qones and Sir Gaheris dressed them, and smote at
them both. Then Dinadan smote at Sir Gaheris a stroke or two, and
turned from him. Nay, said Sir Palomides, it is too much shame for us
two knights to fight with one. And then he did bid Sir Gaheris stand
aside with that knight that hath no list to fight. Then they rode
together and fought long, and at the last Sir Tristram doubled his
strokes, and drove Sir Palomides aback more than three strides. And
then by one assent Sir Gaheris and Sir Dinadan went betwixt them, and
departed them in-sunder. And then by assent of Sir Tristram they would
have lodged together. But Sir Dinadan would not lodge in that castle.
And then he cursed the time that ever he came in their fellowship, and
so he took his horse, and his harness, and departed.

Then Sir Tristram prayed the lords of that castle to lend him a man to
bring him to a lodging, and so they did, and overtook Sir Dinadan, and
rode to their lodging two mile thence with a good man in a priory, and
there they were well at ease. And that same night Sir Bors and Sir
Bleoberis, and Sir Ector and Sir Driant, abode still in the same place
thereas Sir Tristram fought with the thirty knights; and there they met
with Sir Launcelot the same night, and had made promise to lodge with
Sir Colgrevance the same night.



CHAPTER XXIV. How Sir Tristram jousted with Sir Kay and Sir Sagramore
le Desirous, and how Sir Gawaine turned Sir Tristram from Morgan le
Fay.

But anon as the noble knight, Sir Launcelot, heard of the shield of
Cornwall, then wist he well that it was Sir Tristram that fought with
his enemies. And then Sir Launcelot praised Sir Tristram, and called
him the man of most worship in the world. So there was a knight in that
priory that hight Pellinore, and he desired to wit the name of Sir
Tristram, but in no wise he could not; and so Sir Tristram departed and
left Sir Dinadan in the priory, for he was so weary and so sore bruised
that he might not ride. Then this knight, Sir Pellinore, said to Sir
Dinadan: Sithen that ye will not tell me that knight’s name I will ride
after him and make him to tell me his name, or he shall die therefore.
Beware, sir knight, said Sir Dinadan, for an ye follow him ye shall
repent it. So that knight, Sir Pellinore, rode after Sir Tristram and
required him of jousts. Then Sir Tristram smote him down and wounded
him through the shoulder, and so he passed on his way. And on the next
day following Sir Tristram met with pursuivants, and they told him that
there was made a great cry of tournament between King Carados of
Scotland and the King of North Wales, and either should joust against
other at the Castle of Maidens; and these pursuivants sought all the
country after the good knights, and in especial King Carados let make
seeking for Sir Launcelot du Lake, and the King of Northgalis let seek
after Sir Tristram de Liones. And at that time Sir Tristram thought to
be at that jousts; and so by adventure they met with Sir Kay, the
Seneschal, and Sir Sagramore le Desirous; and Sir Kay required Sir
Tristram to joust, and Sir Tristram in a manner refused him, because he
would not be hurt nor bruised against the great jousts that should be
before the Castle of Maidens, and therefore thought to repose him and
to rest him. And alway Sir Kay cried: Sir knight of Cornwall, joust
with me, or else yield thee to me as recreant. When Sir Tristram heard
him say so he turned to him, and then Sir Kay refused him and turned
his back. Then Sir Tristram said: As I find thee I shall take thee.
Then Sir Kay turned with evil will, and Sir Tristram smote Sir Kay
down, and so he rode forth.

Then Sir Sagramore le Desirous rode after Sir Tristram, and made him to
joust with him, and there Sir Tristram smote down Sir Sagramore le
Desirous from his horse, and rode his way; and the same day he met with
a damosel that told him that he should win great worship of a knight
adventurous that did much harm in all that country. When Sir Tristram
heard her say so, he was glad to go with her to win worship. So Sir
Tristram rode with that damosel a six mile, and then met him Sir
Gawaine, and therewithal Sir Gawaine knew the damosel, that she was a
damosel of Queen Morgan le Fay. Then Sir Gawaine understood that she
led that knight to some mischief. Fair knight, said Sir Gawaine,
whither ride you now with that damosel? Sir, said Sir Tristram, I wot
not whither I shall ride but as the damosel will lead me. Sir, said Sir
Gawaine, ye shall not ride with her, for she and her lady did never
good, but ill. And then Sir Gawaine pulled out his sword and said:
Damosel, but if thou tell me anon for what cause thou leadest this
knight with thee thou shalt die for it right anon: I know all your
lady’s treason, and yours. Mercy, Sir Gawaine, she said, and if ye will
save my life I will tell you. Say on, said Sir Gawaine, and thou shalt
have thy life. Sir, she said, Queen Morgan le Fay, my lady, hath
ordained a thirty ladies to seek and espy after Sir Launcelot or Sir
Tristram, and by the trains of these ladies, who that may first meet
any of these two knights they should turn them unto Morgan le Fay’s
castle, saying that they should do deeds of worship; and if any of the
two knights came there, there be thirty knights lying and watching in a
tower to wait upon Sir Launcelot or upon Sir Tristram. Fie for shame,
said Sir Gawaine, that ever such false treason should be wrought or
used in a queen, and a king’s sister, and a king and queen’s daughter.



CHAPTER XXV. How Sir Tristram and Sir Gawaine rode to have foughten
with the thirty knights, but they durst not come out.

Sir, said Sir Gawaine, will ye stand with me, and we will see the
malice of these thirty knights. Sir, said Sir Tristram, go ye to them,
an it please you, and ye shall see I will not fail you, for it is not
long ago since I and a fellow met with thirty knights of that queen’s
fellowship; and God speed us so that we may win worship. So then Sir
Gawaine and Sir Tristram rode toward the castle where Morgan le Fay
was, and ever Sir Gawaine deemed well that he was Sir Tristram de
Liones, because he heard that two knights had slain and beaten thirty
knights. And when they came afore the castle Sir Gawaine spake on high
and said: Queen Morgan le Fay, send out your knights that ye have laid
in a watch for Sir Launcelot and for Sir Tristram. Now, said Sir
Gawaine, I know your false treason, and through all places where that I
ride men shall know of your false treason; and now let see, said Sir
Gawaine, whether ye dare come out of your castle, ye thirty knights.
Then the queen spake and all the thirty knights at once, and said: Sir
Gawaine, full well wottest thou what thou dost and sayest; for by God
we know thee passing well, but all that thou speakest and dost, thou
sayest it upon pride of that good knight that is there with thee. For
there be some of us that know full well the hands of that knight over
all well. And wit thou well, Sir Gawaine, it is more for his sake than
for thine that we will not come out of this castle. For wit ye well,
Sir Gawaine, the knight that beareth the arms of Cornwall, we know him
and what he is.

Then Sir Gawaine and Sir Tristram departed and rode on their ways a day
or two together; and there by adventure, they met with Sir Kay and Sir
Sagramore le Desirous. And then they were glad of Sir Gawaine, and he
of them, but they wist not what he was with the shield of Cornwall, but
by deeming. And thus they rode together a day or two. And then they
were ware of Sir Breuse Saunce Pité chasing a lady for to have slain
her, for he had slain her paramour afore. Hold you all still, said Sir
Gawaine, and show none of you forth, and ye shall see me reward yonder
false knight; for an he espy you he is so well horsed that he will
escape away. And then Sir Gawaine rode betwixt Sir Breuse and the lady,
and said: False knight, leave her, and have ado with me. When Sir
Breuse saw no more but Sir Gawaine he feutred his spear, and Sir
Gawaine against him; and there Sir Breuse overthrew Sir Gawaine, and
then he rode over him, and overthwart him twenty times to have
destroyed him; and when Sir Tristram saw him do so villainous a deed,
he hurled out against him. And when Sir Breuse saw him with the shield
of Cornwall he knew him well that it was Sir Tristram, and then he
fled, and Sir Tristram followed after him; and Sir Breuse Saunce Pité
was so horsed that he went his way quite, and Sir Tristram followed him
long, for he would fain have been avenged upon him. And so when he had
long chased him, he saw a fair well, and thither he rode to repose him,
and tied his horse till a tree.



CHAPTER XXVI. How damosel Bragwaine found Tristram sleeping by a well,
and how she delivered letters to him from La Beale Isoud.

And then he pulled off his helm and washed his visage and his hands,
and so he fell asleep. In the meanwhile came a damosel that had sought
Sir Tristram many ways and days within this land. And when she came to
the well she looked upon him, and had forgotten him as in remembrance
of Sir Tristram, but by his horse she knew him, that hight Passe-Brewel
that had been Sir Tristram’s horse many years. For when he was mad in
the forest Sir Fergus kept him. So this lady, Dame Bragwaine, abode
still till he was awake. So when she saw him wake she saluted him, and
he her again, for either knew other of old acquaintance; then she told
him how she had sought him long and broad, and there she told him how
she had letters from Queen La Beale Isoud. Then anon Sir Tristram read
them, and wit ye well he was glad, for therein was many a piteous
complaint. Then Sir Tristram said: Lady Bragwaine, ye shall ride with
me till that tournament be done at the Castle of Maidens, and then
shall bear letters and tidings with you. And then Sir Tristram took his
horse and sought lodging, and there he met with a good ancient knight
and prayed him to lodge with him. Right so came Gouvernail unto Sir
Tristram, that was glad of that lady. So this old knight’s name was Sir
Pellounes, and he told of the great tournament that should be at the
Castle of Maidens. And there Sir Launcelot and thirty-two knights of
his blood had ordained shields of Cornwall. And right so there came one
unto Sir Pellounes, and told him that Sir Persides de Bloise was come
home; then that knight held up his hands and thanked God of his coming
home. And there Sir Pellounes told Sir Tristram that in two years he
had not seen his son, Sir Persides. Sir, said Sir Tristram, I know your
son well enough for a good knight.

So on a time Sir Tristram and Sir Persides came to their lodging both
at once, and so they unarmed them, and put upon them their clothing.
And then these two knights each welcomed other. And when Sir Persides
understood that Sir Tristram was of Cornwall, he said he was once in
Cornwall: And there I jousted afore King Mark; and so it happed me at
that time to overthrow ten knights, and then came to me Sir Tristram de
Liones and overthrew me, and took my lady away from me, and that shall
I never forget, but I shall remember me an ever I see my time. Ah, said
Sir Tristram, now I understand that ye hate Sir Tristram. What deem ye,
ween ye that Sir Tristram is not able to withstand your malice? Yes,
said Sir Persides, I know well that Sir Tristram is a noble knight and
a much better knight than I, yet shall I not owe him my good will.
Right as they stood thus talking at a bay-window of that castle, they
saw many knights riding to and fro toward the tournament. And then was
Sir Tristram ware of a likely knight riding upon a great black horse,
and a black-covered shield. What knight is that, said Sir Tristram,
with the black horse and the black shield? he seemeth a good knight. I
know him well, said Sir Persides, he is one of the best knights of the
world. Then is it Sir Launcelot, said Tristram. Nay, said Sir Persides,
it is Sir Palomides, that is yet unchristened.



CHAPTER XXVII. How Sir Tristram had a fall with Sir Palomides, and how
Launcelot overthrew two knights.

Then they saw much people of the country salute Sir Palomides. And
within a while after there came a squire of the castle, that told Sir
Pellounes that was lord of that castle, that a knight with a black
shield had smitten down thirteen knights. Fair brother, said Sir
Tristram unto Sir Persides, let us cast upon us cloaks, and let us go
see the play. Not so, said Sir Persides, we will not go like knaves
thither, but we will ride like men and good knights to withstand our
enemies. So they armed them, and took their horses and great spears,
and thither they went thereas many knights assayed themself before the
tournament. And anon Sir Palomides saw Sir Persides, and then he sent a
squire unto him and said: Go thou to the yonder knight with the green
shield and therein a lion of gold, and say him I require him to joust
with me, and tell him that my name is Sir Palomides. When Sir Persides
understood that request of Sir Palomides, he made him ready, and there
anon they met together, but Sir Persides had a fall. Then Sir Tristram
dressed him to be revenged upon Sir Palomides, and that saw Sir
Palomides that was ready and so was not Sir Tristram, and took him at
an advantage and smote him over his horse’s tail when he had no spear
in his rest. Then stert up Sir Tristram and took his horse lightly, and
was wroth out of measure, and sore ashamed of that fall. Then Sir
Tristram sent unto Sir Palomides by Gouvernail, and prayed him to joust
with him at his request. Nay, said Sir Palomides, as at this time I
will not joust with that knight, for I know him better than he weeneth.
And if he be wroth he may right it to-morn at the Castle of Maidens,
where he may see me and many other knights.

With that came Sir Dinadan, and when he saw Sir Tristram wroth he list
not to jape. Lo, said Sir Dinadan, here may a man prove, be a man never
so good yet may he have a fall, and he was never so wise but he might
be overseen, and he rideth well that never fell. So Sir Tristram was
passing wroth, and said to Sir Persides and to Sir Dinadan: I will
revenge me. Right so as they stood talking there, there came by Sir
Tristram a likely knight riding passing soberly and heavily with a
black shield. What knight is that? said Sir Tristram unto Sir Persides.
I know him well, said Sir Persides, for his name is Sir Briant of North
Wales; so he passed on among other knights of North Wales. And there
came in Sir Launcelot du Lake with a shield of the arms of Cornwall,
and he sent a squire unto Sir Briant, and required him to joust with
him. Well, said Sir Briant, sithen I am required to joust I will do
what I may; and there Sir Launcelot smote down Sir Briant from his
horse a great fall. And then Sir Tristram marvelled what knight he was
that bare the shield of Cornwall. Whatsoever he be, said Sir Dinadan, I
warrant you he is of King Ban’s blood, the which be knights of the most
noble prowess in the world, for to account so many for so many. Then
there came two knights of Northgalis, that one hight Hew de la
Montaine, and the other Sir Madok de la Montaine, and they challenged
Sir Launcelot foot-hot. Sir Launcelot not refusing them but made him
ready, with one spear he smote them down both over their horses’
croups; and so Sir Launcelot rode his way. By the good lord, said Sir
Tristram, he is a good knight that beareth the shield of Cornwall, and
meseemeth he rideth in the best manner that ever I saw knight ride.

Then the King of Northgalis rode unto Sir Palomides and prayed him
heartily for his sake to joust with that knight that hath done us of
Northgalis despite. Sir, said Sir Palomides, I am full loath to have
ado with that knight, and cause why is, for as to-morn the great
tournament shall be; and therefore I will keep myself fresh by my will.
Nay, said the King of Northgalis, I pray you require him of jousts.
Sir, said Sir Palomides, I will joust at your request, and require that
knight to joust with me, and often I have seen a man have a fall at his
own request.



CHAPTER XXVIII. How Sir Launcelot jousted with Palomides and overthrew
him, and after he was assailed with twelve knights.

Then Sir Palomides sent unto Sir Launcelot a squire, and required him
of jousts. Fair fellow, said Sir Launcelot, tell me thy lord’s name.
Sir, said the squire, my lord’s name is Sir Palomides, the good knight.
In good hour, said Sir Launcelot, for there is no knight that I saw
this seven years that I had liefer ado withal than with him. And so
either knights made them ready with two great spears. Nay, said Sir
Dinadan, ye shall see that Sir Palomides will quit him right well. It
may be so, said Sir Tristram, but I undertake that knight with the
shield of Cornwall shall give him a fall. I believe it not, said Sir
Dinadan. Right so they spurred their horses and feutred their spears,
and either hit other, and Sir Palomides brake a spear upon Sir
Launcelot, and he sat and moved not; but Sir Launcelot smote him so
lightly that he made his horse to avoid the saddle, and the stroke
brake his shield and the hauberk, and had he not fallen he had been
slain. How now, said Sir Tristram, I wist well by the manner of their
riding both that Sir Palomides should have a fall.

Right so Sir Launcelot rode his way, and rode to a well to drink and to
repose him, and they of Northgalis espied him whither he rode; and then
there followed him twelve knights for to have mischieved him, for this
cause that upon the morn at the tournament of the Castle of Maidens
that he should not win the victory. So they came upon Sir Launcelot
suddenly, and unnethe he might put upon him his helm and take his
horse, but they were in hands with him; and then Sir Launcelot gat his
spear, and rode through them, and there he slew a knight and brake a
spear in his body. Then he drew his sword and smote upon the right hand
and upon the left hand, so that within a few strokes he had slain other
three knights, and the remnant that abode he wounded them sore all that
did abide. Thus Sir Launcelot escaped from his enemies of North Wales,
and then Sir Launcelot rode his way till a friend, and lodged him till
on the morn; for he would not the first day have ado in the tournament
because of his great labour. And on the first day he was with King
Arthur thereas he was set on high upon a scaffold to discern who was
best worthy of his deeds. So Sir Launcelot was with King Arthur, and
jousted not the first day.



CHAPTER XXIX. How Sir Tristram behaved him the first day of the
tournament, and there he had the prize.

Now turn we unto Sir Tristram de Liones, that commanded Gouvernail, his
servant, to ordain him a black shield with none other remembrance
therein. And so Sir Persides and Sir Tristram departed from their host
Sir Pellounes, and they rode early toward the tournament, and then they
drew them to King Carados’ side, of Scotland; and anon knights began
the field what of King Northgalis’ part, and what of King Carados’
part, and there began great party. Then there was hurling and rashing.
Right so came in Sir Persides and Sir Tristram and so they did fare
that they put the King of Northgalis aback. Then came in Sir Bleoberis
de Ganis and Sir Gaheris with them of Northgalis, and then was Sir
Persides smitten down and almost slain, for more than forty horse men
went over him. For Sir Bleoberis did great deeds of arms, and Sir
Gaheris failed him not. When Sir Tristram beheld them, and saw them do
such deeds of arms, he marvelled what they were. Also Sir Tristram
thought shame that Sir Persides was so done to; and then he gat a great
spear in his hand, and then he rode to Sir Gaheris and smote him down
from his horse. And then was Sir Bleoberis wroth, and gat a spear and
rode against Sir Tristram in great ire; and there Sir Tristram met with
him, and smote Sir Bleoberis from his horse. So then the King with the
Hundred Knights was wroth, and he horsed Sir Bleoberis and Sir Gaheris
again, and there began a great medley; and ever Sir Tristram held them
passing short, and ever Sir Bleoberis was passing busy upon Sir
Tristram; and there came Sir Dinadan against Sir Tristram, and Sir
Tristram gave him such a buffet that he swooned in his saddle. Then
anon Sir Dinadan came to Sir Tristram and said: Sir, I know thee better
than thou weenest; but here I promise thee my troth I will never come
against thee more, for I promise thee that sword of thine shall never
come on mine helm.

With that came Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Tristram gave him such a buffet
that down he laid his head; and then he caught him so sore by the helm
that he pulled him under his horse’s feet. And then King Arthur blew to
lodging. Then Sir Tristram departed to his pavilion, and Sir Dinadan
rode with him; and Sir Persides and King Arthur then, and the kings
upon both parties, marvelled what knight that was with the black
shield. Many said their advice, and some knew him for Sir Tristram, and
held their peace and would nought say. So that first day King Arthur,
and all the kings and lords that were judges, gave Sir Tristram the
prize; howbeit they knew him not, but named him the Knight with the
Black Shield.



CHAPTER XXX. How Sir Tristram returned against King Arthur’s party
because he saw Sir Palomides on that party.

Then upon the morn Sir Palomides returned from the King of Northgalis,
and rode to King Arthur’s side, where was King Carados, and the King of
Ireland, and Sir Launcelot’s kin, and Sir Gawaine’s kin. So Sir
Palomides sent the damosel unto Sir Tristram that he sent to seek him
when he was out of his mind in the forest, and this damosel asked Sir
Tristram what he was and what was his name?

As for that, said Sir Tristram, tell Sir Palomides ye shall not wit as
at this time unto the time I have broken two spears upon him. But let
him wit thus much, said Sir Tristram, that I am the same knight that he
smote down in over evening at the tournament; and tell him plainly on
what party that Sir Palomides be I will be of the contrary party.

Sir, said the damosel, ye shall understand that Sir Palomides will be
on King Arthur’s side, where the most noble knights of the world be. In
the name of God, said Sir Tristram, then will I be with the King of
Northgalis, because Sir Palomides will be on King Arthur’s side, and
else I would not but for his sake. So when King Arthur was come they
blew unto the field; and then there began a great party, and so King
Carados jousted with the King of the Hundred Knights, and there King
Carados had a fall: then was there hurling and rushing, and right so
came in knights of King Arthur’s, and they bare aback the King of
Northgalis’ knights.

Then Sir Tristram came in, and began so roughly and so bigly that there
was none might withstand him, and thus Sir Tristram dured long. And at
the last Sir Tristram fell among the fellowship of King Ban, and there
fell upon him Sir Bors de Ganis, and Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir
Blamore de Ganis, and many other knights. And then Sir Tristram smote
on the right hand and on the left hand, that all lords and ladies spake
of his noble deeds. But at the last Sir Tristram should have had the
worse had not the King with the Hundred Knights been. And then he came
with his fellowship and rescued Sir Tristram, and brought him away from
those knights that bare the shields of Cornwall. And then Sir Tristram
saw another fellowship by themself, and there were a forty knights
together, and Sir Kay, the Seneschal, was their governor. Then Sir
Tristram rode in amongst them, and there he smote down Sir Kay from his
horse; and there he fared among those knights like a greyhound among
conies.

Then Sir Launcelot found a knight that was sore wounded upon the head.
Sir, said Sir Launcelot, who wounded you so sore? Sir, he said, a
knight that beareth a black shield, and I may curse the time that ever
I met with him, for he is a devil and no man. So Sir Launcelot departed
from him and thought to meet with Sir Tristram, and so he rode with his
sword drawn in his hand to seek Sir Tristram; and then he espied him
how he hurled here and there, and at every stroke Sir Tristram wellnigh
smote down a knight. O mercy Jesu! said the king, sith the times I bare
arms saw I never no knight do so marvellous deeds of arms. And if I
should set upon this knight, said Sir Launcelot to himself, I did shame
to myself, and therewithal Sir Launcelot put up his sword. And then the
King with the Hundred Knights and an hundred more of North Wales set
upon the twenty of Sir Launcelot’s kin: and they twenty knights held
them ever together as wild swine, and none would fail other. And so
when Sir Tristram beheld the noblesse of these twenty knights he
marvelled of their good deeds, for he saw by their fare and by their
rule that they had liefer die than avoid the field. Now Jesu, said Sir
Tristram, well may he be valiant and full of prowess that hath such a
sort of noble knights unto his kin, and full like is he to be a noble
man that is their leader and governor. He meant it by Sir Launcelot du
Lake. So when Sir Tristram had beholden them long he thought shame to
see two hundred knights battering upon twenty knights. Then Sir
Tristram rode unto the King with the Hundred Knights and said: Sir,
leave your fighting with those twenty knights, for ye win no worship of
them, ye be so many and they so few; and wit ye well they will not out
of the field I see by their cheer and countenance; and worship get ye
none an ye slay them. Therefore leave your fighting with them, for I to
increase my worship I will ride to the twenty knights and help them
with all my might and power. Nay, said the King with the Hundred
Knights, ye shall not do so; now I see your courage and courtesy I will
withdraw my knights for your pleasure, for evermore a good knight will
favour another, and like will draw to like.



CHAPTER XXXI. How Sir Tristram found Palomides by a well, and brought
him with him to his lodging.

Then the King with the Hundred Knights withdrew his knights. And all
this while, and long to-fore, Sir Launcelot had watched upon Sir
Tristram with a very purpose to have fellowshipped with him. And then
suddenly Sir Tristram, Sir Dinadan, and Gouvernail, his man, rode their
way into the forest, that no man perceived where they went. So then
King Arthur blew unto lodging, and gave the King of Northgalis the
prize because Sir Tristram was upon his side. Then Sir Launcelot rode
here and there, so wood as lion that fauted his fill, because he had
lost Sir Tristram, and so he returned unto King Arthur. And then in all
the field was a noise that with the wind it might be heard two mile
thence, how the lords and ladies cried: The Knight with the Black
Shield hath won the field. Alas, said King Arthur, where is that knight
become? It is shame to all those in the field so to let him escape away
from you; but with gentleness and courtesy ye might have brought him
unto me to the Castle of Maidens. Then the noble King Arthur went unto
his knights and comforted them in the best wise that he could, and
said: My fair fellows, be not dismayed, howbeit ye have lost the field
this day. And many were hurt and sore wounded, and many were whole. My
fellows, said King Arthur, look that ye be of good cheer, for to-morn I
will be in the field with you and revenge you of your enemies. So that
night King Arthur and his knights reposed themself.

The damosel that came from La Beale Isoud unto Sir Tristram, all the
while the tournament was a-doing she was with Queen Guenever, and ever
the queen asked her for what cause she came into that country. Madam,
she answered, I come for none other cause but from my lady La Beale
Isoud to wit of your welfare. For in no wise she would not tell the
queen that she came for Sir Tristram’s sake. So this lady, Dame
Bragwaine, took her leave of Queen Guenever, and she rode after Sir
Tristram. And as she rode through the forest she heard a great cry;
then she commanded her squire to go into the forest to wit what was
that noise. And so he came to a well, and there he found a knight
bounden till a tree crying as he had been wood, and his horse and his
harness standing by him. And when he espied that squire, therewith he
abraid and brake himself loose, and took his sword in his hand, and ran
to have slain the squire. Then he took his horse and fled all that ever
he might unto Dame Bragwaine, and told her of his adventure. Then she
rode unto Sir Tristram’s pavilion, and told Sir Tristram what adventure
she had found in the forest. Alas, said Sir Tristram, upon my head
there is some good knight at mischief.

Then Sir Tristram took his horse and his sword and rode thither, and
there he heard how the knight complained unto himself and said: I,
woful knight Sir Palomides, what misadventure befalleth me, that thus
am defoiled with falsehood and treason, through Sir Bors and Sir Ector.
Alas, he said, why live I so long! And then he gat his sword in his
hands, and made many strange signs and tokens; and so through his
raging he threw his sword into that fountain. Then Sir Palomides wailed
and wrang his hands. And at the last for pure sorrow he ran into that
fountain, over his belly, and sought after his sword. Then Sir Tristram
saw that, and ran upon Sir Palomides, and held him in his arms fast.
What art thou, said Palomides, that holdeth me so? I am a man of this
forest that would thee none harm. Alas, said Sir Palomides, I may never
win worship where Sir Tristram is; for ever where he is an I be there,
then get I no worship; and if he be away for the most part I have the
gree, unless that Sir Launcelot be there or Sir Lamorak. Then Sir
Palomides said: Once in Ireland Sir Tristram put me to the worse, and
another time in Cornwall, and in other places in this land. What would
ye do, said Sir Tristram, an ye had Sir Tristram? I would fight with
him, said Sir Palomides, and ease my heart upon him; and yet, to say
thee sooth, Sir Tristram is the gentlest knight in this world living.
What will ye do, said Sir Tristram, will ye go with me to your lodging?
Nay, said he, I will go to the King with the Hundred Knights, for he
rescued me from Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Ector and else had I been
slain traitorly. Sir Tristram said him such kind words that Sir
Palomides went with him to his lodging. Then Gouvernail went to-fore,
and charged Dame Bragwaine to go out of the way to her lodging. And bid
ye Sir Persides that he make him no quarrels. And so they rode together
till they came to Sir Tristram’s pavilion, and there Sir Palomides had
all the cheer that might be had all that night. But in no wise Sir
Palomides might not know what was Sir Tristram; and so after supper
they yede to rest, and Sir Tristram for great travail slept till it was
day. And Sir Palomides might not sleep for anguish; and in the dawning
of the day he took his horse privily, and rode his way unto Sir Gaheris
and unto Sir Sagramore le Desirous, where they were in their pavilions;
for they three were fellows at the beginning of the tournament. And
then upon the morn the king blew unto the tournament upon the third
day.



CHAPTER XXXII. How Sir Tristram smote down Sir Palomides, and how he
jousted with King Arthur, and other feats.

So the King of Northgalis and the King with the Hundred Knights, they
two encountered with King Carados and with the King of Ireland; and
there the King with the Hundred Knights smote down King Carados, and
the King of Northgalis smote down the King of Ireland. With that came
in Sir Palomides, and when he came he made great work, for by his
indented shield he was well known. So came in King Arthur, and did
great deeds of arms together, and put the King of Northgalis and the
King with the Hundred Knights to the worse. With this came in Sir
Tristram with his black shield, and anon he jousted with Sir Palomides,
and there by fine force Sir Tristram smote Sir Palomides over his
horse’s croup. Then King Arthur cried: Knight with the Black Shield,
make thee ready to me, and in the same wise Sir Tristram smote King
Arthur. And then by force of King Arthur’s knights the King and Sir
Palomides were horsed again. Then King Arthur with a great eager heart
he gat a spear in his hand, and there upon the one side he smote Sir
Tristram over his horse. Then foot-hot Sir Palomides came upon Sir
Tristram, as he was upon foot, to have overridden him. Then Sir
Tristram was ware of him, and there he stooped aside, and with great
ire he gat him by the arm, and pulled him down from his horse. Then Sir
Palomides lightly arose, and then they dashed together mightily with
their swords; and many kings, queens, and lords, stood and beheld them.
And at the last Sir Tristram smote Sir Palomides upon the helm three
mighty strokes, and at every stroke that he gave him he said: This for
Sir Tristram’s sake. With that Sir Palomides fell to the earth
grovelling.

Then came the King with the Hundred Knights, and brought Sir Tristram
an horse, and so was he horsed again. By then was Sir Palomides horsed,
and with great ire he jousted upon Sir Tristram with his spear as it
was in the rest, and gave him a great dash with his sword. Then Sir
Tristram avoided his spear, and gat him by the neck with his both
hands, and pulled him clean out of his saddle, and so he bare him afore
him the length of ten spears, and then in the presence of them all he
let him fall at his adventure. Then Sir Tristram was ware of King
Arthur with a naked sword in his hand, and with his spear Sir Tristram
ran upon King Arthur; and then King Arthur boldly abode him and with
his sword he smote a-two his spear, and therewithal Sir Tristram
stonied; and so King Arthur gave him three or four strokes or he might
get out his sword, and at the last Sir Tristram drew his sword and
[either] assailed other passing hard. With that the great press
departed [them]. Then Sir Tristram rode here and there and did his
great pain, that eleven of the good knights of the blood of King Ban,
that was of Sir Launcelot’s kin, that day Sir Tristram smote down; that
all the estates marvelled of his great deeds and all cried upon the
Knight with the Black Shield.



CHAPTER XXXIII. How Sir Launcelot hurt Sir Tristram, and how after Sir
Tristram smote down Sir Palomides.

Then this cry was so large that Sir Launcelot heard it. And then he gat
a great spear in his hand and came towards the cry. Then Sir Launcelot
cried: The Knight with the Black Shield, make thee ready to joust with
me. When Sir Tristram heard him say so he gat his spear in his hand,
and either abashed down their heads, and came together as thunder; and
Sir Tristram’s spear brake in pieces, and Sir Launcelot by malfortune
struck Sir Tristram on the side a deep wound nigh to the death; but yet
Sir Tristram avoided not his saddle, and so the spear brake.
Therewithal Sir Tristram that was wounded gat out his sword, and he
rushed to Sir Launcelot, and gave him three great strokes upon the helm
that the fire sprang thereout, and Sir Launcelot abashed his head lowly
toward his saddle-bow. And therewithal Sir Tristram departed from the
field, for he felt him so wounded that he weened he should have died;
and Sir Dinadan espied him and followed him into the forest. Then Sir
Launcelot abode and did many marvellous deeds.

So when Sir Tristram was departed by the forest’s side he alighted, and
unlaced his harness and freshed his wound; then weened Sir Dinadan that
he should have died. Nay, nay, said Sir Tristram, Dinadan never dread
thee, for I am heart-whole, and of this wound I shall soon be whole, by
the mercy of God. By that Sir Dinadan was ware where came Palomides
riding straight upon them. And then Sir Tristram was ware that Sir
Palomides came to have destroyed him. And so Sir Dinadan gave him
warning, and said: Sir Tristram, my lord, ye are so sore wounded that
ye may not have ado with him, therefore I will ride against him and do
to him what I may, and if I be slain ye may pray for my soul; and in
the meanwhile ye may withdraw you and go into the castle, or in the
forest, that he shall not meet with you. Sir Tristram smiled and said:
I thank you, Sir Dinadan, of your good will, but ye shall wit that I am
able to handle him. And then anon hastily he armed him, and took his
horse, and a great spear in his hand, and said to Sir Dinadan: Adieu;
and rode toward Sir Palomides a soft pace. Then when Sir Palomides saw
that, he made countenance to amend his horse, but he did it for this
cause, for he abode Sir Gaheris that came after him. And when he was
come he rode toward Sir Tristram. Then Sir Tristram sent unto Sir
Palomides, and required him to joust with him; and if he smote down Sir
Palomides he would do no more to him; and if it so happened that Sir
Palomides smote down Sir Tristram, he bade him do his utterance. So
they were accorded. Then they met together, and Sir Tristram smote down
Sir Palomides that he had a grievous fall, so that he lay still as he
had been dead. And then Sir Tristram ran upon Sir Gaheris, and he would
not have jousted; but whether he would or not Sir Tristram smote him
over his horse’s croup, that he lay still as though he had been dead.
And then Sir Tristram rode his way and left Sir Persides’ squire within
the pavilions, and Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode to an old knight’s
place to lodge them. And that old knight had five sons at the
tournament, for whom he prayed God heartily for their coming home. And
so, as the French book saith, they came home all five well beaten.

And when Sir Tristram departed into the forest Sir Launcelot held alway
the stour like hard, as a man araged that took no heed to himself, and
wit ye well there was many a noble knight against him. And when King
Arthur saw Sir Launcelot do so marvellous deeds of arms he then armed
him, and took his horse and his armour, and rode into the field to help
Sir Launcelot; and so many knights came in with King Arthur. And to
make short tale in conclusion, the King of Northgalis and the King of
the Hundred Knights were put to the worse; and because Sir Launcelot
abode and was the last in the field the prize was given him. But Sir
Launcelot would neither for king, queen, nor knight, have the prize,
but where the cry was cried through the field: Sir Launcelot, Sir
Launcelot hath won the field this day, Sir Launcelot let make another
cry contrary: Sir Tristram hath won the field, for he began first, and
last he hath endured, and so hath he done the first day, the second,
and the third day.



CHAPTER XXXIV. How the prize of the third day was given to Sir
Launcelot, and Sir Launcelot gave it to Sir Tristram.

Then all the estates and degrees high and low said of Sir Launcelot
great worship, for the honour that he did unto Sir Tristram; and for
that honour doing to Sir Tristram he was at that time more praised and
renowned than an he had overthrown five hundred knights; and all the
people wholly for this gentleness, first the estates both high and low,
and after the commonalty cried at once: Sir Launcelot hath won the
field whosoever say nay. Then was Sir Launcelot wroth and ashamed, and
so therewithal he rode to King Arthur. Alas, said the king, we are all
dismayed that Sir Tristram is thus departed from us. By God, said King
Arthur, he is one of the noblest knights that ever I saw hold spear or
sword in hand, and the most courteoust knight in his fighting; for full
hard I saw him, said King Arthur, when he smote Sir Palomides upon the
helm thrice, that he abashed his helm with his strokes, and also he
said: Here is a stroke for Sir Tristram, and thus thrice he said. Then
King Arthur, Sir Launcelot, and Sir Dodinas le Savage took their horses
to seek Sir Tristram, and by the means of Sir Persides he had told King
Arthur where Sir Tristram was in his pavilion. But when they came
there, Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan were gone.

Then King Arthur and Sir Launcelot were heavy, and returned again to
the Castle of Maidens making great dole for the hurt of Sir Tristram,
and his sudden departing. So God me help, said King Arthur, I am more
heavy that I cannot meet with him than for all the hurts that all my
knights have had at the tournament. Right so came Sir Gaheris and told
King Arthur how Sir Tristram had smitten down Sir Palomides, and it was
at Sir Palomides’ own request. Alas, said King Arthur, that was great
dishonour to Sir Palomides, inasmuch as Sir Tristram was sore wounded,
and now may we all, kings, and knights, and men of worship, say that
Sir Tristram may be called a noble knight, and one of the best knights
that ever I saw the days of my life. For I will that ye all, kings and
knights, know, said King Arthur, that I never saw knight do so
marvellously as he hath done these three days; for he was the first
that began and that longest held on, save this last day. And though he
was hurt, it was a manly adventure of two noble knights, and when two
noble men encounter needs must the one have the worse, like as God will
suffer at that time. As for me, said Sir Launcelot, for all the lands
that ever my father left me I would not have hurt Sir Tristram an I had
known him at that time; that I hurt him was for I saw not his shield.
For an I had seen his black shield, I would not have meddled with him
for many causes; for late he did as much for me as ever did knight, and
that is well known that he had ado with thirty knights, and no help
save Sir Dinadan. And one thing shall I promise, said Sir Launcelot,
Sir Palomides shall repent it as in his unkindly dealing for to follow
that noble knight that I by mishap hurted thus. Sir Launcelot said all
the worship that might be said by Sir Tristram. Then King Arthur made a
great feast to all that would come. And thus we let pass King Arthur,
and a little we will turn unto Sir Palomides, that after he had a fall
of Sir Tristram, he was nigh-hand araged out of his wit for despite of
Sir Tristram. And so he followed him by adventure. And as he came by a
river, in his woodness he would have made his horse to have leapt over;
and the horse failed footing and fell in the river, wherefore Sir
Palomides was adread lest he should have been drowned; and then he
avoided his horse, and swam to the land, and let his horse go down by
adventure.



CHAPTER XXXV. How Palomides came to the castle where Sir Tristram was,
and of the quest that Sir Launcelot and ten knights made for Sir
Tristram.

And when he came to the land he took off his harness, and sat roaring
and crying as a man out of his mind. Right so came a damosel even by
Sir Palomides, that was sent from Sir Gawaine and his brother unto Sir
Mordred, that lay sick in the same place with that old knight where Sir
Tristram was. For, as the French book saith, Sir Persides hurt so Sir
Mordred a ten days afore; and had it not been for the love of Sir
Gawaine and his brother, Sir Persides had slain Sir Mordred. And so
this damosel came by Sir Palomides, and she and he had language
together, the which pleased neither of them; and so the damosel rode
her ways till she came to the old knight’s place, and there she told
that old knight how she met with the woodest knight by adventure that
ever she met withal. What bare he in his shield? said Sir Tristram. It
was indented with white and black, said the damosel. Ah, said Sir
Tristram, that was Sir Palomides, the good knight. For well I know him,
said Sir Tristram, for one of the best knights living in this realm.
Then that old knight took a little hackney, and rode for Sir Palomides,
and brought him unto his own manor; and full well knew Sir Tristram Sir
Palomides, but he said but little, for at that time Sir Tristram was
walking upon his feet, and well amended of his hurts; and always when
Sir Palomides saw Sir Tristram he would behold him full marvellously,
and ever him seemed that he had seen him. Then would he say unto Sir
Dinadan: An ever I may meet with Sir Tristram he shall not escape mine
hands. I marvel, said Sir Dinadan, that ye boast behind Sir Tristram,
for it is but late that he was in your hands, and ye in his hands; why
would ye not hold him when ye had him? for I saw myself twice or thrice
that ye gat but little worship of Sir Tristram. Then was Sir Palomides
ashamed. So leave we them a little while in the old castle with the old
knight Sir Darras.

Now shall we speak of King Arthur, that said to Sir Launcelot: Had not
ye been we had not lost Sir Tristram, for he was here daily unto the
time ye met with him, and in an evil time, said Arthur, ye encountered
with him. My lord Arthur, said Launcelot, ye put upon me that I should
be cause of his departition; God knoweth it was against my will. But
when men be hot in deeds of arms oft they hurt their friends as well as
their foes. And my lord, said Sir Launcelot, ye shall understand that
Sir Tristram is a man that I am loath to offend, for he hath done for
me more than ever I did for him as yet. But then Sir Launcelot made
bring forth a book: and then Sir Launcelot said: Here we are ten
knights that will swear upon a book never to rest one night where we
rest another this twelvemonth until that we find Sir Tristram. And as
for me, said Sir Launcelot, I promise you upon this book that an I may
meet with him, either with fairness or foulness I shall bring him to
this court, or else I shall die therefore. And the names of these ten
knights that had undertaken this quest were these following: First was
Sir Launcelot, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, and Bleoberis,
and Sir Blamore de Ganis, and Lucan the Butler, Sir Uwaine, Sir Galihud
Lionel, and Galiodin. So these ten noble knights departed from the
court of King Arthur, and so they rode upon their quest together until
they came to a cross where departed four ways, and there departed the
fellowship in four to seek Sir Tristram.

And as Sir Launcelot rode by adventure he met with Dame Bragwaine that
was sent into that country to seek Sir Tristram, and she fled as fast
as her palfrey might go. So Sir Launcelot met with her and asked her
why she fled. Ah, fair knight, said Dame Bragwaine, I flee for dread of
my life, for here followeth me Sir Breuse Saunce Pité to slay me. Hold
you nigh me, said Sir Launcelot. Then when Sir Launcelot saw Sir Breuse
Saunce Pité, Sir Launcelot cried unto him, and said: False knight,
destroyer of ladies and damosels, now thy last days be come. When Sir
Breuse Saunce Pité saw Sir Launcelot’s shield he knew it well, for at
that time he bare not the arms of Cornwall, but he bare his own shield.
And then Sir Breuse fled, and Sir Launcelot followed after him. But Sir
Breuse was so well horsed that when him list to flee he might well
flee, and also abide when him list. And then Sir Launcelot returned
unto Dame Bragwaine, and she thanked him of his great labour.



CHAPTER XXXVI. How Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, and Sir Dinadan were
taken and put in prison.

Now will we speak of Sir Lucan the butler, that by fortune he came
riding to the same place thereas was Sir Tristram, and in he came in
none other intent but to ask harbour. Then the porter asked what was
his name. Tell your lord that my name is Sir Lucan, the butler, a
Knight of the Round Table. So the porter went unto Sir Darras, lord of
the place, and told him who was there to ask harbour. Nay, nay, said
Sir Daname, that was nephew to Sir Darras, say him that he shall not be
lodged here, but let him wit that I, Sir Daname, will meet with him
anon, and bid him make him ready. So Sir Daname came forth on
horseback, and there they met together with spears, and Sir Lucan smote
down Sir Daname over his horse’s croup, and then he fled into that
place, and Sir Lucan rode after him, and asked after him many times.

Then Sir Dinadan said to Sir Tristram: It is shame to see the lord’s
cousin of this place defoiled. Abide, said Sir Tristram, and I shall
redress it. And in the meanwhile Sir Dinadan was on horseback, and he
jousted with Lucan the butler, and there Sir Lucan smote Dinadan
through the thick of the thigh, and so he rode his way; and Sir
Tristram was wroth that Sir Dinadan was hurt, and followed after, and
thought to avenge him; and within a while he overtook Sir Lucan, and
bade him turn; and so they met together so that Sir Tristram hurt Sir
Lucan passing sore and gave him a fall. With that came Sir Uwaine, a
gentle knight, and when he saw Sir Lucan so hurt he called Sir Tristram
to joust with him. Fair knight, said Sir Tristram, tell me your name I
require you. Sir knight, wit ye well my name is Sir Uwaine le Fise de
Roy Ureine. Ah, said Sir Tristram, by my will I would not have ado with
you at no time. Ye shall not so, said Sir Uwaine, but ye shall have ado
with me. And then Sir Tristram saw none other bote, but rode against
him, and overthrew Sir Uwaine and hurt him in the side, and so he
departed unto his lodging again. And when Sir Dinadan understood that
Sir Tristram had hurt Sir Lucan he would have ridden after Sir Lucan
for to have slain him, but Sir Tristram would not suffer him. Then Sir
Uwaine let ordain an horse litter, and brought Sir Lucan to the abbey
of Ganis, and the castle thereby hight the Castle of Ganis, of the
which Sir Bleoberis was lord. And at that castle Sir Launcelot promised
all his fellows to meet in the quest of Sir Tristram.

So when Sir Tristram was come to his lodging there came a damosel that
told Sir Darras that three of his sons were slain at that tournament,
and two grievously wounded that they were never like to help themself.
And all this was done by a noble knight that bare the black shield, and
that was he that bare the prize. Then came there one and told Sir
Darras that the same knight was within, him that bare the black shield.
Then Sir Darras yede unto Sir Tristram’s chamber, and there he found
his shield and showed it to the damosel. Ah sir, said the damosel, that
same is he that slew your three sons. Then without any tarrying Sir
Darras put Sir Tristram, and Sir Palomides, and Sir Dinadan, within a
strong prison, and there Sir Tristram was like to have died of great
sickness; and every day Sir Palomides would reprove Sir Tristram of old
hate betwixt them. And ever Sir Tristram spake fair and said little.
But when Sir Palomides saw the falling of sickness of Sir Tristram,
then was he heavy for him, and comforted him in all the best wise he
could. And as the French book saith, there came forty knights to Sir
Darras that were of his own kin, and they would have slain Sir Tristram
and his two fellows, but Sir Darras would not suffer that, but kept
them in prison, and meat and drink they had. So Sir Tristram endured
there great pain, for sickness had undertaken him, and that is the
greatest pain a prisoner may have. For all the while a prisoner may
have his health of body he may endure under the mercy of God and in
hope of good deliverance; but when sickness toucheth a prisoner’s body,
then may a prisoner say all wealth is him bereft, and then he hath
cause to wail and to weep. Right so did Sir Tristram when sickness had
undertaken him, for then he took such sorrow that he had almost slain
himself.



CHAPTER XXXVII. How King Mark was sorry for the good renown of Sir
Tristram. Some of King Arthur’s knights jousted with knights of
Cornwall.

Now will we speak, and leave Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, and Sir
Dinadan in prison, and speak we of other knights that sought after Sir
Tristram many divers parts of this land. And some yede into Cornwall;
and by adventure Sir Gaheris, nephew unto King Arthur, came unto King
Mark, and there he was well received and sat at King Mark’s own table
and ate of his own mess. Then King Mark asked Sir Gaheris what tidings
there were in the realm of Logris. Sir, said Sir Gaheris, the king
reigneth as a noble knight; and now but late there was a great jousts
and tournament as ever I saw any in the realm of Logris, and the most
noble knights were at that jousts. But there was one knight that did
marvellously three days, and he bare a black shield, and of all knights
that ever I saw he proved the best knight. Then, said King Mark, that
was Sir Launcelot, or Sir Palomides the paynim. Not so, said Sir
Gheris, for both Sir Launcelot and Sir Palomides were on the contrary
party against the Knight with the Black Shield. Then was it Sir
Tristram, said the king. Yea, said Sir Gaheris. And therewithal the
king smote down his head, and in his heart he feared sore that Sir
Tristram should get him such worship in the realm of Logris
wherethrough that he himself should not be able to withstand him. Thus
Sir Gaheris had great cheer with King Mark, and with Queen La Beale
Isoud, the which was glad of Sir Gaheris’ words; for well she wist by
his deeds and manners that it was Sir Tristram. And then the king made
a feast royal, and to that feast came Sir Uwaine le Fise de Roy Ureine,
and some called him Uwaine le Blanchemains. And this Sir Uwaine
challenged all the knights of Cornwall. Then was the king wood wroth
that he had no knights to answer him. Then Sir Andred, nephew unto King
Mark, leapt up and said: I will encounter with Sir Uwaine. Then he yede
and armed him and horsed him in the best manner. And there Sir Uwaine
met with Sir Andred, and smote him down that he swooned on the earth.
Then was King Mark sorry and wroth out of measure that he had no knight
to revenge his nephew, Sir Andred.

So the king called unto him Sir Dinas, the Seneschal, and prayed him
for his sake to take upon him to joust with Sir Uwaine. Sir, said Sir
Dinas, I am full loath to have ado with any knight of the Round Table.
Yet, said the king, for my love take upon thee to joust. So Sir Dinas
made him ready, and anon they encountered together with great spears,
but Sir Dinas was overthrown, horse and man, a great fall. Who was
wroth but King Mark! Alas, he said, have I no knight that will
encounter with yonder knight? Sir, said Sir Gaheris, for your sake I
will joust. So Sir Gaheris made him ready, and when he was armed he
rode into the field. And when Sir Uwaine saw Sir Gaheris’ shield he
rode to him and said: Sir, ye do not your part. For, sir, the first
time ye were made Knight of the Round Table ye sware that ye should not
have ado with your fellowship wittingly. And pardie, Sir Gaheris, ye
knew me well enough by my shield, and so do I know you by your shield,
and though ye would break your oath I would not break mine; for there
is not one here, nor ye, that shall think I am afeard of you, but I
durst right well have ado with you, and yet we be sisters’ sons. Then
was Sir Gaheris ashamed, and so therewithal every knight went their
way, and Sir Uwaine rode into the country.

Then King Mark armed him, and took his horse and his spear, with a
squire with him. And then he rode afore Sir Uwaine, and suddenly at a
gap he ran upon him as he that was not ware of him, and there he smote
him almost through the body, and there left him. So within a while
there came Sir Kay and found Sir Uwaine, and asked him how he was hurt.
I wot not, said Sir Uwaine, why nor wherefore, but by treason I am sure
I gat this hurt; for here came a knight suddenly upon me or that I was
ware, and suddenly hurt me. Then there was come Sir Andred to seek King
Mark. Thou traitor knight, said Sir Kay, an I wist it were thou that
thus traitorly hast hurt this noble knight thou shouldst never pass my
hands. Sir, said Sir Andred, I did never hurt him, and that I will
report me to himself. Fie on you false knight, said Sir Kay, for ye of
Cornwall are nought worth. So Sir Kay made carry Sir Uwaine to the
Abbey of the Black Cross, and there he was healed. And then Sir Gaheris
took his leave of King Mark, but or he departed he said: Sir king, ye
did a foul shame unto you and your court, when ye banished Sir Tristram
out of this country, for ye needed not to have doubted no knight an he
had been here. And so he departed.



CHAPTER XXVIII. Of the treason of King Mark, and how Sir Gaheris smote
him down and Andred his cousin.

Then there came Sir Kay, the Seneschal, unto King Mark, and there he
had good cheer showing outward. Now, fair lords, said he, will ye prove
any adventure in the forest of Morris, in the which I know well is as
hard an adventure as I know any. Sir, said Sir Kay, I will prove it.
And Sir Gaheris said he would be avised for King Mark was ever full of
treason: and therewithal Sir Gaheris departed and rode his way. And by
the same way that Sir Kay should ride he laid him down to rest,
charging his squire to wait upon Sir Kay; And warn me when he cometh.
So within a while Sir Kay came riding that way, and then Sir Gaheris
took his horse and met him, and said: Sir Kay, ye are not wise to ride
at the request of King Mark, for he dealeth all with treason. Then said
Sir Kay: I require you let us prove this adventure. I shall not fail
you, said Sir Gaheris. And so they rode that time till a lake that was
that time called the Perilous Lake, and there they abode under the shaw
of the wood.

The meanwhile King Mark within the castle of Tintagil avoided all his
barons, and all other save such as were privy with him were avoided out
of his chamber. And then he let call his nephew Sir Andred, and bade
arm him and horse him lightly; and by that time it was midnight. And so
King Mark was armed in black, horse and all; and so at a privy postern
they two issued out with their varlets with them, and rode till they
came to that lake. Then Sir Kay espied them first, and gat his spear,
and proffered to joust. And King Mark rode against him, and smote each
other full hard, for the moon shone as the bright day. And there at
that jousts Sir Kay’s horse fell down, for his horse was not so big as
the king’s horse, and Sir Kay’s horse bruised him full sore. Then Sir
Gaheris was wroth that Sir Kay had a fall. Then he cried: Knight, sit
thou fast in thy saddle, for I will revenge my fellow. Then King Mark
was afeard of Sir Gaheris, and so with evil will King Mark rode against
him, and Sir Gaheris gave him such a stroke that he fell down. So then
forthwithal Sir Gaheris ran unto Sir Andred and smote him from his
horse quite, that his helm smote in the earth, and nigh had broken his
neck. And therewithal Sir Gaheris alighted, and gat up Sir Kay. And
then they yode both on foot to them, and bade them yield them, and tell
their names outher they should die. Then with great pain Sir Andred
spake first, and said: It is King Mark of Cornwall, therefore be ye
ware what ye do, and I am Sir Andred, his cousin. Fie on you both, said
Sir Gaheris, for a false traitor, and false treason hast thou wrought
and he both, under the feigned cheer that ye made us! it were pity,
said Sir Gaheris, that thou shouldst live any longer. Save my life,
said King Mark, and I will make amends; and consider that I am a king
anointed. It were the more shame, said Sir Gaheris, to save thy life;
thou art a king anointed with cream, and therefore thou shouldst hold
with all men of worship; and therefore thou art worthy to die. With
that he lashed at King Mark without saying any more, and covered him
with his shield and defended him as he might. And then Sir Kay lashed
at Sir Andred, and therewithal King Mark yielded him unto Sir Gaheris.
And then he kneeled adown, and made his oath upon the cross of the
sword, that never while he lived he would be against errant-knights.
And also he sware to be good friend unto Sir Tristram if ever he came
into Cornwall.

By then Sir Andred was on the earth, and Sir Kay would have slain him.
Let be, said Sir Gaheris, slay him not I pray you. It were pity, said
Sir Kay, that he should live any longer, for this is nigh cousin unto
Sir Tristram, and ever he hath been a traitor unto him, and by him he
was exiled out of Cornwall, and therefore I will slay him, said Sir
Kay. Ye shall not, said Sir Gaheris; sithen I have given the king his
life, I pray you give him his life. And therewithal Sir Kay let him go.
And so Sir Kay and Sir Gaheris rode their way unto Dinas, the
Seneschal, for because they heard say that he loved well Sir Tristram.
So they reposed them there, and soon after they rode unto the realm of
Logris. And so within a little while they met with Sir Launcelot that
always had Dame Bragwaine with him, to that intent he weened to have
met the sooner with Sir Tristram; and Sir Launcelot asked what tidings
in Cornwall, and whether they heard of Sir Tristram or not. Sir Kay and
Sir Gaheris answered and said, that they heard not of him. Then they
told Sir Launcelot word by word of their adventure. Then Sir Launcelot
smiled and said: Hard it is to take out of the flesh that is bred in
the bone; and so made them merry together.



CHAPTER XIX. How after that Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, and Sir
Dinadan had been long in prison they were delivered.

Now leave we off this tale, and speak we of Sir Dinas that had within
the castle a paramour, and she loved another knight better than him.
And so when Sir Dinas went out a-hunting she slipped down by a towel,
and took with her two brachets, and so she yede to the knight that she
loved, and he her again. And when Sir Dinas came home and missed his
paramour and his brachets, then was he the more wrother for his
brachets than for the lady. So then he rode after the knight that had
his paramour, and bade him turn and joust. So Sir Dinas smote him down,
that with the fall he brake his leg and his arm. And then his lady and
paramour cried Sir Dinas mercy, and said she would love him better than
ever she did. Nay, said Sir Dinas, I shall never trust them that once
betrayed me, and therefore, as ye have begun, so end, for I will never
meddle with you. And so Sir Dinas departed, and took his brachets with
him, and so rode to his castle.

Now will we turn unto Sir Launcelot, that was right heavy that he could
never hear no tidings of Sir Tristram, for all this while he was in
prison with Sir Darras, Palomides, and Dinadan. Then Dame Bragwaine
took her leave to go into Cornwall, and Sir Launcelot, Sir Kay, and Sir
Gaheris rode to seek Sir Tristram in the country of Surluse.

Now speaketh this tale of Sir Tristram and of his two fellows, for
every day Sir Palomides brawled and said language against Sir Tristram.
I marvel, said Sir Dinadan, of thee, Sir Palomides, an thou haddest Sir
Tristram here thou wouldst do him no harm; for an a wolf and a sheep
were together in a prison the wolf would suffer the sheep to be in
peace. And wit thou well, said Sir Dinadan, this same is Sir Tristram
at a word, and now must thou do thy best with him, and let see now if
ye can skift it with your hands. Then was Sir Palomides abashed and
said little. Sir Palomides, then said Sir Tristram, I have heard much
of your maugre against me, but I will not meddle with you as at this
time by my will, because I dread the lord of this place that hath us in
governance; for an I dread him not more than I do thee, soon it should
be skift: so they peaced themself. Right so came in a damosel and said:
Knights, be of good cheer, for ye are sure of your lives, and that I
heard say my lord, Sir Darras. Then were they glad all three, for daily
they weened they should have died.

Then soon after this Sir Tristram fell sick that he weened to have
died; then Sir Dinadan wept, and so did Sir Palomides under them both
making great sorrow. So a damosel came in to them and found them
mourning. Then she went unto Sir Darras, and told him how that mighty
knight that bare the black shield was likely to die. That shall not be,
said Sir Darras, for God defend when knights come to me for succour
that I should suffer them to die within my prison. Therefore, said Sir
Darras to the damosel, fetch that knight and his fellows afore me. And
then anon Sir Darras saw Sir Tristram brought afore him. He said: Sir
knight, me repenteth of thy sickness for thou art called a full noble
knight, and so it seemeth by thee; and wit ye well it shall never be
said that Sir Darras shall destroy such a noble knight as thou art in
prison, howbeit that thou hast slain three of my sons whereby I was
greatly aggrieved. But now shalt thou go and thy fellows, and your
harness and horses have been fair and clean kept, and ye shall go where
it liketh you, upon this covenant, that thou, knight, wilt promise me
to be good friend to my sons two that be now alive, and also that thou
tell me thy name. Sir, said he, as for me my name is Sir Tristram de
Liones, and in Cornwall was I born, and nephew I am unto King Mark. And
as for the death of your sons I might not do withal, for an they had
been the next kin that I have I might have done none otherwise. And if
I had slain them by treason or treachery I had been worthy to have
died. All this I consider, said Sir Darras, that all that ye did was by
force of knighthood, and that was the cause I would not put you to
death. But sith ye be Sir Tristram, the good knight, I pray you
heartily to be my good friend and to my sons. Sir, said Sir Tristram, I
promise you by the faith of my body, ever while I live I will do you
service, for ye have done to us but as a natural knight ought to do.
Then Sir Tristram reposed him there till that he was amended of his
sickness; and when he was big and strong they took their leave, and
every knight took their horses, and so departed and rode together till
they came to a cross way. Now fellows, said Sir Tristram, here will we
depart in sundry ways. And because Sir Dinadan had the first adventure
of him I will begin.



CHAPTER XL. How Sir Dinadan rescued a lady from Sir Breuse Saunce Pité,
and how Sir Tristram received a shield of Morgan le Fay.

So as Sir Dinadan rode by a well he found a lady making great dole.
What aileth you? said Sir Dinadan. Sir knight, said the lady, I am the
wofullest lady of the world, for within these five days here came a
knight called Sir Breuse Saunce Pité, and he slew mine own brother, and
ever since he hath kept me at his own will, and of all men in the world
I hate him most; and therefore I require you of knighthood to avenge
me, for he will not tarry, but be here anon. Let him come, said Sir
Dinadan, and because of honour of all women I will do my part. With
this came Sir Breuse, and when he saw a knight with his lady he was
wood wroth. And then he said: Sir knight, keep thee from me. So they
hurtled together as thunder, and either smote other passing sore, but
Sir Dinadan put him through the shoulder a grievous wound, and or ever
Sir Dinadan might turn him Sir Breuse was gone and fled. Then the lady
prayed him to bring her to a castle there beside but four mile thence;
and so Sir Dinadan brought her there, and she was welcome, for the lord
of that castle was her uncle; and so Sir Dinadan rode his way upon his
adventure.

Now turn we this tale unto Sir Tristram, that by adventure he came to a
castle to ask lodging, wherein was Queen Morgan le Fay; and so when Sir
Tristram was let into that castle he had good cheer all that night. And
upon the morn when he would have departed the queen said: Wit ye well
ye shall not depart lightly, for ye are here as a prisoner. Jesu
defend! said Sir Tristram, for I was but late a prisoner. Fair knight,
said the queen, ye shall abide with me till that I wit what ye are and
from whence ye come. And ever the queen would set Sir Tristram on her
own side, and her paramour on the other side. And ever Queen Morgan
would behold Sir Tristram, and thereat the knight was jealous, and was
in will suddenly to have run upon Sir Tristram with a sword, but he
left it for shame. Then the queen said to Sir Tristram: Tell me thy
name, and I shall suffer you to depart when ye will. Upon that covenant
I tell you my name is Sir Tristram de Liones. Ah, said Morgan le Fay,
an I had wist that, thou shouldst not have departed so soon as thou
shalt. But sithen I have made a promise I will hold it, with that thou
wilt promise me to bear upon thee a shield that I shall deliver thee,
unto the castle of the Hard Rock, where King Arthur had cried a great
tournament, and there I pray you that ye will be, and to do for me as
much deeds of arms as ye may do. For at the Castle of Maidens, Sir
Tristram, ye did marvellous deeds of arms as ever I heard knight do.
Madam, said Sir Tristram, let me see the shield that I shall bear. Then
the shield was brought forth, and the field was goldish, with a king
and a queen therein painted, and a knight standing above them, [one
foot] upon the king’s head, and the other upon the queen’s. Madam, said
Sir Tristram, this is a fair shield and a mighty; but what signifieth
this king and this queen, and the knight standing upon both their
heads? I shall tell you, said Morgan le Fay, it signifieth King Arthur
and Queen Guenever, and a knight who holdeth them both in bondage and
in servage. Who is that knight? said Sir Tristram. That shall ye not
wit as at this time, said the queen. But as the French book saith,
Queen Morgan loved Sir Launcelot best, and ever she desired him, and he
would never love her nor do nothing at her request, and therefore she
held many knights together for to have taken him by strength. And
because she deemed that Sir Launcelot loved Queen Guenever paramour,
and she him again, therefore Queen Morgan le Fay ordained that shield
to put Sir Launcelot to a rebuke, to that intent that King Arthur might
understand the love between them. Then Sir Tristram took that shield
and promised her to bear it at the tournament at the Castle of the Hard
Rock. But Sir Tristram knew not that that shield was ordained against
Sir Launcelot, but afterward he knew it.



CHAPTER XLI. How Sir Tristram took with him the shield, and also how he
slew the paramour of Morgan le Fay.

So then Sir Tristram took his leave of the queen, and took the shield
with him. Then came the knight that held Queen Morgan le Fay, his name
was Sir Hemison, and he made him ready to follow Sir Tristram. Fair
friend, said Morgan, ride not after that knight, for ye shall not win
no worship of him. Fie on him, coward, said Sir Hemison, for I wist
never good knight come out of Cornwall but if it were Sir Tristram de
Liones. What an that be he? said she. Nay, nay, said he, he is with La
Beale Isoud, and this is but a daffish knight. Alas, my fair friend, ye
shall find him the best knight that ever ye met withal, for I know him
better than ye do. For your sake, said Sir Hemison, I shall slay him.
Ah, fair friend, said the queen, me repenteth that ye will follow that
knight, for I fear me sore of your again coming. With this this knight
rode his way wood wroth, and he rode after Sir Tristram as fast as he
had been chased with knights. When Sir Tristram heard a knight come
after him so fast he returned about, and saw a knight coming against
him. And when he came nigh to Sir Tristram he cried on high: Sir
knight, keep thee from me. Then they rushed together as it had been
thunder, and Sir Hemison brised his spear upon Sir Tristram, but his
harness was so good that he might not hurt him. And Sir Tristram smote
him harder, and bare him through the body, and he fell over his horse’s
croup. Then Sir Tristram turned to have done more with his sword, but
he saw so much blood go from him that him seemed he was likely to die,
and so he departed from him and came to a fair manor to an old knight,
and there Sir Tristram lodged.



CHAPTER XLII. How Morgan le Fay buried her paramour, and how Sir
Tristram praised Sir Launcelot and his kin.

Now leave to speak of Sir Tristram, and speak we of the knight that was
wounded to the death. Then his varlet alighted, and took off his helm,
and then he asked his lord whether there were any life in him. There is
in me life, said the knight, but it is but little; and therefore leap
thou up behind me when thou hast holpen me up, and hold me fast that I
fall not, and bring me to Queen Morgan le Fay; for deep draughts of
death draw to my heart that I may not live, for I would fain speak with
her or I died: for else my soul will be in great peril an I die.
For[thwith] with great pain his varlet brought him to the castle, and
there Sir Hemison fell down dead. When Morgan le Fay saw him dead she
made great sorrow out of reason; and then she let despoil him unto his
shirt, and so she let him put into a tomb. And about the tomb she let
write: Here lieth Sir Hemison, slain by the hands of Sir Tristram de
Liones.

Now turn we unto Sir Tristram, that asked the knight his host if he saw
late any knights adventurous. Sir, he said, the last night here lodged
with me Ector de Maris and a damosel with him, and that damosel told me
that he was one of the best knights of the world. That is not so, said
Sir Tristram, for I know four better knights of his own blood, and the
first is Sir Launcelot du Lake, call him the best knight, and Sir Bors
de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Blamore de Ganis, and Sir Gaheris. Nay,
said his host, Sir Gawaine is a better knight than he. That is not so,
said Sir Tristram, for I have met with them both, and I felt Sir
Gaheris for the better knight, and Sir Lamorak I call him as good as
any of them except Sir Launcelot. Why name ye not Sir Tristram? said
his host, for I account him as good as any of them. I know not Sir
Tristram, said Tristram. Thus they talked and bourded as long as them
list, and then went to rest. And on the morn Sir Tristram departed, and
took his leave of his host, and rode toward the Roche Dure, and none
adventure had Sir Tristram but that; and so he rested not till he came
to the castle, where he saw five hundred tents.



CHAPTER XLIII. How Sir Tristram at a tournament bare the shield that
Morgan le Fay delivered to him.

Then the King of Scots and the King of Ireland held against King
Arthur’s knights, and there began a great medley. So came in Sir
Tristram and did marvellous deeds of arms, for there he smote down many
knights. And ever he was afore King Arthur with that shield. And when
King Arthur saw that shield he marvelled greatly in what intent it was
made; but Queen Guenever deemed as it was, wherefore she was heavy.
Then was there a damosel of Queen Morgan in a chamber by King Arthur,
and when she heard King Arthur speak of that shield, then she spake
openly unto King Arthur. Sir King, wit ye well this shield was ordained
for you, to warn you of your shame and dishonour, and that longeth to
you and your queen. And then anon that damosel picked her away privily,
that no man wist where she was become. Then was King Arthur sad and
wroth, and asked from whence came that damosel. There was not one that
knew her nor wist where she was become. Then Queen Guenever called to
her Sir Ector de Maris, and there she made her complaint to him, and
said: I wot well this shield was made by Morgan le Fay in despite of me
and of Sir Launcelot, wherefore I dread me sore lest I should be
destroyed. And ever the king beheld Sir Tristram, that did so
marvellous deeds of arms that he wondered sore what knight he might be,
and well he wist it was not Sir Launcelot. And it was told him that Sir
Tristram was in Petit Britain with Isoud la Blanche Mains, for he
deemed, an he had been in the realm of Logris, Sir Launcelot or some of
his fellows that were in the quest of Sir Tristram that they should
have found him or that time. So King Arthur had marvel what knight he
might be. And ever Sir Arthur’s eye was on that shield. All that espied
the queen, and that made her sore afeard.

Then ever Sir Tristram smote down knights wonderly to behold, what upon
the right hand and upon the left hand, that unnethe no knight might
withstand him. And the King of Scots and the King of Ireland began to
withdraw them. When Arthur espied that, he thought that that knight
with the strange shield should not escape him. Then he called unto him
Sir Uwaine le Blanche Mains, and bade him arm him and make him ready.
So anon King Arthur and Sir Uwaine dressed them before Sir Tristram,
and required him to tell them where he had that shield. Sir, he said, I
had it of Queen Morgan le Fay, sister unto King Arthur.

 So here endeth this history of this book, for it is the first book of
 Sir Tristram de Liones and the second book of Sir Tristram followeth.


GLOSSARY

Abashed, abased, lowered,
Abate, depress, calm,
Abought, paid for,
Abraid, started,
Accompted, counted,
Accorded, agreed,
Accordment, agreement,
Acquit, repay,
Actually, actively,
Adoubted, afraid,
Advision, vision,
Afeard, afraid,
Afterdeal, disadvantage,
Againsay, retract,
Aknown, known,
Aligement, alleviation,
Allegeance, alleviation,
Allow, approve,
Almeries, chests,
Alther, gen. pl., of all,
Amounted, mounted,
Anealed, anointed,
Anguishly, in pain,
Anon, at once,
Apair, weaken,
Apparelled, fitted up,
Appeach, impeach,
Appealed, challenged, accused,
Appertices, displays,
Araged, enraged, ; confused,
Araised, raised,
Arase, obliterate,
Areared, reared,
Armyvestal, martial,
Array, plight, state of affairs,
Arrayed, situated,
Arson, saddle-bow,
Askance, casually,
Assoiled, absolved,
Assotted, infatuated,
Assummon, summon,
Astonied, amazed, stunned,
At, of, by,
At-after, after,
Attaint, overcome,
Aumbries, chests,
Avail (at), at an advantage,
Avaled, lowered,
Avaunt, boast,
Aventred, couched,
Avised, be advised, take thought,
Avision, vision,
Avoid, quit,
Avoided, got clear off,
Avow, vow,
Await of (in), in watch for,
Awayward, away,
Awke, sideways,

Bachelors, probationers for knighthood
Bain, bath,
Barbican, gate-tower,
Barget, little ship,
Battle, division of an army,
Bawdy, dirty,
Beams, trumpets,
Be-closed, enclosed,
Become, pp., befallen, gone to,
Bedashed, splashed,
Behests, promises,
Behight, promised,
Beholden (beholding) to, obliged to,
Behote, promised,
Benome, deprived, taken away,
Besants, gold coins,
Beseek, beseech,
Beseen, appointed, arrayed,
Beskift, shove off,
Bested, beset,
Betaken, entrusted,
Betaught, entrusted, recommended,
Betid, happened,
Betook, committed, entrusted,
Bevered, quivered,
Board, sb., deck,
Bobaunce, boasting, pride,
Boishe, bush, branch of a tree,
Boistous, rough,
Bole, trunk of a tree,
Boot, remedy,
Borrow out, redeem,
Borrows, pledges,
Bote, remedy,
Bound, ready,
Bourded, jested,
Bourder, jester,
Braced, embraced,
Brachet, little hound,
Braide, quick movement,
Brast, burst, break,
Breaths, breathing holes,
Brief, shorten,
Brim, fierce, furious,
Brised, broke,
Broached, pierced,
Broaches, spits,
Bur, hand-guard of a spear,
Burble, bubble,
Burbling, bubbling,
Burgenetts, buds, blossoms,
Bushment, ambush,
By and by, immediately,
Bywaryed, expended, bestowed,

Canel bone, collar bone,
Cankered, inveterate,
Cantel, slice, strip,
Careful, sorrowful, full of troubles,
Cast (of bread), loaves baked at the same time,
Cast, ref: v., propose,
Cedle, schedule, note,
Cere, wax over, embalm,; cerel,
Certes, certainly,
Chafe, heat, decompose,; chafed, heated,
Chaflet, platform, scaffold,
Champaign, open country,
Chariot (Fr charette), cart,
Cheer, countenance,  entertainment,
Chierte, dearness,
Chrism, anointing oil,
Clatter, talk confusedly,
Cleight, clutched,
Cleped, called,
Clipping, embracing,
Cog, small boat,
Cognisance, badge, mark of distinction,
Coif, head-piece,
Comfort, strengthen, help,
Cominal, common,
Complished, complete,
Con, know, be able, ; con thanlt, be grateful,
Conserve, preserve,
Conversant, abiding in,
Cording, agreement,
Coronal, circlet,
Cost, side,
Costed, kept up with,
Couched, lay,
Courage, encourage,
Courtelage, courtyard,
Covert, sheltered,
Covetise, covetousness,
Covin, deceit,
Cream, oil,
Credence, faith,
Croup, crupper,
Curteist, most courteous,

Daffish, foolish,
Danger (in), under obligation to, in the power of,
Dawed, v tr., revived,  intr. dawned,
Deadly, mortal, human,
Deal, part, portion,
Debate, quarrel, strife,
Debonair, courteous,
Deceivable, deceitful,
Defaded, faded,
Default, fault,
Defend, forbid,; defended,; forbidden,
Defoiled, trodden down, fouled, deflowered,
Degree (win the), rank, superiority,
Delibered, determined,
Deliverly, adroitly,
Departed, divided,
Departition, departure,
Dere, harm,
Descrive, describe,
Despoiled, stripped,
Detrenched, cut to pieces,
Devised, looked carefully at,
Devoir, duty, service,
Did off, doffed,
Dight, prepared,
Dindled, trembled,
Disadventure, misfortune,
Discover, reveal,
Disherited, disinherited,
Disparpled, scattered,
Dispenses, expenses,
Disperplyd, scattered,
Dispoiled, stripped,
Distained, sullied, dishonoured,
Disworship, shame,
Dole, gift of alms,
Dole, sorrow,
Domineth, dominates, rules,
Don, gift,
Doted, foolish,
Doubted, redoubtable,
Draughts, privities, secret interviews, recesses,
Drenched, drowned,
Dress, make ready,
Dressed up, raised,
Dretched, troubled in sleep,
Dretching, being troubled in sleep,
Dromounds, war vessels,
Dure, endure, last,; dured,; during,
Duresse, bondage, hardship,
Dwined, dwindled,

Eased, entertained,
Eft, after, again,
Eftures, passages,
Embattled, ranged for battle,
Embushed, concealed in the woods,
Eme, uncle,
Empoison, poison,
Emprised, undertook,
Enbraid,
Enchafe, heat,; enchafed, heated,
Enchieve, achieve,
Endlong, alongside of,
Enewed, painted,
Enforce, constrain,
Engine, device,
Enow, enough,
Enquest, enterprise,
Ensured, assured,
Entermete, intermeddle,
Errant, wandering,
Estates, ranks,
Even hand, at an equality,
Evenlong, along,
Everych, each, every one,

Faiter, vagabond,
Fare, sb., ado, commotion,
Faren, pp., treated,
Faute, lack,; fauted, lacked,
Fealty, oath of fidelity,
Fear, frighten,
Feute, trace, track,
Feuter, set in rest, couch,
Feutred, set in socket,
Fiaunce, affiance, promise,
Flang, flung,; rushed,
Flatling, prostrate,
Fleet, float,
Flemed, put to flight,
Flittered, fluttered,
Foiled, defeated, shamed,
Foined, thrust,
Foining, thrusting,
Foins, thrusts,
Foot-hot, hastily,
For-bled, spent with bleeding,
Force (no), no concern,
Fordeal, advantage,
Fordo, destroy,; fordid,
Forecast, preconcerted plot,
For-fared, worsted,
Forfend, forbid,
Forfoughten, weary with fighting,
Forhewn, hewn to pieces,
Forjousted, tired with jousting,
Forthinketh, repents,
Fortuned, happened,
Forward, vanguard,
Forwowmded, sorely wounded,
Free, noble,
Freshed,
Froward, away from,

Gad, wedge or spike of iron,
Gainest, readiest,
Gar, cause,
Gart, compelled,
Gentily, like a gentleman,
Gerfalcon, a fine hawk,
Germane, closely allied,
Gest, deed, story,
Gisarm, halberd, battle-axe,
Glaive, sword,
Glasting, barking,
Glatisant, barking, yelping,
Gobbets, lumps,
Graithed, made ready,
Gree, degree, superiority,
Greed, pp., pleased, content,
Grescs, steps,
Grimly, ugly,
Grovelling, on his face,
Guerdonless, without reward,
Guise, fashion,

Habergeon, hauberk with leggings attached,
Hair, a hair-shirt,
Hale and how, a sailor’s cry,
Halp, helped,
Halsed, embraced,
Halsing, embracing,
Handfast, betrothed,
Handsel, earnest-money,
Hangers, testicles,
Harbingers, messengers sent to prepare lodgings,
Harness, armour,
Hart of greese, fat deer,
Hauberk, coat of mail,
Haut, high, noble,
Hauteyn, haughty,
Heavy, sad,
Hete, command,
Hide, skin,
Hied, hurried,
High (on), aloud,
Higher hand, the uppermost,
Hight, called,
Hilled, covered, concealed,
Holden, held,
Holp, helped,
Holts, woods,
Hough-bone, back part of kneejoint,
Houselled, to be given the Eucharist,
Hoved, hovered, waited about,
Hurled, dashed, staggered,; hurling,
Hurtle, dash,

Incontinent, forthwith,
Ind, dark blue,
Infellowship, join in fellowship,
In like, alike,
Intermit, interpose,

Japer, jester,
Japes, jests,
Jesseraunt, a short cuirass,

Keep, sb., care,
Keep, s., care, reck,
Kemps, champions,
Kind, nature,
Kindly, natural,
Knights parters, marshals,
Know, acknowledge,
Knowledging, acknowledgment, confession,

Lain, conceal,
Langering, sauntering,
Lapped, took in her lap,
Large, generous,
Largeness, liberality,
Laton, latten, brass,
Laund, waste plain,
Layne, conceal,
Lazar-cot, leper-house,
Learn, teach,
Lears, cheeks,
Leaved, leafy,
Lecher, fornicator,
Leech, physician,
Leman, lover,
Let, caused to,
Let, hinder,
Lewdest, most ignorant,
Licours lecherous,
Lief, dear,
Liefer, more gladly,
Lieve, believe,
Limb-meal, limb from limb,
List, desire, pleasure,
Lithe, joint,
Longing unto, belonging to,
Long on (upon), because of,
Loos, praise,
Lotless, without a share,
Loveday, day for. settling disputes,
Loving, praising,
Lunes, leashes, strings,
Lusk, lubber,
Lusts, inclinations,

Maims, wounds,
Makeless, matchless,
Makers, authors, poets,
Mas,ease, discomfort,
Mal engine, evil design,
Mal-fortune, ill-luck, mishap,
Marches, borders,
Mass-penny, offering at mass for the dead,
Matche old, machicolated, with holes for defence,
Maugre, sb., despite,
Measle, disease,
Medled, mingled,
Medley, melee, general encounter,
Meiny, retinue,
Mickle, much,
Minever, ermine,
Mischieved, hurt,
Mischievous, painful,
Miscorr fort, discomfort,
Miscreature, unbeliever,
Missay, revile,; missaid,
Mo, more,
More and less, rich and poor,
Motes, notes on a horn,
Mount~ lance, amount of, extent,
Much, great,

Naked, unarmed,
Namely, especially,
Ne, nor,
Near-hand, nearly,; near,
Needly, needs, on your own compulsion,
Nesh, soft, tender,
Nigh-hand, nearly,
Nill, will not,
Nilt, will not,
Nis, ne is, is not,
Nist, ne wist, knew not,
Noblesse, nobleness,
Nobley, nobility, splendour,
Noised, reported,
Nold, would not,
Noseling, on his nose,
Not for then, nevertheless,
Notoyrly, notoriously,
Noyous, hurtful,

Obeissance, obedience,
Or, before,
Orgule, haughtiness,
Orgulist, haughtiest,
Orgulite, pride, arrogance,
Orgulous, proud,
Other, or,
Ouches, jewels,
Ought, owned,
Outcept, except,
Outher, or,
Out-taken, except,
Over-evening, last night,
Overget, overtake,
Overhylled, covered,
Over-led, domineered over,
Overlong, the length of,
Overslip, pass,
Overthwart, adj., cross,
Overthwart, sb., mischance,
Overthwart and endlong, by the breadth and length,

Painture, painting,
Paitrelles, breastplate of a horse,
Paltocks, short coats,
Parage, descent,
Pareil, like,
Passing, surpassingly,
Paynim, pagan,
Pensel, pennon,
Perclos, partition,
Perdy, par Dieu,
Perigot, falcon,
Perish, destroy,
Peron, tombstone,
Pight, pitched,
Pike, steal away,
Piked, stole,
Pillers, plunderers,
Pilling, plundering,
Pleasaunce, pleasure,
Plenour, complete,
Plump, sb., cluster,
Pointling, aiming,
Pont, bridge,
Port, gate,
Posseded, possessed,
Potestate, governor,
Precessours, predecessors,
Press, throng,
Pretendeth, belongs to,
Pricker, hard rider,
Pricking, spurring,
Prime, A.M.,
Prise, capture,
Puissance, power,
Purfle, trimming,
Purfled, embroidered,
Purvey, provide,

Quarrels, arrowheads,
Questing, barking,
Quick, alive,
Quit, repaid,; acquitted, behaved,

Raced (rased), tore,
Rack (of bulls), herd,
Raines, a town in Brittany famous for its cloth,
Ramping, raging,
Range, rank, station,
Ransacked, searched,
Rashed, fell headlong,
Rashing, rushing,
Rasing, rushing,
Rasure,
Raundon, impetuosity,
Rear, raise,
Rechate, note of recall,
Recomforted, comforted, cheered,
Recounter, rencontre, encounter,
Recover, rescue,
Rede, advise, ; sb., counsel,
Redounded, glanced back,
Religion, religious order,
Reneye, deny,
Report, refer,
Resemblaunt; semblance,
Retrayed, drew back,
Rightwise, rightly,
Rivage, shore,
Romed, roared,
Roted, practised,
Rove, cleft,
Rownsepyk, a branch,

Sacring, consecrating,
Sad, serious,
Sadly, heartily, earnestly,
Salle, room,
Samite, silk stuff with gold or silver
threads,
Sangreal, Holy Grail,
Sarps, girdles,
Saw, proverb,
Scathes, harms, hurts,
icripture, writing,
Search, probe wounds,
Selar, canopy,
Semblable, like,
Semblant, semblance,
Sendal, fine cloth,
Sennight, week,
Servage, slavery,
Sewer, officer who set on dishes and tasted them,
Shaft-mon, handbreadth,
Shaw, thicket,
Sheef, thrust,
Sheer-Thursday, Thursday in Holy Week,
Shend, harm,
Shenship, disgrace,
Shent, undone, blamed,
Shour, attack,
Shrew, rascal,
Shrewd, knavish,
Sib, akin to,
Sideling, sideways,
Siege, seat,
Signified, likened,
Siker, sure,
Sikerness, assurance,
Sith, since,
Sithen, afterwards, since,
Skift, changed,
Slade, valley,
Slake, glen,
Soil (to go to), hunting term for taking the water,
Sonds, messages,
Sort, company,
Sperd, bolted,
Spere, ask, inquire,
Spered, asked,
Sperhawk, sparrowhawk,
Sprent, sprinkled,
Stale, station,
Stark, thoroughly,
Stead, place,
Stert, started, rose quickly,
Steven, appointment,; steven ser. appointment made,
Steven, voice,
Stigh, path,
Stilly, silently,
Stint, fixed revenue,
Stonied, astonished,; became confused,
Stour, battle,
Strain, race, descent,
Strait, narrow,
Straked, blew a horn,
Sue, pursue,
Sued, pursued,
Surcingles, saddle girths,
Swang, swung,
Sweven, dream,
Swough, sound of wind,

Talent, desire,
Tallages, taxes,
Tallies, taxes,
Tamed, crushed,
Tatches, qualities,
Tene, sorrow,
Term, period of time,
Thilk, that same,
Tho, then,
Thrang, pushed,
Thrulled, pushed,
Till, to,
To-brast, burst,
To-fore, before,
To-morn, to-morrow,
Took, gave,
To-rove, broke up,
To-shivered, broken to pieces,
Traced, advanced and retreated,
Trains, devices, wiles,
Trasing, pressing forward,
Travers (met at), came across,
Traverse, slantwise,
Traversed, moved sideways,
Tray, grief,
Treatise, treaty,
Tree, timber,
Trenchant, cutting, sharp,
Tres:, hunting term,
Truage, tribute,
Trussed, packed,

Ubblie, wafer, Host,
Umbecast, cast about,
Umberere, the part of the helmet which shaded the eyes,
Umbre, shade,
Unavised, thoughtlessly,
Uncouth, strange,
Underne, - A.M.,
Ungoodly, rudely,
Unhappy, unlucky,
Unhilled, uncovered,
Unr the, scarcely,
Unsicker, unstable,
Unwimpled, uncovered,
Unwrast, untwisted, unbound,
Upright, flat on the back,
Up-so-down, upside down,
Ure, usage,
Utas, octave of a festival,
Utterance, uttermost,

Varlet, servant,
Venery, hunting,
Ven ails, breathing holes,
Villain, man of low birth,
Visors, the perforated parts of helmets,
Voided, slipped away from,

Wagging, shaking,
Waited, watched,
Waits, watches,
Wallop, gallop,
Wanhope, despair,
Wap, ripple,
Ware, aware,
Warison, reward,
Warn, forbid, refuse,
Weeds, garments,
Weltered, rolled about,
Wend, thought,
Wer-wolf, a man turned into a wolf by magic,
Where, whereas,
Wide-where, over wide space,
Wield, possess, have power over,
Wield himself, come to himself,
Wight, brave, strong,
Wightly, swiftly,
Wildsome, desolate,
Wimpled, with the head covered,
Win, make way,
Wite, v., blame,
Within-forth, on the inside,
Without-forth, on the outside,
Wittiest, cleverest,
Wittily, cleverly,
Witting, knowledge,
Wold or nold, would or would not,
Wonder, adj., wondrous,
Wonder, adv., wondrously,
Wonderly, wonderfully,
Wood, mad,
Woodness, madness,
Wood shaw, thicket of the wood,
Worship, honour,
Worshipped, cause to be honoured,
Worts, roots,
Wot, know,
Wrack, destruction,
Wroken, wreaked,
Wrothe, twisted,

Yede, ran,
Yelden, yielded,
Yerde, stick, stem,
Yode, went,
Yolden, yielded,
Y-wis, certainly,












*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LE MORTE D'ARTHUR: VOLUME 1 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


ehmaidhcdaIeART OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10373 ***

[Illustration]




The Middle Temple Murder

by J.S. Fletcher

1919

Contents

 CHAPTER I. THE SCRAP OF GREY PAPER
 CHAPTER II. HIS FIRST BRIEF
 CHAPTER III. THE CLUE OF THE CAP
 CHAPTER IV. THE ANGLO-ORIENT HOTEL
 CHAPTER V. SPARGO WISHES TO SPECIALIZE
 CHAPTER VI. WITNESS TO A MEETING
 CHAPTER VII. MR. AYLMORE
 CHAPTER VIII. THE MAN FROM THE SAFE DEPOSIT
 CHAPTER IX. THE DEALER IN RARE STAMPS
 CHAPTER X. THE LEATHER BOX
 CHAPTER XI. MR. AYLMORE IS QUESTIONED
 CHAPTER XII. THE NEW WITNESS
 CHAPTER XIII. UNDER SUSPICION
 CHAPTER XIV. THE SILVER TICKET
 CHAPTER XV. MARKET MILCASTER
 CHAPTER XVI. THE “YELLOW DRAGON”
 CHAPTER XVII. MR. QUARTERPAGE HARKS BACK
 CHAPTER XVIII. AN OLD NEWSPAPER
 CHAPTER XIX. THE CHAMBERLAYNE STORY
 CHAPTER XX. MAITLAND _alias_ MARBURY
 CHAPTER XXI. ARRESTED
 CHAPTER XXII. THE BLANK PAST
 CHAPTER XXIII. MISS BAYLIS
 CHAPTER XXIV. MOTHER GUTCH
 CHAPTER XXV. REVELATIONS
 CHAPTER XXVI. STILL SILENT
 CHAPTER XXVII. MR. ELPHICK’S CHAMBERS
 CHAPTER XXVIII. OF PROVED IDENTITY
 CHAPTER XXIX. THE CLOSED DOORS
 CHAPTER XXX. REVELATION
 CHAPTER XXXI. THE PENITENT WINDOW-CLEANER
 CHAPTER XXXII. THE CONTENTS OF THE COFFIN
 CHAPTER XXXIII. FORESTALLED
 CHAPTER XXXIV. THE WHIP HAND
 CHAPTER XXXV. MYERST EXPLAINS
 CHAPTER XXXVI. THE FINAL TELEGRAM




CHAPTER ONE
THE SCRAP OF GREY PAPER


As a rule, Spargo left the _Watchman_ office at two o’clock. The paper
had then gone to press. There was nothing for him, recently promoted to
a sub-editorship, to do after he had passed the column for which he was
responsible; as a matter of fact he could have gone home before the
machines began their clatter. But he generally hung about, trifling,
until two o’clock came. On this occasion, the morning of the 22nd of
June, 1912, he stopped longer than usual, chatting with Hacket, who had
charge of the foreign news, and who began telling him about a telegram
which had just come through from Durazzo. What Hacket had to tell was
interesting: Spargo lingered to hear all about it, and to discuss it.
Altogether it was well beyond half-past two when he went out of the
office, unconsciously puffing away from him as he reached the threshold
the last breath of the atmosphere in which he had spent his midnight.
In Fleet Street the air was fresh, almost to sweetness, and the first
grey of the coming dawn was breaking faintly around the high silence of
St. Paul’s.

Spargo lived in Bloomsbury, on the west side of Russell Square. Every
night and every morning he walked to and from the _Watchman_ office by
the same route—Southampton Row, Kingsway, the Strand, Fleet Street. He
came to know several faces, especially amongst the police; he formed
the habit of exchanging greetings with various officers whom he
encountered at regular points as he went slowly homewards, smoking his
pipe. And on this morning, as he drew near to Middle Temple Lane, he
saw a policeman whom he knew, one Driscoll, standing at the entrance,
looking about him. Further away another policeman appeared, sauntering.
Driscoll raised an arm and signalled; then, turning, he saw Spargo. He
moved a step or two towards him. Spargo saw news in his face.

“What is it?” asked Spargo.

Driscoll jerked a thumb over his shoulder, towards the partly open door
of the lane. Within, Spargo saw a man hastily donning a waistcoat and
jacket.

“He says,” answered Driscoll, “him, there—the porter—that there’s a man
lying in one of them entries down the lane, and he thinks he’s dead.
Likewise, he thinks he’s murdered.”

Spargo echoed the word.

“But what makes him think that?” he asked, peeping with curiosity
beyond Driscoll’s burly form. “Why?”

“He says there’s blood about him,” answered Driscoll. He turned and
glanced at the oncoming constable, and then turned again to Spargo.
“You’re a newspaper man, sir?” he suggested.

“I am,” replied Spargo.

“You’d better walk down with us,” said Driscoll, with a grin. “There’ll
be something to write pieces in the paper about. At least, there may
be.” Spargo made no answer. He continued to look down the lane,
wondering what secret it held, until the other policeman came up. At
the same moment the porter, now fully clothed, came out.

“Come on!” he said shortly. “I’ll show you.”

Driscoll murmured a word or two to the newly-arrived constable, and
then turned to the porter.

“How came you to find him, then?” he asked

The porter jerked his head at the door which they were leaving.

“I heard that door slam,” he replied, irritably, as if the fact which
he mentioned caused him offence. “I know I did! So I got up to look
around. Then—well, I saw that!”

He raised a hand, pointing down the lane. The three men followed his
outstretched finger. And Spargo then saw a man’s foot, booted,
grey-socked, protruding from an entry on the left hand.

“Sticking out there, just as you see it now,” said the porter. “I ain’t
touched it. And so—”

He paused and made a grimace as if at the memory of some unpleasant
thing. Driscoll nodded comprehendingly.

“And so you went along and looked?” he suggested. “Just so—just to see
who it belonged to, as it might be.”

“Just to see—what there was to see,” agreed the porter. “Then I saw
there was blood. And then—well, I made up the lane to tell one of you
chaps.”

“Best thing you could have done,” said Driscoll. “Well, now then—”

The little procession came to a halt at the entry. The entry was a cold
and formal thing of itself; not a nice place to lie dead in, having
glazed white tiles for its walls and concrete for its flooring;
something about its appearance in that grey morning air suggested to
Spargo the idea of a mortuary. And that the man whose foot projected
over the step was dead he had no doubt: the limpness of his pose
certified to it.

For a moment none of the four men moved or spoke. The two policemen
unconsciously stuck their thumbs in their belts and made play with
their fingers; the porter rubbed his chin thoughtfully—Spargo
remembered afterwards the rasping sound of this action; he himself put
his hands in his pockets and began to jingle his money and his keys.
Each man had his own thoughts as he contemplated the piece of human
wreckage which lay before him.

“You’ll notice,” suddenly observed Driscoll, speaking in a hushed
voice, “You’ll notice that he’s lying there in a queer way—same as
if—as if he’d been put there. Sort of propped up against that wall, at
first, and had slid down, like.”

Spargo was taking in all the details with a professional eye. He saw at
his feet the body of an elderly man; the face was turned away from him,
crushed in against the glaze of the wall, but he judged the man to be
elderly because of grey hair and whitening whisker; it was clothed in a
good, well-made suit of grey check cloth—tweed—and the boots were good:
so, too, was the linen cuff which projected from the sleeve that hung
so limply. One leg was half doubled under the body; the other was
stretched straight out across the threshold; the trunk was twisted to
the wall. Over the white glaze of the tiles against which it and the
shoulder towards which it had sunk were crushed there were gouts and
stains of blood. And Driscoll, taking a hand out of his belt, pointed a
finger at them.

“Seems to me,” he said, slowly, “seems to me as how he’s been struck
down from behind as he came out of here. That blood’s from his
nose—gushed out as he fell. What do you say, Jim?” The other policeman
coughed.

“Better get the inspector here,” he said. “And the doctor and the
ambulance. Dead—ain’t he?”

Driscoll bent down and put a thumb on the hand which lay on the
pavement.

“As ever they make ’em,” he remarked laconically. “And stiff, too.
Well, hurry up, Jim!”

Spargo waited until the inspector arrived; waited until the
hand-ambulance came. More policemen came with it; they moved the body
for transference to the mortuary, and Spargo then saw the dead man’s
face. He looked long and steadily at it while the police arranged the
limbs, wondering all the time who it was that he gazed at, how he came
to that end, what was the object of his murderer, and many other
things. There was some professionalism in Spargo’s curiosity, but there
was also a natural dislike that a fellow-being should have been so
unceremoniously smitten out of the world.

There was nothing very remarkable about the dead man’s face. It was
that of a man of apparently sixty to sixty-five years of age; plain,
even homely of feature, clean-shaven, except for a fringe of white
whisker, trimmed, after an old-fashioned pattern, between the ear and
the point of the jaw. The only remarkable thing about it was that it
was much lined and seamed; the wrinkles were many and deep around the
corners of the lips and the angles of the eyes; this man, you would
have said to yourself, has led a hard life and weathered storm, mental
as well as physical.

Driscoll nudged Spargo with a turn of his elbow. He gave him a wink.
“Better come down to the dead-house,” he muttered confidentially.

“Why?” asked Spargo.

“They’ll go through him,” whispered Driscoll. “Search him, d’ye see?
Then you’ll get to know all about him, and so on. Help to write that
piece in the paper, eh?”

Spargo hesitated. He had had a stiff night’s work, and until his
encounter with Driscoll he had cherished warm anticipation of the meal
which would be laid out for him at his rooms, and of the bed into which
he would subsequently tumble. Besides, a telephone message would send a
man from the _Watchman_ to the mortuary. This sort of thing was not in
his line now, now—

“You’ll be for getting one o’ them big play-cards out with something
about a mystery on it,” suggested Driscoll. “You never know what lies
at the bottom o’ these affairs, no more you don’t.”

That last observation decided Spargo; moreover, the old instinct for
getting news began to assert itself.

“All right,” he said. “I’ll go along with you.”

And re-lighting his pipe he followed the little cortège through the
streets, still deserted and quiet, and as he walked behind he reflected
on the unobtrusive fashion in which murder could stalk about. Here was
the work of murder, no doubt, and it was being quietly carried along a
principal London thoroughfare, without fuss or noise, by officials to
whom the dealing with it was all a matter of routine. Surely—

“My opinion,” said a voice at Spargo’s elbow, “my opinion is that it
was done elsewhere. Not there! He was put there. That’s what I say.”
Spargo turned and saw that the porter was at his side. He, too, was
accompanying the body.

“Oh!” said Spargo. “You think—”

“I think he was struck down elsewhere and carried there,” said the
porter. “In somebody’s chambers, maybe. I’ve known of some queer games
in our bit of London! Well!—he never came in at my lodge last
night—I’ll stand to that. And who is he, I should like to know? From
what I see of him, not the sort to be about our place.”

“That’s what we shall hear presently,” said Spargo. “They’re going to
search him.”

But Spargo was presently made aware that the searchers had found
nothing. The police-surgeon said that the dead man had, without doubt,
been struck down from behind by a terrible blow which had fractured the
skull and caused death almost instantaneously. In Driscoll’s opinion,
the murder had been committed for the sake of plunder. For there was
nothing whatever on the body. It was reasonable to suppose that a man
who is well dressed would possess a watch and chain, and have money in
his pockets, and possibly rings on his fingers. But there was nothing
valuable to be found; in fact there was nothing at all to be found that
could lead to identification—no letters, no papers, nothing. It was
plain that whoever had struck the dead man down had subsequently
stripped him of whatever was on him. The only clue to possible identity
lay in the fact that a soft cap of grey cloth appeared to have been
newly purchased at a fashionable shop in the West End.

Spargo went home; there seemed to be nothing to stop for. He ate his
food and he went to bed, only to do poor things in the way of sleeping.
He was not the sort to be impressed by horrors, but he recognized at
last that the morning’s event had destroyed his chance of rest; he
accordingly rose, took a cold bath, drank a cup of coffee, and went
out. He was not sure of any particular idea when he strolled away from
Bloomsbury, but it did not surprise him when, half an hour later he
found that he had walked down to the police station near which the
unknown man’s body lay in the mortuary. And there he met Driscoll, just
going off duty. Driscoll grinned at sight of him.

“You’re in luck,” he said. “’Tisn’t five minutes since they found a bit
of grey writing paper crumpled up in the poor man’s waistcoat pocket—it
had slipped into a crack. Come in, and you’ll see it.”

Spargo went into the inspector’s office. In another minute he found
himself staring at the scrap of paper. There was nothing on it but an
address, scrawled in pencil:—Ronald Breton, Barrister, King’s Bench
Walk, Temple, London.




CHAPTER TWO
HIS FIRST BRIEF


Spargo looked up at the inspector with a quick jerk of his head. “I
know this man,” he said.

The inspector showed new interest.

“What, Mr. Breton?” he asked.

“Yes. I’m on the _Watchman_, you know, sub-editor. I took an article
from him the other day—article on ‘Ideal Sites for Campers-Out.’ He
came to the office about it. So this was in the dead man’s pocket?”

“Found in a hole in his pocket, I understand: I wasn’t present myself.
It’s not much, but it may afford some clue to identity.”

Spargo picked up the scrap of grey paper and looked closely at it. It
seemed to him to be the sort of paper that is found in hotels and in
clubs; it had been torn roughly from the sheet.

“What,” he asked meditatively, “what will you do about getting this man
identified?”

The inspector shrugged his shoulders.

“Oh, usual thing, I suppose. There’ll be publicity, you know. I suppose
you’ll be doing a special account yourself, for your paper, eh? Then
there’ll be the others. And we shall put out the usual notice. Somebody
will come forward to identify—sure to. And—”

A man came into the office—a stolid-faced, quiet-mannered, soberly
attired person, who might have been a respectable tradesman out for a
stroll, and who gave the inspector a sidelong nod as he approached his
desk, at the same time extending his hand towards the scrap of paper
which Spargo had just laid down.

“I’ll go along to King’s Bench Walk and see Mr. Breton,” he observed,
looking at his watch. “It’s just about ten—I daresay he’ll be there
now.”

“I’m going there, too,” remarked Spargo, but as if speaking to himself.
“Yes, I’ll go there.”

The newcomer glanced at Spargo, and then at the inspector. The
inspector nodded at Spargo.

“Journalist,” he said, “Mr. Spargo of the _Watchman_. Mr. Spargo was
there when the body was found. And he knows Mr. Breton.” Then he nodded
from Spargo to the stolid-faced person. “This is Detective-Sergeant
Rathbury, from the Yard,” he said to Spargo. “He’s come to take charge
of this case.”

“Oh?” said Spargo blankly. “I see—what,” he went on, with sudden
abruptness, “what shall you do about Breton?”

“Get him to come and look at the body,” replied Rathbury. “He may know
the man and he mayn’t. Anyway, his name and address are here, aren’t
they?”

“Come along,” said Spargo. “I’ll walk there with you.”

Spargo remained in a species of brown study all the way along Tudor
Street; his companion also maintained silence in a fashion which showed
that he was by nature and custom a man of few words. It was not until
the two were climbing the old balustrated staircase of the house in
King’s Bench Walk in which Ronald Breton’s chambers were somewhere
situate that Spargo spoke.

“Do you think that old chap was killed for what he may have had on
him?” he asked, suddenly turning on the detective.

“I should like to know what he had on him before I answered that
question, Mr. Spargo,” replied Rathbury, with a smile.

“Yes,” said Spargo, dreamily. “I suppose so. He might have had—nothing
on him, eh?”

The detective laughed, and pointed to a board on which names were
printed.

“We don’t know anything yet, sir,” he observed, “except that Mr. Breton
is on the fourth floor. By which I conclude that it isn’t long since he
was eating his dinner.”

“Oh, he’s young—he’s quite young,” said Spargo. “I should say he’s
about four-and-twenty. I’ve met him only—”

At that moment the unmistakable sounds of girlish laughter came down
the staircase. Two girls seemed to be laughing—presently masculine
laughter mingled with the lighter feminine.

“Seems to be studying law in very pleasant fashion up here, anyway,”
said Rathbury. “Mr. Breton’s chambers, too. And the door’s open.”

The outer oak door of Ronald Breton’s chambers stood thrown wide; the
inner one was well ajar; through the opening thus made Spargo and the
detective obtained a full view of the interior of Mr. Ronald Breton’s
rooms. There, against a background of law books, bundles of papers tied
up with pink tape, and black-framed pictures of famous legal
notabilities, they saw a pretty, vivacious-eyed girl, who, perched on a
chair, wigged and gowned, and flourishing a mass of crisp paper, was
haranguing an imaginary judge and jury, to the amusement of a young man
who had his back to the door, and of another girl who leant
confidentially against his shoulder.

“I put it to you, gentlemen of the jury—I put it to you with
confidence, feeling that you must be, must necessarily be, some,
perhaps brothers, perhaps husbands, and fathers, can you, on your
consciences do my client the great wrong, the irreparable injury,
the—the—”

“Think of some more adjectives!” exclaimed the young man. “Hot and
strong ’uns—pile ’em up. That’s what they like—they—Hullo!”

This exclamation arose from the fact that at this point of the
proceedings the detective rapped at the inner door, and then put his
head round its edge. Whereupon the young lady who was orating from the
chair, jumped hastily down; the other young lady withdrew from the
young man’s protecting arm; there was a feminine giggle and a feminine
swishing of skirts, and a hasty bolt into an inner room, and Mr. Ronald
Breton came forward, blushing a little, to greet the interrupter.

“Come in, come in!” he exclaimed hastily. “I—”

Then he paused, catching sight of Spargo, and held out his hand with a
look of surprise.

“Oh—Mr. Spargo?” he said. “How do you do?—we—I—we were just having a
lark—I’m off to court in a few minutes. What can I do for you, Mr.
Spargo?”

He had backed to the inner door as he spoke, and he now closed it and
turned again to the two men, looking from one to the other. The
detective, on his part, was looking at the young barrister. He saw a
tall, slimly-built youth, of handsome features and engaging presence,
perfectly groomed, and immaculately garbed, and having upon him a
general air of well-to-do-ness, and he formed the impression from these
matters that Mr. Breton was one of those fortunate young men who may
take up a profession but are certainly not dependent upon it. He turned
and glanced at the journalist.

“How do you do?” said Spargo slowly. “I—the fact is, I came here with
Mr. Rathbury. He—wants to see you. Detective-Sergeant Rathbury—of New
Scotland Yard.”

Spargo pronounced this formal introduction as if he were repeating a
lesson. But he was watching the young barrister’s face. And Breton
turned to the detective with a look of surprise.

“Oh!” he said. “You wish—”

Rathbury had been fumbling in his pocket for the scrap of grey paper,
which he had carefully bestowed in a much-worn memorandum-book. “I
wished to ask a question, Mr. Breton,” he said. “This morning, about a
quarter to three, a man—elderly man—was found dead in Middle Temple
Lane, and there seems little doubt that he was murdered. Mr. Spargo
here—he was present when the body was found.”

“Soon after,” corrected Spargo. “A few minutes after.”

“When this body was examined at the mortuary,” continued Rathbury, in
his matter-of-fact, business-like tones, “nothing was found that could
lead to identification. The man appears to have been robbed. There was
nothing whatever on him—but this bit of torn paper, which was found in
a hole in the lining of his waistcoat pocket. It’s got your name and
address on it, Mr. Breton. See?”

Ronald Breton took the scrap of paper and looked at it with knitted
brows.

“By Jove!” he muttered. “So it has; that’s queer. What’s he like, this
man?”

Rathbury glanced at a clock which stood on the mantelpiece.

“Will you step round and take a look at him, Mr. Breton?” he said.
“It’s close by.”

“Well—I—the fact is, I’ve got a case on, in Mr. Justice Borrow’s
court,” Breton answered, also glancing at his clock. “But it won’t be
called until after eleven. Will—”

“Plenty of time, sir,” said Rathbury; “it won’t take you ten minutes to
go round and back again—a look will do. You don’t recognize this
handwriting, I suppose?”

Breton still held the scrap of paper in his fingers. He looked at it
again, intently.

“No!” he answered. “I don’t. I don’t know it at all—I can’t think, of
course, who this man could be, to have my name and address. I thought
he might have been some country solicitor, wanting my professional
services, you know,” he went on, with a shy smile at Spargo; “but,
three—three o’clock in the morning, eh?”

“The doctor,” observed Rathbury, “the doctor thinks he had been dead
about two and a half hours.”

Breton turned to the inner door.

“I’ll—I’ll just tell these ladies I’m going out for a quarter of an
hour,” he said. “They’re going over to the court with me—I got my first
brief yesterday,” he went on with a boyish laugh, glancing right and
left at his visitors. “It’s nothing much—small case—but I promised my
fiancée and her sister that they should be present, you know. A
moment.”

He disappeared into the next room and came back a moment later in all
the glory of a new silk hat. Spargo, a young man who was never very
particular about his dress, began to contrast his own attire with the
butterfly appearance of this youngster; he had been quick to notice
that the two girls who had whisked into the inner room had been
similarly garbed in fine raiment, more characteristic of Mayfair than
of Fleet Street. Already he felt a strange curiosity about Breton, and
about the young ladies whom he heard talking behind the inner door.

“Well, come on,” said Breton. “Let’s go straight there.”

The mortuary to which Rathbury led the way was cold, drab, repellent to
the general gay sense of the summer morning. Spargo shivered
involuntarily as he entered it and took a first glance around. But the
young barrister showed no sign of feeling or concern; he looked quickly
about him and stepped alertly to the side of the dead man, from whose
face the detective was turning back a cloth. He looked steadily and
earnestly at the fixed features. Then he drew back, shaking his head.

“No!” he said with decision. “Don’t know him—don’t know him from Adam.
Never set eyes on him in my life, that I know of.”

Rathbury replaced the cloth.

“I didn’t suppose you would,” he remarked. “Well, I expect we must go
on the usual lines. Somebody’ll identify him.”

“You say he was murdered?” said Breton. “Is that—certain?”

Rathbury jerked his thumb at the corpse.

“The back of his skull is smashed in,” he said laconically. “The doctor
says he must have been struck down from behind—and a fearful blow, too.
I’m much obliged to you, Mr. Breton.”

“Oh, all right!” said Breton. “Well, you know where to find me if you
want me. I shall be curious about this. Good-bye—good-bye, Mr. Spargo.”

The young barrister hurried away, and Rathbury turned to the
journalist.

“I didn’t expect anything from that,” he remarked. “However, it was a
thing to be done. You are going to write about this for your paper?”

Spargo nodded.

“Well,” continued Rathbury, “I’ve sent a man to Fiskie’s, the hatter’s,
where that cap came from, you know. We may get a bit of information
from that quarter—it’s possible. If you like to meet me here at twelve
o’clock I’ll tell you anything I’ve heard. Just now I’m going to get
some breakfast.”

“I’ll meet you here,” said Spargo, “at twelve o’clock.”

He watched Rathbury go away round one corner; he himself suddenly set
off round another. He went to the _Watchman_ office, wrote a few lines,
which he enclosed in an envelope for the day-editor, and went out
again. Somehow or other, his feet led him up Fleet Street, and before
he quite realized what he was doing he found himself turning into the
Law Courts.




CHAPTER THREE
THE CLUE OF THE CAP


Having no clear conception of what had led him to these scenes of
litigation, Spargo went wandering aimlessly about in the great hall and
the adjacent corridors until an official, who took him to be lost,
asked him if there was any particular part of the building he wanted.
For a moment Spargo stared at the man as if he did not comprehend his
question. Then his mental powers reasserted themselves.

“Isn’t Mr. Justice Borrow sitting in one of the courts this morning?”
he suddenly asked.

“Number seven,” replied the official. “What’s your case—when’s it
down?”

“I haven’t got a case,” said Spargo. “I’m a pressman—reporter, you
know.”

The official stuck out a finger.

“Round the corner—first to your right—second on the left,” he said
automatically. “You’ll find plenty of room—nothing much doing there
this morning.”

He turned away, and Spargo recommenced his apparently aimless
perambulation of the dreary, depressing corridors.

“Upon my honour!” he muttered. “Upon my honour, I really don’t know
what I’ve come up here for. I’ve no business here.”

Just then he turned a corner and came face to face with Ronald Breton.
The young barrister was now in his wig and gown and carried a bundle of
papers tied up with pink tape; he was escorting two young ladies, who
were laughing and chattering as they tripped along at his side. And
Spargo, glancing at them meditatively, instinctively told himself which
of them it was that he and Rathbury had overheard as she made her
burlesque speech: it was not the elder one, who walked by Ronald Breton
with something of an air of proprietorship, but the younger, the girl
with the laughing eyes and the vivacious smile, and it suddenly dawned
upon him that somewhere, deep within him, there had been a notion, a
hope of seeing this girl again—why, he could not then think.

Spargo, thus coming face to face with these three, mechanically lifted
his hat. Breton stopped, half inquisitive. His eyes seemed to ask a
question.

“Yes,” said Spargo. “I—the fact is, I remembered that you said you were
coming up here, and I came after you. I want—when you’ve time—to have a
talk, to ask you a few questions. About—this affair of the dead man,
you know.”

Breton nodded. He tapped Spargo on the arm.

“Look here,” he said. “When this case of mine is over, I can give you
as much time as you like. Can you wait a bit? Yes? Well, I say, do me a
favour. I was taking these ladies round to the gallery—round there, and
up the stairs—and I’m a bit pressed for time—I’ve a solicitor waiting
for me. You take them—there’s a good fellow; then, when the case is
over, bring them down here, and you and I will talk. Here—I’ll
introduce you all—no ceremony. Miss Aylmore—Miss Jessie Aylmore. Mr.
Spargo—of the _Watchman_. Now, I’m off!” Breton turned on the instant;
his gown whisked round a corner, and Spargo found himself staring at
two smiling girls. He saw then that both were pretty and attractive,
and that one seemed to be the elder by some three or four years.

“That is very cool of Ronald,” observed the elder young lady. “Perhaps
his scheme doesn’t fit in with yours, Mr. Spargo? Pray don’t—”

“Oh, it’s all right!” said Spargo, feeling himself uncommonly stupid.
“I’ve nothing to do. But—where did Mr. Breton say you wished to be
taken?”

“Into the gallery of number seven court,” said the younger girl
promptly. “Round this corner—I think I know the way.”

Spargo, still marvelling at the rapidity with which affairs were moving
that morning, bestirred himself to act as cicerone, and presently led
the two young ladies to the very front of one of those public galleries
from which idlers and specially-interested spectators may see and hear
the proceedings which obtain in the badly-ventilated, ill-lighted tanks
wherein justice is dispensed at the Law Courts. There was no one else
in that gallery; the attendant in the corridor outside seemed to be
vastly amazed that any one should wish to enter it, and he presently
opened the door, beckoned to Spargo, and came half-way down the stairs
to meet him.

“Nothing much going on here this morning,” he whispered behind a raised
hand. “But there’s a nice breach case in number five—get you three good
seats there if you like.”

Spargo declined this tempting offer, and went back to his charges. He
had decided by that time that Miss Aylmore was about twenty-three, and
her sister about eighteen; he also thought that young Breton was a
lucky dog to be in possession of such a charming future wife and an
equally charming sister-in-law. And he dropped into a seat at Miss
Jessie Aylmore’s side, and looked around him as if he were much awed by
his surroundings.

“I suppose one can talk until the judge enters?” he whispered. “Is this
really Mr. Breton’s first case?”

“His very first—all on his own responsibility, any way,” replied
Spargo’s companion, smiling. “And he’s very nervous—and so’s my sister.
Aren’t you, now, Evelyn?”

Evelyn Aylmore looked at Spargo, and smiled quietly.

“I suppose one’s always nervous about first appearances,” she said.
“However, I think Ronald’s got plenty of confidence, and, as he says,
it’s not much of a case: it isn’t even a jury case. I’m afraid you’ll
find it dull, Mr. Spargo—it’s only something about a promissory note.”

“Oh, I’m all right, thank you,” replied Spargo, unconsciously falling
back on a favourite formula. “I always like to hear lawyers—they manage
to say such a lot about—about—”

“About nothing,” said Jessie Aylmore. “But there—so do gentlemen who
write for the papers, don’t they?”

Spargo was about to admit that there was a good deal to be said on that
point when Miss Aylmore suddenly drew her sister’s attention to a man
who had just entered the well of the court.

“Look, Jessie!” she observed. “There’s Mr. Elphick!”

Spargo looked down at the person indicated: an elderly, large-faced,
smooth-shaven man, a little inclined to stoutness, who, wigged and
gowned, was slowly making his way to a corner seat just outside that
charmed inner sanctum wherein only King’s Counsel are permitted to sit.
He dropped into this in a fashion which showed that he was one of those
men who loved personal comfort; he bestowed his plump person at the
most convenient angle and fitting a monocle in his right eye, glanced
around him. There were a few of his professional brethren in his
vicinity; there were half a dozen solicitors and their clerks in
conversation with one or other of them; there were court officials. But
the gentleman of the monocle swept all these with an indifferent look
and cast his eyes upward until he caught sight of the two girls.
Thereupon he made a most gracious bow in their direction; his broad
face beamed in a genial smile, and he waved a white hand.

“Do you know Mr. Elphick, Mr. Spargo?” enquired the younger Miss
Aylmore.

“I rather think I’ve seen him, somewhere about the Temple,” answered
Spargo. “In fact, I’m sure I have.”

“His chambers are in Paper Buildings,” said Jessie. “Sometimes he gives
tea-parties in them. He is Ronald’s guardian, and preceptor, and
mentor, and all that, and I suppose he’s dropped into this court to
hear how his pupil goes on.”

“Here is Ronald,” whispered Miss Aylmore.

“And here,” said her sister, “is his lordship, looking very cross. Now,
Mr. Spargo, you’re in for it.”

Spargo, to tell the truth, paid little attention to what went on
beneath him. The case which young Breton presently opened was a
commercial one, involving certain rights and properties in a promissory
note; it seemed to the journalist that Breton dealt with it very well,
showing himself master of the financial details, and speaking with
readiness and assurance. He was much more interested in his companions,
and especially in the younger one, and he was meditating on how he
could improve his further acquaintance when he awoke to the fact that
the defence, realizing that it stood no chance, had agreed to withdraw,
and that Mr. Justice Borrow was already giving judgment in Ronald
Breton’s favour.

In another minute he was walking out of the gallery in rear of the two
sisters.

“Very good—very good, indeed,” he said, absent-mindedly. “I thought he
put his facts very clearly and concisely.”

Downstairs, in the corridor, Ronald Breton was talking to Mr. Elphick.
He pointed a finger at Spargo as the latter came up with the girls:
Spargo gathered that Breton was speaking of the murder and of his,
Spargo’s, connection with it. And directly they approached, he spoke.

“This is Mr. Spargo, sub-editor of the _Watchman_.” Breton said. “Mr.
Elphick—Mr. Spargo. I was just telling Mr. Elphick, Spargo, that you
saw this poor man soon after he was found.”

Spargo, glancing at Mr. Elphick, saw that he was deeply interested. The
elderly barrister took him—literally—by the button-hole.

“My dear sir!” he said. “You—saw this poor fellow? Lying dead—in the
third entry down Middle Temple Lane? The third entry, eh?”

“Yes,” replied Spargo, simply. “I saw him. It was the third entry.”

“Singular!” said Mr. Elphick, musingly. “I know a man who lives in that
house. In fact, I visited him last night, and did not leave until
nearly midnight. And this unfortunate man had Mr. Ronald Breton’s name
and address in his pocket?”

Spargo nodded. He looked at Breton, and pulled out his watch. Just then
he had no idea of playing the part of informant to Mr. Elphick.

“Yes, that’s so,” he answered shortly. Then, looking at Breton
significantly, he added, “If you can give me those few minutes, now—?”

“Yes—yes!” responded Ronald Breton, nodding. “I understand. Evelyn—I’ll
leave you and Jessie to Mr. Elphick; I must go.”

Mr. Elphick seized Spargo once more.

“My dear sir!” he said, eagerly. “Do you—do you think I could possibly
see—the body?”

“It’s at the mortuary,” answered Spargo. “I don’t know what their
regulations are.”

Then he escaped with Breton. They had crossed Fleet Street and were in
the quieter shades of the Temple before Spargo spoke.

“About what I wanted to say to you,” he said at last. “It was—this.
I—well, I’ve always wanted, as a journalist, to have a real big murder
case. I think this is one. I want to go right into it—thoroughly, first
and last. And—I think you can help me.”

“How do you know that it is a murder case?” asked Breton quietly.

“It’s a murder case,” answered Spargo, stolidly. “I feel it. Instinct,
perhaps. I’m going to ferret out the truth. And it seems to me—”

He paused and gave his companion a sharp glance.

“It seems to me,” he presently continued, “that the clue lies in that
scrap of paper. That paper and that man are connecting links between
you and—somebody else.”

“Possibly,” agreed Breton. “You want to find the somebody else?”

“I want you to help me to find the somebody else,” answered Spargo. “I
believe this is a big, very big affair: I want to do it. I don’t
believe in police methods—much. By the by, I’m just going to meet
Rathbury. He may have heard of something. Would you like to come?”

Breton ran into his chambers in King’s Bench Walk, left his gown and
wig, and walked round with Spargo to the police office. Rathbury came
out as they were stepping in.

“Oh!” he said. “Ah!—I’ve got what may be helpful, Mr. Spargo. I told
you I’d sent a man to Fiskie’s, the hatter! Well, he’s just returned.
The cap which the dead man was wearing was bought at Fiskie’s yesterday
afternoon, and it was sent to Mr. Marbury, Room 20, at the Anglo-Orient
Hotel.”

“Where is that?” asked Spargo.

“Waterloo district,” answered Rathbury. “A small house, I believe.
Well, I’m going there. Are you coming?”

“Yes,” replied Spargo. “Of course. And Mr. Breton wants to come, too.”

“If I’m not in the way,” said Breton.

Rathbury laughed.

“Well, we may find out something about this scrap of paper,” he
observed. And he waved a signal to the nearest taxi-cab driver.




CHAPTER FOUR
THE ANGLO-ORIENT HOTEL


The house at which Spargo and his companions presently drew up was an
old-fashioned place in the immediate vicinity of Waterloo Railway
Station—a plain-fronted, four-square erection, essentially
mid-Victorian in appearance, and suggestive, somehow, of the very early
days of railway travelling. Anything more in contrast with the modern
ideas of a hotel it would have been difficult to find in London, and
Ronald Breton said so as he and the others crossed the pavement.

“And yet a good many people used to favour this place on their way to
and from Southampton in the old days,” remarked Rathbury. “And I
daresay that old travellers, coming back from the East after a good
many years’ absence, still rush in here. You see, it’s close to the
station, and travellers have a knack of walking into the nearest place
when they’ve a few thousand miles of steamboat and railway train behind
them. Look there, now!” They had crossed the threshold as the detective
spoke, and as they entered a square, heavily-furnished hall, he made a
sidelong motion of his head towards a bar on the left, wherein stood or
lounged a number of men who from their general appearance, their
slouched hats, and their bronzed faces appeared to be Colonials, or at
any rate to have spent a good part of their time beneath Oriental
skies. There was a murmur of tongues that had a Colonial accent in it;
an aroma of tobacco that suggested Sumatra and Trichinopoly, and
Rathbury wagged his head sagely. “Lay you anything the dead man was a
Colonial, Mr. Spargo,” he remarked. “Well, now, I suppose that’s the
landlord and landlady.”

There was an office facing them, at the rear of the hall, and a man and
woman were regarding them from a box window which opened above a ledge
on which lay a register book. They were middle-aged folk: the man, a
fleshy, round-faced, somewhat pompous-looking individual, who might at
some time have been a butler; the woman a tall, spare-figured,
thin-featured, sharp-eyed person, who examined the newcomers with an
enquiring gaze. Rathbury went up to them with easy confidence.

“You the landlord of this house, sir?” he asked. “Mr. Walters? Just
so—and Mrs. Walters, I presume?”

The landlord made a stiff bow and looked sharply at his questioner.

“What can I do for you, sir?” he enquired.

“A little matter of business, Mr. Walters,” replied Rathbury, pulling
out a card. “You’ll see there who I am—Detective-Sergeant Rathbury, of
the Yard. This is Mr. Frank Spargo, a newspaper man; this is Mr. Ronald
Breton, a barrister.”

The landlady, hearing their names and description, pointed to a side
door, and signed Rathbury and his companions to pass through. Obeying
her pointed finger, they found themselves in a small private parlour.
Walters closed the two doors which led into it and looked at his
principal visitor.

“What is it, Mr. Rathbury?” he enquired. “Anything wrong?”

“We want a bit of information,” answered Rathbury, almost with
indifference.

“Did anybody of the name of Marbury put up here yesterday—elderly man,
grey hair, fresh complexion?”

Mrs. Walters started, glancing at her husband.

“There!” she exclaimed. “I knew some enquiry would be made. Yes—a Mr.
Marbury took a room here yesterday morning, just after the noon train
got in from Southampton. Number 20 he took. But—he didn’t use it last
night. He went out—very late—and he never came back.”

Rathbury nodded. Answering a sign from the landlord, he took a chair
and, sitting down, looked at Mrs. Walters.

“What made you think some enquiry would be made, ma’am?” he asked. “Had
you noticed anything?”

Mrs. Walters seemed a little confused by this direct question. Her
husband gave vent to a species of growl.

“Nothing to notice,” he muttered. “Her way of speaking—that’s all.”

“Well—why I said that was this,” said the landlady. “He happened to
tell us, did Mr. Marbury, that he hadn’t been in London for over twenty
years, and couldn’t remember anything about it, him, he said, never
having known much about London at any time. And, of course, when he
went out so late and never came back, why, naturally, I thought
something had happened to him, and that there’d be enquiries made.”

“Just so—just so!” said Rathbury. “So you would, ma’am—so you would.
Well, something has happened to him. He’s dead. What’s more, there’s
strong reason to think he was murdered.”

Mr. and Mrs. Walters received this announcement with proper surprise
and horror, and the landlord suggested a little refreshment to his
visitors. Spargo and Breton declined, on the ground that they had work
to do during the afternoon; Rathbury accepted it, evidently as a matter
of course.

“My respects,” he said, lifting his glass. “Well, now, perhaps you’ll
just tell me what you know of this man? I may as well tell you, Mr. and
Mrs. Walters, that he was found dead in Middle Temple Lane this
morning, at a quarter to three; that there wasn’t anything on him but
his clothes and a scrap of paper which bore this gentleman’s name and
address; that this gentleman knows nothing whatever of him, and that I
traced him here because he bought a cap at a West End hatter’s
yesterday, and had it sent to your hotel.”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Walters quickly, “that’s so. And he went out in that
cap last night. Well—we don’t know much about him. As I said, he came
in here about a quarter past twelve yesterday morning, and booked
Number 20. He had a porter with him that brought a trunk and a
bag—they’re in 20 now, of course. He told me that he had stayed at this
house over twenty years ago, on his way to Australia—that, of course,
was long before we took it. And he signed his name in the book as John
Marbury.”

“We’ll look at that, if you please,” said Rathbury.

Walters fetched in the register and turned the leaf to the previous
day’s entries. They all bent over the dead man’s writing.

“‘John Marbury, Coolumbidgee, New South Wales,’” said Rathbury. “Ah—now
I was wondering if that writing would be the same as that on the scrap
of paper, Mr. Breton. But, you see, it isn’t—it’s quite different.”

“Quite different,” said Breton. He, too, was regarding the handwriting
with great interest. And Rathbury noticed his keen inspection of it,
and asked another question.

“Ever seen that writing before?” he suggested.

“Never,” answered Breton. “And yet—there’s something very familiar
about it.”

“Then the probability is that you have seen it before,” remarked
Rathbury. “Well—now we’ll hear a little more about Marbury’s doings
here. Just tell me all you know, Mr. and Mrs. Walters.”

“My wife knows most,” said Walters. “I scarcely saw the man—I don’t
remember speaking with him.”

“No,” said Mrs. Walters. “You didn’t—you weren’t much in his way.
Well,” she continued, “I showed him up to his room. He talked a
bit—said he’d just landed at Southampton from Melbourne.”

“Did he mention his ship?” asked Rathbury. “But if he didn’t, it
doesn’t matter, for we can find out.”

“I believe the name’s on his things,” answered the landlady. “There are
some labels of that sort. Well, he asked for a chop to be cooked for
him at once, as he was going out. He had his chop, and he went out at
exactly one o’clock, saying to me that he expected he’d get lost, as he
didn’t know London well at any time, and shouldn’t know it at all now.
He went outside there—I saw him—looked about him and walked off towards
Blackfriars way. During the afternoon the cap you spoke of came for
him—from Fiskie’s. So, of course, I judged he’d been Piccadilly way.
But he himself never came in until ten o’clock. And then he brought a
gentleman with him.”

“Aye?” said Rathbury. “A gentleman, now? Did you see him?”

“Just,” replied the landlady. “They went straight up to 20, and I just
caught a mere glimpse of the gentleman as they turned up the stairs. A
tall, well-built gentleman, with a grey beard, very well dressed as far
as I could see, with a top hat and a white silk muffler round his
throat, and carrying an umbrella.”

“And they went to Marbury’s room?” said Rathbury. “What then?”

“Well, then, Mr. Marbury rang for some whiskey and soda,” continued
Mrs. Walters. “He was particular to have a decanter of whiskey: that,
and a syphon of soda were taken up there. I heard nothing more until
nearly midnight; then the hall-porter told me that the gentleman in 20
had gone out, and had asked him if there was a night-porter—as, of
course, there is. He went out at half-past eleven.”

“And the other gentleman?” asked Rathbury.

“The other gentleman,” answered the landlady, “went out with him. The
hall-porter said they turned towards the station. And that was the last
anybody in this house saw of Mr. Marbury. He certainly never came
back.”

“That,” observed Rathbury with a quiet smile, “that is quite certain,
ma’am? Well—I suppose we’d better see this Number 20 room, and have a
look at what he left there.”

“Everything,” said Mrs. Walters, “is just as he left it. Nothing’s been
touched.”

It seemed to two of the visitors that there was little to touch. On the
dressing-table lay a few ordinary articles of toilet—none of them of
any quality or value: the dead man had evidently been satisfied with
the plain necessities of life. An overcoat hung from a peg: Rathbury,
without ceremony, went through its pockets; just as unceremoniously he
proceeded to examine trunk and bag, and finding both unlocked, he laid
out on the bed every article they contained and examined each
separately and carefully. And he found nothing whereby he could gather
any clue to the dead owner’s identity.

“There you are!” he said, making an end of his task. “You see, it’s
just the same with these things as with the clothes he had on him.
There are no papers—there’s nothing to tell who he was, what he was
after, where he’d come from—though that we may find out in other ways.
But it’s not often that a man travels without some clue to his
identity. Beyond the fact that some of this linen was, you see, bought
in Melbourne, we know nothing of him. Yet he must have had papers and
money on him. Did you see anything of his money, now, ma’am?” he asked,
suddenly turning to Mrs. Walters. “Did he pull out his purse in your
presence, now?”

“Yes,” answered the landlady, with promptitude. “He came into the bar
for a drink after he’d been up to his room. He pulled out a handful of
gold when he paid for it—a whole handful. There must have been some
thirty to forty sovereigns and half-sovereigns.”

“And he hadn’t a penny piece on him—when found,” muttered Rathbury.

“I noticed another thing, too,” remarked the landlady. “He was wearing
a very fine gold watch and chain, and had a splendid ring on his left
hand—little finger—gold, with a big diamond in it.”

“Yes,” said the detective, thoughtfully, “I noticed that he’d worn a
ring, and that it had been a bit tight for him. Well—now there’s only
one thing to ask about. Did your chambermaid notice if he left any torn
paper around—tore any letters up, or anything like that?”

But the chambermaid, produced, had not noticed anything of the sort; on
the contrary, the gentleman of Number 20 had left his room very tidy
indeed. So Rathbury intimated that he had no more to ask, and nothing
further to say, just then, and he bade the landlord and landlady of the
Anglo-Orient Hotel good morning, and went away, followed by the two
young men.

“What next?” asked Spargo, as they gained the street.

“The next thing,” answered Rathbury, “is to find the man with whom
Marbury left this hotel last night.”

“And how’s that to be done?” asked Spargo.

“At present,” replied Rathbury, “I don’t know.”

And with a careless nod, he walked off, apparently desirous of being
alone.




CHAPTER FIVE
SPARGO WISHES TO SPECIALIZE


The barrister and the journalist, left thus unceremoniously on a
crowded pavement, looked at each other. Breton laughed.

“We don’t seem to have gained much information,” he remarked. “I’m
about as wise as ever.”

“No—wiser,” said Spargo. “At any rate, I am. I know now that this dead
man called himself John Marbury; that he came from Australia; that he
only landed at Southampton yesterday morning, and that he was in the
company last night of a man whom we have had described to us—a tall,
grey-bearded, well-dressed man, presumably a gentleman.”

Breton shrugged his shoulders.

“I should say that description would fit a hundred thousand men in
London,” he remarked.

“Exactly—so it would,” answered Spargo. “But we know that it was one of
the hundred thousand, or half-million, if you like. The thing is to
find that one—the one.”

“And you think you can do it?”

“I think I’m going to have a big try at it.”

Breton shrugged his shoulders again.

“What?—by going up to every man who answers the description, and saying
‘Sir, are you the man who accompanied John Marbury to the Anglo——”

Spargo suddenly interrupted him.

“Look here!” he said. “Didn’t you say that you knew a man who lives in
that block in the entry of which Marbury was found?”

“No, I didn’t,” answered Breton. “It was Mr. Elphick who said that. All
the same, I do know that man—he’s Mr. Cardlestone, another barrister.
He and Mr. Elphick are friends—they’re both enthusiastic
philatelists—stamp collectors, you know—and I dare say Mr. Elphick was
round there last night examining something new Cardlestone’s got hold
of. Why?”

“I’d like to go round there and make some enquiries,” replied Spargo.
“If you’d be kind enough to——”

“Oh, I’ll go with you!” responded Breton, with alacrity. “I’m just as
keen about this business as you are, Spargo! I want to know who this
man Marbury is, and how he came to have my name and address on him.
Now, if I had been a well-known man in my profession, you know, why—”

“Yes,” said Spargo, as they got into a cab, “yes, that would have
explained a lot. It seems to me that we’ll get at the murderer through
that scrap of paper a lot quicker than through Rathbury’s line. Yes,
that’s what I think.”

Breton looked at his companion with interest.

“But—you don’t know what Rathbury’s line is,” he remarked.

“Yes, I do,” said Spargo. “Rathbury’s gone off to discover who the man
is with whom Marbury left the Anglo-Orient Hotel last night. That’s his
line.”

“And you want——?”

“I want to find out the full significance of that bit of paper, and who
wrote it,” answered Spargo. “I want to know why that old man was coming
to you when he was murdered.”

Breton started.

“By Jove!” he exclaimed. “I—I never thought of that. You—you really
think he was coming to me when he was struck down?”

“Certain. Hadn’t he got an address in the Temple? Wasn’t he in the
Temple? Of course, he was trying to find you.”

“But—the late hour?”

“No matter. How else can you explain his presence in the Temple? I
think he was asking his way. That’s why I want to make some enquiries
in this block.”

It appeared to Spargo that a considerable number of people, chiefly of
the office-boy variety, were desirous of making enquiries about the
dead man. Being luncheon-hour, that bit of Middle Temple Lane where the
body was found, was thick with the inquisitive and the
sensation-seeker, for the news of the murder had spread, and though
there was nothing to see but the bare stones on which the body had
lain, there were more open mouths and staring eyes around the entry
than Spargo had seen for many a day. And the nuisance had become so
great that the occupants of the adjacent chambers had sent for a
policeman to move the curious away, and when Spargo and his companion
presented themselves at the entry this policeman was being lectured as
to his duties by a little weazen-faced gentleman, in very snuffy and
old-fashioned garments, and an ancient silk hat, who was obviously
greatly exercised by the unwonted commotion.

“Drive them all out into the street!” exclaimed this personage. “Drive
them all away, constable—into Fleet Street or upon the
Embankment—anywhere, so long as you rid this place of them. This is a
disgrace, and an inconvenience, a nuisance, a——”

“That’s old Cardlestone,” whispered Breton. “He’s always irascible, and
I don’t suppose we’ll get anything out of him. Mr. Cardlestone,” he
continued, making his way up to the old gentleman who was now
retreating up the stone steps, brandishing an umbrella as ancient as
himself. “I was just coming to see you, sir. This is Mr. Spargo, a
journalist, who is much interested in this murder. He——”

“I know nothing about the murder, my dear sir!” exclaimed Mr.
Cardlestone. “And I never talk to journalists—a pack of busybodies,
sir, saving your presence. I am not aware that any murder has been
committed, and I object to my doorway being filled by a pack of office
boys and street loungers. Murder indeed! I suppose the man fell down
these steps and broke his neck—drunk, most likely.”

He opened his outer door as he spoke, and Breton, with a reassuring
smile and a nod at Spargo, followed him into his chambers on the first
landing, motioning the journalist to keep at their heels.

“Mr. Elphick tells me that he was with you until a late hour last
evening, Mr. Cardlestone,” he said. “Of course, neither of you heard
anything suspicious?”

“What should we hear that was suspicious in the Temple, sir?” demanded
Mr. Cardlestone, angrily. “I hope the Temple is free from that sort of
thing, young Mr. Breton. Your respected guardian and myself had a quiet
evening on our usual peaceful pursuits, and when he went away all was
as quiet as the grave, sir. What may have gone on in the chambers above
and around me I know not! Fortunately, our walls are thick,
sir—substantial. I say, sir, the man probably fell down and broke his
neck. What he was doing here, I do not presume to say.”

“Well, it’s guess, you know, Mr. Cardlestone,” remarked Breton, again
winking at Spargo. “But all that was found on this man was a scrap of
paper on which my name and address were written. That’s practically all
that was known of him, except that he’d just arrived from Australia.”

Mr. Cardlestone suddenly turned on the young barrister with a sharp,
acute glance.

“Eh?” he exclaimed. “What’s this? You say this man had your name and
address on him, young Breton!—yours? And that he came from—Australia?”

“That’s so,” answered Breton. “That’s all that’s known.”

Mr. Cardlestone put aside his umbrella, produced a bandanna
handkerchief of strong colours, and blew his nose in a reflective
fashion.

“That’s a mysterious thing,” he observed. “Um—does Elphick know all
that?”

Breton looked at Spargo as if he was asking him for an explanation of
Mr. Cardlestone’s altered manner. And Spargo took up the conversation.

“No,” he said. “All that Mr. Elphick knows is that Mr. Ronald Breton’s
name and address were on the scrap of paper found on the body. Mr.
Elphick”—here Spargo paused and looked at Breton—“Mr. Elphick,” he
presently continued, slowly transferring his glance to the old
barrister, “spoke of going to view the body.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Mr. Cardlestone, eagerly. “It can be seen? Then I’ll go
and see it. Where is it?”

Breton started.

“But—my dear sir!” he said. “Why?”

Mr. Cardlestone picked up his umbrella again.

“I feel a proper curiosity about a mystery which occurs at my very
door,” he said. “Also, I have known more than one man who went to
Australia. This might—I say might, young gentlemen—might be a man I had
once known. Show me where this body is.”

Breton looked helplessly at Spargo: it was plain that he did not
understand the turn that things were taking. But Spargo was quick to
seize an opportunity. In another minute he was conducting Mr.
Cardlestone through the ins and outs of the Temple towards Blackfriars.
And as they turned into Tudor Street they encountered Mr. Elphick.

“I am going to the mortuary,” he remarked. “So, I suppose, are you,
Cardlestone? Has anything more been discovered, young man?”

Spargo tried a chance shot—at what he did not know. “The man’s name was
Marbury,” he said. “He was from Australia.”

He was keeping a keen eye on Mr. Elphick, but he failed to see that Mr.
Elphick showed any of the surprise which Mr. Cardlestone had exhibited.
Rather, he seemed indifferent.

“Oh?” he said—“Marbury? And from Australia. Well—I should like to see
the body.”

Spargo and Breton had to wait outside the mortuary while the two elder
gentlemen went in. There was nothing to be learnt from either when they
reappeared.

“We don’t know the man,” said Mr. Elphick, calmly. “As Mr. Cardlestone,
I understand, has said to you already—we have known men who went to
Australia, and as this man was evidently wandering about the Temple, we
thought it might have been one of them, come back. But—we don’t
recognize him.”

“Couldn’t recognize him,” said Mr. Cardlestone. “No!”

They went away together arm in arm, and Breton looked at Spargo.

“As if anybody on earth ever fancied they’d recognize him!” he said.
“Well—what are you going to do now, Spargo? I must go.”

Spargo, who had been digging his walking-stick into a crack in the
pavement, came out of a fit of abstraction.

“I?” he said. “Oh—I’m going to the office.” And he turned abruptly
away, and walking straight off to the editorial rooms at the
_Watchman_, made for one in which sat the official guardian of the
editor. “Try to get me a few minutes with the chief,” he said.

The private secretary looked up.

“Really important?” he asked.

“Big!” answered Spargo. “Fix it.”

Once closeted with the great man, whose idiosyncrasies he knew pretty
well by that time, Spargo lost no time.

“You’ve heard about this murder in Middle Temple Lane?” he suggested.

“The mere facts,” replied the editor, tersely.

“I was there when the body was found,” continued Spargo, and gave a
brief résumé of his doings. “I’m certain this is a most unusual
affair,” he went on. “It’s as full of mystery as—as it could be. I want
to give my attention to it. I want to specialize on it. I can make such
a story of it as we haven’t had for some time—ages. Let me have it. And
to start with, let me have two columns for tomorrow morning. I’ll make
it—big!”

The editor looked across his desk at Spargo’s eager face.

“Your other work?” he said.

“Well in hand,” replied Spargo. “I’m ahead a whole week—both articles
and reviews. I can tackle both.”

The editor put his finger tips together.

“Have you got some idea about this, young man?” he asked.

“I’ve got a great idea,” answered Spargo. He faced the great man
squarely, and stared at him until he had brought a smile to the
editorial face. “That’s why I want to do it,” he added. “And—it’s not
mere boasting nor over-confidence—I know I shall do it better than
anybody else.”

The editor considered matters for a brief moment.

“You mean to find out who killed this man?” he said at last.

Spargo nodded his head—twice.

“I’ll find that out,” he said doggedly.

The editor picked up a pencil, and bent to his desk.

“All right,” he said. “Go ahead. You shall have your two columns.”

Spargo went quietly away to his own nook and corner. He got hold of a
block of paper and began to write. He was going to show how to do
things.




CHAPTER SIX
WITNESS TO A MEETING


Ronald Breton walked into the _Watchman_ office and into Spargo’s room
next morning holding a copy of the current issue in his hand. He waved
it at Spargo with an enthusiasm which was almost boyish.

“I say!” he exclaimed. “That’s the way to do it, Spargo! I congratulate
you. Yes, that’s the way—certain!”

Spargo, idly turning over a pile of exchanges, yawned.

“What way?” he asked indifferently.

“The way you’ve written this thing up,” said Breton. “It’s a hundred
thousand times better than the usual cut-and-dried account of a murder.
It’s—it’s like a—a romance!”

“Merely a new method of giving news,” said Spargo. He picked up a copy
of the _Watchman_, and glanced at his two columns, which had somehow
managed to make themselves into three, viewing the displayed lettering,
the photograph of the dead man, the line drawing of the entry in Middle
Temple Lane, and the facsimile of the scrap of grey paper, with a
critical eye. “Yes—merely a new method,” he continued. “The question
is—will it achieve its object?”

“What’s the object?” asked Breton.

Spargo fished out a box of cigarettes from an untidy drawer, pushed it
over to his visitor, helped himself, and tilting back his chair, put
his feet on his desk.

“The object?” he said, drily. “Oh, well, the object is the ultimate
detection of the murderer.”

“You’re after that?”

“I’m after that—just that.”

“And not—not simply out to make effective news?”

“I’m out to find the murderer of John Marbury,” said Spargo
deliberately slow in his speech. “And I’ll find him.”

“Well, there doesn’t seem to be much in the way of clues, so far,”
remarked Breton. “I see—nothing. Do you?”

Spargo sent a spiral of scented smoke into the air.

“I want to know an awful lot,” he said. “I’m hungering for news. I want
to know who John Marbury is. I want to know what he did with himself
between the time when he walked out of the Anglo-Orient Hotel, alive
and well, and the time when he was found in Middle Temple Lane, with
his skull beaten in and dead. I want to know where he got that scrap of
paper. Above everything, Breton, I want to know what he’d got to do
with you!”

He gave the young barrister a keen look, and Breton nodded.

“Yes,” he said. “I confess that’s a corker. But I think——”

“Well?” said Spargo.

“I think he may have been a man who had some legal business in hand, or
in prospect, and had been recommended to—me,” said Breton.

Spargo smiled—a little sardonically.

“That’s good!” he said. “You had your very first brief—yesterday.
Come—your fame isn’t blown abroad through all the heights yet, my
friend! Besides—don’t intending clients approach—isn’t it strict
etiquette for them to approach?—barristers through solicitors?”

“Quite right—in both your remarks,” replied Breton, good-humouredly.
“Of course, I’m not known a bit, but all the same I’ve known several
cases where a barrister has been approached in the first instance and
asked to recommend a solicitor. Somebody who wanted to do me a good
turn may have given this man my address.”

“Possible,” said Spargo. “But he wouldn’t have come to consult you at
midnight. Breton!—the more I think of it, the more I’m certain there’s
a tremendous mystery in this affair! That’s why I got the chief to let
me write it up as I have done—here. I’m hoping that this
photograph—though to be sure, it’s of a dead face—and this facsimile of
the scrap of paper will lead to somebody coming forward who can——”

Just then one of the uniformed youths who hang about the marble
pillared vestibule of the _Watchman_ office came into the room with the
unmistakable look and air of one who carries news of moment.

“I dare lay a sovereign to a cent that I know what this is,” muttered
Spargo in an aside. “Well?” he said to the boy. “What is it?”

The messenger came up to the desk.

“Mr. Spargo,” he said, “there’s a man downstairs who says that he wants
to see somebody about that murder case that’s in the paper this
morning, sir. Mr. Barrett said I was to come to you.”

“Who is the man?” asked Spargo.

“Won’t say, sir,” replied the boy. “I gave him a form to fill up, but
he said he wouldn’t write anything—said all he wanted was to see the
man who wrote the piece in the paper.”

“Bring him here,” commanded Spargo. He turned to Breton when the boy
had gone, and he smiled. “I knew we should have somebody here sooner or
later,” he said. “That’s why I hurried over my breakfast and came down
at ten o’clock. Now then, what will you bet on the chances of this
chap’s information proving valuable?”

“Nothing,” replied Breton. “He’s probably some crank or faddist who’s
got some theory that he wants to ventilate.”

The man who was presently ushered in by the messenger seemed from
preliminary and outward appearance to justify Breton’s prognostication.
He was obviously a countryman, a tall, loosely-built, middle-aged man,
yellow of hair, blue of eye, who was wearing his Sunday-best array of
pearl-grey trousers and black coat, and sported a necktie in which were
several distinct colours. Oppressed with the splendour and grandeur of
the _Watchman_ building, he had removed his hard billycock hat as he
followed the boy, and he ducked his bared head at the two young men as
he stepped on to the thick pile of the carpet which made luxurious
footing in Spargo’s room. His blue eyes, opened to their widest, looked
round him in astonishment at the sumptuousness of modern
newspaper-office accommodation.

“How do you do, sir?” said Spargo, pointing a finger to one of the
easy-chairs for which the _Watchman_ office is famous. “I understand
that you wish to see me?”

The caller ducked his yellow head again, sat down on the edge of the
chair, put his hat on the floor, picked it up again, and endeavoured to
hang it on his knee, and looked at Spargo innocently and shyly.

“What I want to see, sir,” he observed in a rustic accent, “is the
gentleman as wrote that piece in your newspaper about this here murder
in Middle Temple Lane.”

“You see him,” said Spargo. “I am that man.”

The caller smiled—generously.

“Indeed, sir?” he said. “A very nice bit of reading, I’m sure. And what
might your name be, now, sir? I can always talk free-er to a man when I
know what his name is.”

“So can I,” answered Spargo. “My name is Spargo—Frank Spargo. What’s
yours?”

“Name of Webster, sir—William Webster. I farm at One Ash Farm, at
Gosberton, in Oakshire. Me and my wife,” continued Mr. Webster, again
smiling and distributing his smile between both his hearers, “is at
present in London on a holiday. And very pleasant we find it—weather
and all.”

“That’s right,” said Spargo. “And—you wanted to see me about this
murder, Mr. Webster?”

“I did, sir. Me, I believe, knowing, as I think, something that’ll do
for you to put in your paper. You see, Mr. Spargo, it come about in
this fashion—happen you’ll be for me to tell it in my own way.”

“That,” answered Spargo, “is precisely what I desire.”

“Well, to be sure, I couldn’t tell it in no other,” declared Mr.
Webster. “You see, sir, I read your paper this morning while I was
waiting for my breakfast—they take their breakfasts so late in them
hotels—and when I’d read it, and looked at the pictures, I says to my
wife ‘As soon as I’ve had my breakfast,’ I says, ‘I’m going to where
they print this newspaper to tell ’em something.’ ‘Aye?’ she says,
‘Why, what have you to tell, I should like to know?’ just like that,
Mr. Spargo.”

“Mrs. Webster,” said Spargo, “is a lady of businesslike principles. And
what have you to tell?”

Mr. Webster looked into the crown of his hat, looked out of it, and
smiled knowingly.

“Well, sir,” he continued, “Last night, my wife, she went out to a part
they call Clapham, to take her tea and supper with an old friend of
hers as lives there, and as they wanted to have a bit of woman-talk,
like, I didn’t go. So thinks I to myself, I’ll go and see this here
House of Commons. There was a neighbour of mine as had told me that all
you’d got to do was to tell the policeman at the door that you wanted
to see your own Member of Parliament. So when I got there I told ’em
that I wanted to see our M.P., Mr. Stonewood—you’ll have heard tell of
him, no doubt; he knows me very well—and they passed me, and I wrote
out a ticket for him, and they told me to sit down while they found
him. So I sat down in a grand sort of hall where there were a rare lot
of people going and coming, and some fine pictures and images to look
at, and for a time I looked at them, and then I began to take a bit of
notice of the folk near at hand, waiting, you know, like myself. And as
sure as I’m a christened man, sir, the gentleman whose picture you’ve
got in your paper—him as was murdered—was sitting next to me! I knew
that picture as soon as I saw it this morning.”

Spargo, who had been making unmeaning scribbles on a block of paper,
suddenly looked at his visitor.

“What time was that?” he asked.

“It was between a quarter and half-past nine, sir,” answered Mr.
Webster. “It might ha’ been twenty past—it might ha’ been twenty-five
past.”

“Go on, if you please,” said Spargo.

“Well, sir, me and this here dead gentleman talked a bit. About what a
long time it took to get a member to attend to you, and such-like. I
made mention of the fact that I hadn’t been in there before. ‘Neither
have I!’ he says, ‘I came in out of curiosity,’ he says, and then he
laughed, sir—queer-like. And it was just after that that what I’m going
to tell you about happened.”

“Tell,” commanded Spargo.

“Well, sir, there was a gentleman came along, down this grand hall that
we were sitting in—a tall, handsome gentleman, with a grey beard. He’d
no hat on, and he was carrying a lot of paper and documents in his
hand, so I thought he was happen one of the members. And all of a
sudden this here man at my side, he jumps up with a sort of start and
an exclamation, and——”

Spargo lifted his hand. He looked keenly at his visitor.

“Now, you’re absolutely sure about what you heard him exclaim?” he
asked. “Quite sure about it? Because I see you are going to tell us
what he did exclaim.”

“I’ll tell you naught but what I’m certain of, sir,” replied Webster.
“What he said as he jumped up was ‘Good God!’ he says, sharp-like—and
then he said a name, and I didn’t right catch it, but it sounded like
Danesworth, or Painesworth, or something of that sort—one of them
there, or very like ’em, at any rate. And then he rushed up to this
here gentleman, and laid his hand on his arm—sudden-like.”

“And—the gentleman?” asked Spargo, quietly.

“Well, he seemed taken aback, sir. He jumped. Then he stared at the
man. Then they shook hands. And then, after they’d spoken a few words
together-like, they walked off, talking. And, of course, I never saw no
more of ’em. But when I saw your paper this morning, sir, and that
picture in it, I said to myself ‘That’s the man I sat next to in that
there hall at the House of Commons!’ Oh, there’s no doubt of it, sir!”

“And supposing you saw a photograph of the tall gentleman with the grey
beard?” suggested Spargo. “Could you recognize him from that?”

“Make no doubt of it, sir,” answered Mr. Webster. “I observed him
particular.”

Spargo rose, and going over to a cabinet, took from it a thick volume,
the leaves of which he turned over for several minutes.

“Come here, if you please, Mr. Webster,” he said.

The farmer went across the room.

“There is a full set of photographs of members of the present House of
Commons here,” said Spargo. “Now, pick out the one you saw. Take your
time—and be sure.”

He left his caller turning over the album and went back to Breton.

“There!” he whispered. “Getting nearer—a bit nearer—eh?”

“To what?” asked Breton. “I don’t see—”

A sudden exclamation from the farmer interrupted Breton’s remark.

“This is him, sir!” answered Mr. Webster. “That’s the gentleman—know
him anywhere!”

The two young men crossed the room. The farmer was pointing a stubby
finger to a photograph, beneath which was written _Stephen Aylmore,
Esq., M.P. for Brookminster_.




CHAPTER SEVEN
MR. AYLMORE


Spargo, keenly observant and watchful, felt, rather than saw, Breton
start; he himself preserved an imperturbable equanimity. He gave a mere
glance at the photograph to which Mr. Webster was pointing.

“Oh!” he said. “That he?”

“That’s the gentleman, sir,” replied Webster. “Done to the life, that
is. No difficulty in recognizing of that, Mr. Spargo.”

“You’re absolutely sure?” demanded Spargo. “There are a lot of men in
the House of Commons, you know, who wear beards, and many of the beards
are grey.”

But Webster wagged his head.

“That’s him, sir!” he repeated. “I’m as sure of that as I am that my
name’s William Webster. That’s the man I saw talking to him whose
picture you’ve got in your paper. Can’t say no more, sir.”

“Very good,” said Spargo. “I’m much obliged to you. I’ll see Mr.
Aylmore. Leave me your address in London, Mr. Webster. How long do you
remain in town?”

“My address is the Beachcroft Hotel, Bloomsbury, sir, and I shall be
there for another week,” answered the farmer. “Hope I’ve been of some
use, Mr. Spargo. As I says to my wife——”

Spargo cut his visitor short in polite fashion and bowed him out. He
turned to Breton, who still stood staring at the album of portraits.

“There!—what did I tell you?” he said. “Didn’t I say I should get some
news? There it is.”

Breton nodded his head. He seemed thoughtful.

“Yes,” he agreed. “Yes, I say, Spargo!”

“Well?”

“Mr. Aylmore is my prospective father-in-law, you know.”

“Quite aware of it. Didn’t you introduce me to his daughters—only
yesterday?”

“But—how did you know they were his daughters?”

Spargo laughed as he sat down to his desk.

“Instinct—intuition,” he answered. “However, never mind that, just now.
Well—I’ve found something out. Marbury—if that is the dead man’s real
name, and anyway, it’s all we know him by—was in the company of Mr.
Aylmore that night. Good!”

“What are you going to do about it?” asked Breton.

“Do? See Mr. Aylmore, of course.”

He was turning over the leaves of a telephone address-book; one hand
had already picked up the mouthpiece of the instrument on his desk.

“Look here,” said Breton. “I know where Mr. Aylmore is always to be
found at twelve o’clock. At the A. and P.—the Atlantic and Pacific
Club, you know, in St. James’s. If you like, I’ll go with you.”

Spargo glanced at the clock and laid down the telephone.

“All right,” he said. “Eleven o’clock, now. I’ve something to do. I’ll
meet you outside the A. and P. at exactly noon.”

“I’ll be there,” agreed Breton. He made for the door, and with his hand
on it, turned. “What do you expect from—from what we’ve just heard?” he
asked.

Spargo shrugged his shoulders.

“Wait—until we hear what Mr. Aylmore has to say,” he answered. “I
suppose this man Marbury was some old acquaintance.”

Breton closed the door and went away: left alone, Spargo began to
mutter to himself.

“Good God!” he says. “Dainsworth—Painsworth—something of that sort—one
of the two. Excellent—that our farmer friend should have so much
observation. Ah!—and why should Mr. Stephen Aylmore be recognized as
Dainsworth or Painsworth or something of that sort. Now, who is Mr.
Stephen Aylmore—beyond being what I know him to be?”

Spargo’s fingers went instinctively to one of a number of books of
reference which stood on his desk: they turned with practised swiftness
to a page over which his eye ran just as swiftly. He read aloud:

“AYLMORE, STEPHEN, M.P. for Brookminster since 1910. Residences: 23,
St. Osythe Court, Kensington: Buena Vista, Great Marlow. Member
Atlantic and Pacific and City Venturers’ Clubs. Interested in South
American enterprise.”

“Um!” muttered Spargo, putting the book away. “That’s not very
illuminating. However, we’ve got one move finished. Now we’ll make
another.”

Going over to the album of photographs, Spargo deftly removed that of
Mr. Aylmore, put it in an envelope and the envelope in his pocket and,
leaving the office, hailed a taxi-cab, and ordered its driver to take
him to the Anglo-Orient Hotel. This was the something-to-do of which he
had spoken to Breton: Spargo wanted to do it alone.

Mrs. Walters was in her low-windowed office when Spargo entered the
hall; she recognized him at once and motioned him into her parlour.

“I remember you,” said Mrs. Walters; “you came with the detective—Mr.
Rathbury.”

“Have you seen him, since?” asked Spargo.

“Not since,” replied Mrs. Walters. “No—and I was wondering if he’d be
coming round, because——” She paused there and looked at Spargo with
particular enquiry—“You’re a friend of his, aren’t you?” she asked. “I
suppose you know as much as he does—about this?”

“He and I,” replied Spargo, with easy confidence, “are working this
case together. You can tell me anything you’d tell him.”

The landlady rummaged in her pocket and produced an old purse, from an
inner compartment of which she brought out a small object wrapped in
tissue paper.

“Well,” she said, unwrapping the paper, “we found this in Number 20
this morning—it was lying under the dressing-table. The girl that found
it brought it to me, and I thought it was a bit of glass, but Walters,
he says as how he shouldn’t be surprised if it’s a diamond. And since
we found it, the waiter who took the whisky up to 20, after Mr. Marbury
came in with the other gentleman, has told me that when he went into
the room the two gentlemen were looking at a paper full of things like
this. So there?”

Spargo fingered the shining bit of stone.

“That’s a diamond—right enough,” he said. “Put it away, Mrs. Walters—I
shall see Rathbury presently, and I’ll tell him about it. Now, that
other gentleman! You told us you saw him. Could you recognize him—I
mean, a photograph of him? Is this the man?”

Spargo knew from the expression of Mrs. Walters’ face that she had no
more doubt than Webster had.

“Oh, yes!” she said. “That’s the gentleman who came in with Mr.
Marbury—I should have known him in a thousand. Anybody would recognize
him from that—perhaps you’d let our hall-porter and the waiter I
mentioned just now look at it?”

“I’ll see them separately and see if they’ve ever seen a man who
resembles this,” replied Spargo.

The two men recognized the photograph at once, without any prompting,
and Spargo, after a word or two with the landlady, rode off to the
Atlantic and Pacific Club, and found Ronald Breton awaiting him on the
steps. He made no reference to his recent doings, and together they
went into the house and asked for Mr. Aylmore.

Spargo looked with more than uncommon interest at the man who presently
came to them in the visitors’ room. He was already familiar with Mr.
Aylmore’s photograph, but he never remembered seeing him in real life;
the Member for Brookminster was one of that rapidly diminishing body of
legislators whose members are disposed to work quietly and
unobtrusively, doing yeoman service on committees, obeying every behest
of the party whips, without forcing themselves into the limelight or
seizing every opportunity to air their opinions. Now that Spargo met
him in the flesh he proved to be pretty much what the journalist had
expected—a rather cold-mannered, self-contained man, who looked as if
he had been brought up in a school of rigid repression, and taught not
to waste words. He showed no more than the merest of languid interests
in Spargo when Breton introduced him, and his face was quite
expressionless when Spargo brought to an end his brief explanation
—purposely shortened—of his object in calling upon him.

“Yes,” he said indifferently. “Yes, it is quite true that I met Marbury
and spent a little time with him on the evening your informant spoke
of. I met him, as he told you, in the lobby of the House. I was much
surprised to meet him. I had not seen him for—I really don’t know how
many years.”

He paused and looked at Spargo as if he was wondering what he ought or
not to say to a newspaper man. Spargo remained silent, waiting. And
presently Mr. Aylmore went on.

“I read your account in the _Watchman_ this morning,” he said. “I was
wondering, when you called just now, if I would communicate with you or
with the police. The fact is—I suppose you want this for your paper,
eh?” he continued after a sudden breaking off.

“I shall not print anything that you wish me not to print,” answered
Spargo. “If you care to give me any information——”

“Oh, well!” said Mr. Aylmore. “I don’t mind. The fact is, I knew next
to nothing. Marbury was a man with whom I had some—well, business
relations, of a sort, a great many years ago. It must be twenty
years—perhaps more—since I lost sight of him. When he came up to me in
the lobby the other night, I had to make an effort of memory to recall
him. He wished me, having once met me, to give him some advice, and as
there was little doing in the House that night, and as he had once
been—almost a friend—I walked to his hotel with him, chatting. He told
me that he had only landed from Australia that morning, and what he
wanted my advice about, principally, was—diamonds. Australian
diamonds.”

“I was unaware,” remarked Spargo, “that diamonds were ever found in
Australia.”

Mr. Aylmore smiled—a little cynically.

“Perhaps so,” he said. “But diamonds have been found in Australia from
time to time, ever since Australia was known to Europeans, and in the
opinion of experts, they will eventually be found there in quantity.
Anyhow, Marbury had got hold of some Australian diamonds, and he showed
them to me at his hotel—a number of them. We examined them in his
room.”

“What did he do with them—afterwards?” asked Spargo.

“He put them in his waistcoat pocket—in a very small wash-leather bag,
from which he had taken them. There were, in all, sixteen or twenty
stones—not more, and they were all small. I advised him to see some
expert—I mentioned Streeter’s to him. Now, I can tell you how he got
hold of Mr. Breton’s address.”

The two young men pricked up their ears. Spargo unconsciously tightened
his hold on the pencil with which he was making notes.

“He got it from me,” continued Mr. Aylmore. “The handwriting on the
scrap of paper is mine, hurriedly scrawled. He wanted legal advice. As
I knew very little about lawyers, I told him that if he called on Mr.
Breton, Mr. Breton would be able to tell him of a first-class, sharp
solicitor. I wrote down Mr. Breton’s address for him, on a scrap of
paper which he tore off a letter that he took from his pocket. By the
by, I observe that when his body was found there was nothing on it in
the shape of papers or money. I am quite sure that when I left him he
had a lot of gold on him, those diamonds, and a breast-pocket full of
letters.”

“Where did you leave him, sir?” asked Spargo. “You left the hotel
together, I believe?”

“Yes. We strolled along when we left it. Having once met, we had much
to talk of, and it was a fine night. We walked across Waterloo Bridge
and very shortly afterwards he left me. And that is really all I know.
My own impression——” He paused for a moment and Spargo waited silently.

“My own impression—though I confess it may seem to have no very solid
grounds—is that Marbury was decoyed to where he was found, and was
robbed and murdered by some person who knew he had valuables on him.
There is the fact that he was robbed, at any rate.”

“I’ve had a notion,” said Breton, diffidently. “Mayn’t be worth much,
but I’ve had it, all the same. Some fellow-passenger of Marbury’s may
have tracked him all day—Middle Temple Lane’s pretty lonely at night,
you know.”

No one made any comment upon this suggestion, and on Spargo looking at
Mr. Aylmore, the Member of Parliament rose and glanced at the door.

“Well, that’s all I can tell you, Mr. Spargo,” he said. “You see, it’s
not much, after all. Of course, there’ll be an inquest on Marbury, and
I shall have to re-tell it. But you’re welcome to print what I’ve told
you.”

Spargo left Breton with his future father-in-law and went away towards
New Scotland Yard. He and Rathbury had promised to share news—now he
had some to communicate.




CHAPTER EIGHT
THE MAN FROM THE SAFE DEPOSIT


Spargo found Rathbury sitting alone in a small, somewhat dismal
apartment which was chiefly remarkable for the business-like paucity of
its furnishings and its indefinable air of secrecy. There was a plain
writing-table and a hard chair or two; a map of London, much
discoloured, on the wall; a few faded photographs of eminent bands in
the world of crime, and a similar number of well-thumbed books of
reference. The detective himself, when Spargo was shown in to him, was
seated at the table, chewing an unlighted cigar, and engaged in the
apparently aimless task of drawing hieroglyphics on scraps of paper. He
looked up as the journalist entered, and held out his hand.

“Well, I congratulate you on what you stuck in the _Watchman_ this
morning,” he said. “Made extra good reading, I thought. They did right
to let you tackle that job. Going straight through with it now, I
suppose, Mr. Spargo?”

Spargo dropped into the chair nearest to Rathbury’s right hand. He
lighted a cigarette, and having blown out a whiff of smoke, nodded his
head in a fashion which indicated that the detective might consider his
question answered in the affirmative.

“Look here,” he said. “We settled yesterday, didn’t we, that you and I
are to consider ourselves partners, as it were, in this job? That’s all
right,” he continued, as Rathbury nodded very quietly. “Very well—have
you made any further progress?”

Rathbury put his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat and, leaning
back in his chair, shook his head.

“Frankly, I haven’t,” he replied. “Of course, there’s a lot being done
in the usual official-routine way. We’ve men out making various
enquiries. We’re enquiring about Marbury’s voyage to England. All that
we know up to now is that he was certainly a passenger on a liner which
landed at Southampton in accordance with what he told those people at
the Anglo-Orient, that he left the ship in the usual way and was
understood to take the train to town—as he did. That’s all. There’s
nothing in that. We’ve cabled to Melbourne for any news of him from
there. But I expect little from that.”

“All right,” said Spargo. “And—what are you doing—you, yourself?
Because, if we’re to share facts, I must know what my partner’s after.
Just now, you seemed to be—drawing.”

Rathbury laughed.

“Well, to tell you the truth,” he said, “when I want to work things
out, I come into this room—it’s quiet, as you see—and I scribble
anything on paper while I think. I was figuring on my next step, and—”

“Do you see it?” asked Spargo, quickly.

“Well—I want to find the man who went with Marbury to that hotel,”
replied Rathbury. “It seems to me—”

Spargo wagged his finger at his fellow-contriver.

“I’ve found him,” he said. “That’s what I wrote that article for—to
find him. I knew it would find him. I’ve never had any training in your
sort of work, but I knew that article would get him. And it has got
him.”

Rathbury accorded the journalist a look of admiration.

“Good!” he said. “And—who is he?”

“I’ll tell you the story,” answered Spargo, “and in a summary. This
morning a man named Webster, a farmer, a visitor to London, came to me
at the office, and said that being at the House of Commons last night
he witnessed a meeting between Marbury and a man who was evidently a
Member of Parliament, and saw them go away together. I showed him an
album of photographs of the present members, and he immediately
recognized the portrait of one of them as the man in question. I
thereupon took the portrait to the Anglo-Orient Hotel—Mrs. Walters also
at once recognized it as that of the man who came to the hotel with
Marbury, stopped with him a while in his room, and left with him. The
man is Mr. Stephen Aylmore, the member for Brookminster.”

Rathbury expressed his feelings in a sharp whistle.

“I know him!” he said. “Of course—I remember Mrs. Walters’s description
now. But his is a familiar type—tall, grey-bearded, well-dressed.
Um!—well, we’ll have to see Mr. Aylmore at once.”

“I’ve seen him,” said Spargo. “Naturally! For you see, Mrs. Walters
gave me a bit more evidence. This morning they found a loose diamond on
the floor of Number 20, and after it was found the waiter who took the
drinks up to Marbury and his guest that night remembered that when he
entered the room the two gentlemen were looking at a paper full of
similar objects. So then I went on to see Mr. Aylmore. You know young
Breton, the barrister?—you met him with me, you remember?”

“The young fellow whose name and address were found on Marbury,”
replied Rathbury. “I remember.”

“Breton is engaged to Aylmore’s daughter,” continued Spargo. “Breton
took me to Aylmore’s club. And Aylmore gives a plain, straightforward
account of the matter which he’s granted me leave to print. It clears
up a lot of things. Aylmore knew Marbury over twenty years ago. He lost
sight of him. They met accidentally in the lobby of the House on the
evening preceding the murder. Marbury told him that he wanted his
advice about those rare things, Australian diamonds. He went back with
him to his hotel and spent a while with him; then they walked out
together as far as Waterloo Bridge, where Aylmore left him and went
home. Further, the scrap of grey paper is accounted for. Marbury wanted
the address of a smart solicitor; Aylmore didn’t know of one but told
Marbury that if he called on young Breton, he’d know, and would put him
in the way to find one. Marbury wrote Breton’s address down. That’s
Aylmore’s story. But it’s got an important addition. Aylmore says that
when he left Marbury, Marbury had on him a quantity of those diamonds
in a wash-leather bag, a lot of gold, and a breast-pocket full of
letters and papers. Now—there was nothing on him when he was found dead
in Middle Temple Lane.”

Spargo stopped and lighted a fresh cigarette.

“That’s all I know,” he said. “What do you make of it?”

Rathbury leaned back in his chair in his apparently favourite attitude
and stared hard at the dusty ceiling above him.

“Don’t know,” he said. “It brings things up to a point, certainly.
Aylmore and Marbury parted at Waterloo Bridge—very late. Waterloo
Bridge is pretty well next door to the Temple. But—how did Marbury get
into the Temple, unobserved? We’ve made every enquiry, and we can’t
trace him in any way as regards that movement. There’s a clue for his
going there in the scrap of paper bearing Breton’s address, but even a
Colonial would know that no business was done in the Temple at
midnight, eh?”

“Well,” said Spargo, “I’ve thought of one or two things. He may have
been one of those men who like to wander around at night. He may have
seen—he would see—plenty of lights in the Temple at that hour; he may
have slipped in unobserved—it’s possible, it’s quite possible. I once
had a moonlight saunter in the Temple myself after midnight, and had no
difficulty about walking in and out, either. But—if Marbury was
murdered for the sake of what he had on him—how did he meet with his
murderer or murderers in there? Criminals don’t hang about Middle
Temple Lane.”

The detective shook his head. He picked up his pencil and began making
more hieroglyphics.

“What’s your theory, Mr. Spargo?” he asked suddenly. “I suppose you’ve
got one.”

“Have you?” asked Spargo, bluntly.

“Well,” returned Rathbury, hesitatingly, “I hadn’t, up to now. But
now—now, after what you’ve told me, I think I can make one. It seems to
me that after Marbury left Aylmore he probably mooned about by himself,
that he was decoyed into the Temple, and was there murdered and robbed.
There are a lot of queer ins and outs, nooks and corners in that old
spot, Mr. Spargo, and the murderer, if he knew his ground well, could
easily hide himself until he could get away in the morning. He might be
a man who had access to chambers or offices—think how easy it would be
for such a man, having once killed and robbed his victim, to lie hid
for hours afterwards? For aught we know, the man who murdered Marbury
may have been within twenty feet of you when you first saw his dead
body that morning. Eh?”

Before Spargo could reply to this suggestion an official entered the
room and whispered a few words in the detective’s ear.

“Show him in at once,” said Rathbury. He turned to Spargo as the man
quitted the room and smiled significantly. “Here’s somebody wants to
tell something about the Marbury case,” he remarked. “Let’s hope it’ll
be news worth hearing.”

Spargo smiled in his queer fashion.

“It strikes me that you’ve only got to interest an inquisitive public
in order to get news,” he said. “The principal thing is to investigate
it when you’ve got it. Who’s this, now?”

The official had returned with a dapper-looking gentleman in a
frock-coat and silk hat, bearing upon him the unmistakable stamp of the
city man, who inspected Rathbury with deliberation and Spargo with a
glance, and being seated turned to the detective as undoubtedly the
person he desired to converse with.

“I understand that you are the officer in charge of the Marbury murder
case,” he observed. “I believe I can give you some valuable information
in respect to that. I read the account of the affair in the _Watchman_
newspaper this morning, and saw the portrait of the murdered man there,
and I was at first inclined to go to the _Watchman_ office with my
information, but I finally decided to approach the police instead of
the Press, regarding the police as being more—more responsible.”

“Much obliged to you, sir,” said Rathbury, with a glance at Spargo.
“Whom have I the pleasure of——”

“My name,” replied the visitor, drawing out and laying down a card, “is
Myerst—Mr. E.P. Myerst, Secretary of the London and Universal Safe
Deposit Company. I may, I suppose, speak with confidence,” continued
Mr. Myerst, with a side-glance at Spargo. “My information
is—confidential.”

Rathbury inclined his head and put his fingers together.

“You may speak with every confidence, Mr. Myerst,” he answered. “If
what you have to tell has any real bearing on the Marbury case, it will
probably have to be repeated in public, you know, sir. But at present
it will be treated as private.”

“It has a very real bearing on the case, I should say,” replied Mr.
Myerst. “Yes, I should decidedly say so. The fact is that on June 21st
at about—to be precise—three o’clock in the afternoon, a stranger, who
gave the name of John Marbury, and his present address as the
Anglo-Orient Hotel, Waterloo, called at our establishment, and asked if
he could rent a small safe. He explained to me that he desired to
deposit in such a safe a small leather box—which, by the by, was of
remarkably ancient appearance—that he had brought with him. I showed
him a safe such as he wanted, informed him of the rent, and of the
rules of the place, and he engaged the safe, paid the rent for one year
in advance, and deposited his leather box—an affair of about a foot
square—there and then. After that, having exchanged a remark or two
about the altered conditions of London, which, I understood him to say,
he had not seen for a great many years, he took his key and his
departure. I think there can be no doubt about this being the Mr.
Marbury who was found murdered.”

“None at all, I should say, Mr. Myerst,” said Rathbury. “And I’m much
obliged to you for coming here. Now you might tell me a little more,
sir. Did Marbury tell you anything about the contents of the box?”

“No. He merely remarked that he wished the greatest care to be taken of
it,” replied the secretary.

“Didn’t give you any hint as to what was in it?” asked Rathbury.

“None. But he was very particular to assure himself that it could not
be burnt, nor burgled, nor otherwise molested,” replied Mr. Myerst. “He
appeared to be greatly relieved when he found that it was impossible
for anyone but himself to take his property from his safe.”

“Ah!” said Rathbury, winking at Spargo. “So he would, no doubt. And
Marbury himself, sir, now? How did he strike you?”

Mr. Myerst gravely considered this question.

“Mr. Marbury struck me,” he answered at last, “as a man who had
probably seen strange places. And before leaving he made, what I will
term, a remarkable remark. About—in fact, about his leather box.”

“His leather box?” said Rathbury. “And what was it, sir?”

“This,” replied the secretary. “‘That box,’ he said, ‘is safe now. But
it’s been safer. It’s been buried—and deep-down, too—for many and many
a year!’”




CHAPTER NINE
THE DEALER IN RARE STAMPS


“Buried—and deep-down, too—for many and many a year,” repeated Mr.
Myerst, eyeing his companions with keen glances. “I consider that,
gentlemen, a very remarkable remark—very remarkable!”

Rathbury stuck his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat again and
began swaying backwards and forwards in his chair. He looked at Spargo.
And with his knowledge of men, he knew that all Spargo’s journalistic
instincts had been aroused, and that he was keen as mustard to be off
on a new scent.

“Remarkable—remarkable, Mr. Myerst!” he assented. “What do you say, Mr.
Spargo?”

Spargo turned slowly, and for the first time since Myerst had entered
made a careful inspection of him. The inspection lasted several
seconds; then Spargo spoke.

“And what did you say to that?” he asked quietly.

Myerst looked from his questioner to Rathbury. And Rathbury thought it
time to enlighten the caller.

“I may as well tell you, Mr. Myerst,” he said smilingly, “that this is
Mr. Spargo, of the _Watchman_. Mr. Spargo wrote the article about the
Marbury case of which you spoke when you came in. Mr. Spargo, you’ll
gather, is deeply interested in this matter—and he and I, in our
different capacities, are working together. So—you understand?” Myerst
regarded Spargo in a new light. And while he was so looking at him.
Spargo repeated the question he had just put.

“I said—What did you say to that?”

Myerst hesitated.

“Well—er—I don’t think I said anything,” he replied. “Nothing that one
might call material, you know.”

“Didn’t ask him what he meant?” suggested Spargo.

“Oh, no—not at all,” replied Myerst.

Spargo got up abruptly from his chair.

“Then you missed one of the finest opportunities I ever heard of!” he
said, half-sneeringly. “You might have heard such a story—”

He paused, as if it were not worth while to continue, and turned to
Rathbury, who was regarding him with amusement.

“Look here, Rathbury,” he said. “Is it possible to get that box
opened?”

“It’ll have to be opened,” answered Rathbury, rising. “It’s got to be
opened. It probably contains the clue we want. I’m going to ask Mr.
Myerst here to go with me just now to take the first steps about having
it opened. I shall have to get an order. We may get the matter through
today, but at any rate we’ll have it done tomorrow morning.”

“Can you arrange for me to be present when that comes off?” asked
Spargo. “You can—certain? That’s all right, Rathbury. Now I’m off, and
you’ll ring me up or come round if you hear anything, and I’ll do the
same by you.”

And without further word, Spargo went quickly away, and just as quickly
returned to the _Watchman_ office. There the assistant who had been
told off to wait upon his orders during this new crusade met him with a
business card.

“This gentleman came in to see you about an hour ago, Mr. Spargo,” he
said. “He thinks he can tell you something about the Marbury affair,
and he said that as he couldn’t wait, perhaps you’d step round to his
place when you came in.”

Spargo took the card and read:

MR. JAMES CRIEDIR,
DEALER IN PHILATELIC RARITIES,
2,021, STRAND.


Spargo put the card in his waistcoat pocket and went out again,
wondering why Mr. James Criedir could not, would not, or did not call
himself a dealer in rare postage stamps, and so use plain English. He
went up Fleet Street and soon found the shop indicated on the card, and
his first glance at its exterior showed that whatever business might
have been done by Mr. Criedir in the past at that establishment there
was to be none done there in the future by him, for there were
newly-printed bills in the window announcing that the place was to let.
And inside he found a short, portly, elderly man who was superintending
the packing-up and removal of the last of his stock. He turned a
bright, enquiring eye on the journalist.

“Mr. Criedir?” said Spargo.

“The same, sir,” answered the philatelist. “You are—?”

“Mr. Spargo, of the _Watchman_. You called on me.”

Mr. Criedir opened the door of a tiny apartment at the rear of the very
little shop and motioned his caller to enter. He followed him in and
carefully closed the door.

“Glad to see you, Mr. Spargo,” he said genially. “Take a seat, sir—I’m
all in confusion here—giving up business, you see. Yes, I called on
you. I think, having read the _Watchman_ account of that Marbury
affair, and having seen the murdered man’s photograph in your columns,
that I can give you a bit of information.”

“Material?” asked Spargo, tersely.

Mr. Criedir cocked one of his bright eyes at his visitor. He coughed
drily.

“That’s for you to decide—when you’ve heard it,” he said. “I should
say, considering everything, that it was material. Well, it’s this—I
kept open until yesterday—everything as usual, you know—stock in the
window and so on—so that anybody who was passing would naturally have
thought that the business was going on, though as a matter of fact, I’m
retiring—retired,” added Mr. Criedir with a laugh, “last night. Now—but
won’t you take down what I’ve got to tell you?”

“I am taking it down,” answered Spargo. “Every word. In my head.”

Mr. Criedir laughed and rubbed his hands.

“Oh!” he said. “Ah, well, in my young days journalists used to pull out
pencil and notebook at the first opportunity. But you modern young
men—”

“Just so,” agreed Spargo. “This information, now?”

“Well,” said Mr. Criedir, “we’ll go on then. Yesterday afternoon the
man described as Marbury came into my shop. He—”

“What time—exact time?” asked Spargo.

“Two—to the very minute by St. Clement Danes clock,” answered Mr.
Criedir. “I’d swear twenty affidavits on that point. He was precisely
as you’ve described him—dress, everything—I tell you I knew his photo
as soon as I saw it. He was carrying a little box—”

“What sort of box?” said Spargo.

“A queer, old-fashioned, much-worn leather box—a very miniature trunk,
in fact,” replied Mr. Criedir. “About a foot square; the sort of thing
you never see nowadays. It was very much worn; it attracted me for that
very reason. He set it on the counter and looked at me. ‘You’re a
dealer in stamps—rare stamps?’ he said. ‘I am,’ I replied. ‘I’ve
something here I’d like to show you,’ he said, unlocking the box.
‘It’s—’”

“Stop a bit,” said Spargo. “Where did he take the key from with which
he unlocked the box?”

“It was one of several which he carried on a split ring, and he took
the bunch out of his left-hand trousers pocket,” replied Mr. Criedir.
“Oh, I keep my eyes open, young gentleman! Well—he opened his box. It
seemed to me to be full of papers—at any rate there were a lot of
legal-looking documents on the top, tied up with red tape. To show you
how I notice things I saw that the papers were stained with age, and
that the red tape was faded to a mere washed-out pink.”

“Good—good!” murmured Spargo. “Excellent! Proceed, sir.”

“He put his hand under the topmost papers and drew out an envelope,”
continued Mr. Criedir. “From the envelope he produced an exceedingly
rare, exceedingly valuable set of Colonial stamps—the very-first ever
issued. ‘I’ve just come from Australia,’ he said. ‘I promised a young
friend of mine out there to sell these stamps for him in London, and as
I was passing this way I caught sight of your shop. Will you buy ’em,
and how much will you give for ’em?’”

“Prompt,” muttered Spargo.

“He seemed to me the sort of man who doesn’t waste words,” agreed Mr.
Criedir. “Well, there was no doubt about the stamps, nor about their
great value. But I had to explain to him that I was retiring from
business that very day, and did not wish to enter into even a single
deal, and that, therefore, I couldn’t do anything. ‘No matter,’ he
says, ‘I daresay there are lots of men in your line of trade—perhaps
you can recommend me to a good firm?’ ‘I could recommend you to a dozen
extra-good firms,’ I answered. ‘But I can do better for you. I’ll give
you the name and address of a private buyer who, I haven’t the least
doubt, will be very glad to buy that set from you and will give you a
big price.’ ‘Write it down,’ he says, ‘and thank you for your trouble.’
So I gave him a bit of advice as to the price he ought to get, and I
wrote the name and address of the man I referred to on the back of one
of my cards.”

“Whose name and address?” asked Spargo.

“Mr. Nicholas Cardlestone, 2, Pilcox Buildings, Middle Temple Lane,”
replied Mr. Criedir. “Mr. Cardlestone is one of the most enthusiastic
and accomplished philatelists in Europe. And I knew he didn’t possess
that set of stamps.”

“I know Mr. Cardlestone,” remarked Spargo. “It was at the foot of his
stairs that Marbury was found murdered.”

“Just so,” said Mr. Criedir. “Which makes me think that he was going to
see Mr. Cardlestone when he was set upon, murdered, and robbed.”

Spargo looked fixedly at the retired stamp-dealer.

“What, going to see an elderly gentleman in his rooms in the Temple, to
offer to sell him philatelic rarities at—past midnight?” he said. “I
think—not much!”

“All right,” replied Mr. Criedir. “You think and argue on modern
lines—which are, of course, highly superior. But—how do you account for
my having given Marbury Mr. Cardlestone’s address and for his having
been found dead—murdered—at the foot of Cardlestone’s stairs a few
hours later?”

“I don’t account for it,” said Spargo. “I’m trying to.”

Mr. Criedir made no comment on this. He looked his visitor up and down
for a moment; gathered some idea of his capabilities, and suddenly
offered him a cigarette. Spargo accepted it with a laconic word of
thanks, and smoked half-way through it before he spoke again.

“Yes,” he said. “I’m trying to account. And I shall account. And I’m
much obliged to you, Mr. Criedir, for what you’ve told me. Now, then,
may I ask you a question or two?”

“A thousand!” responded Mr. Criedir with great geniality.

“Very well. Did Marbury say he’d call on Cardlestone?”

“He did. Said he’d call as soon as he could—that day.”

“Have you told Cardlestone what you’ve just told me?”

“I have. But not until an hour ago—on my way back from your office, in
fact. I met him in Fleet Street and told him.”

“Had he received a call from Marbury?”

“No! Never heard of or seen the man. At least, never heard of him until
he heard of the murder. He told me he and his friend, Mr. Elphick,
another philatelist, went to see the body, wondering if they could
recognize it as any man they’d ever known, but they couldn’t.”

“I know they did,” said Spargo. “I saw ’em at the mortuary. Um!
Well—one more question. When Marbury left you, did he put those stamps
in his box again, as before?”

“No,” replied Mr. Criedir. “He put them in his right-hand breast
pocket, and he locked up his old box, and went off swinging it in his
left hand.”

Spargo went away down Fleet Street, seeing nobody. He muttered to
himself, and he was still muttering when he got into his room at the
office. And what he muttered was the same thing, repeated over and over
again:

“Six hours—six hours—six hours! Those six hours!”

Next morning the _Watchman_ came out with four leaded columns of
up-to-date news about the Marbury Case, and right across the top of the
four ran a heavy double line of great capitals, black and staring:—WHO
SAW JOHN MARBURY BETWEEN 3.15 P.M. AND 9.15 P.M. ON THE DAY PRECEDING
HIS MURDER?




CHAPTER TEN
THE LEATHER BOX


Whether Spargo was sanguine enough to expect that his staring headline
would bring him information of the sort he wanted was a secret which he
kept to himself. That a good many thousands of human beings must have
set eyes on John Marbury between the hours which Spargo set forth in
that headline was certain; the problem was—What particular owner or
owners of a pair or of many pairs of those eyes would remember him? Why
should they remember him? Walters and his wife had reason to remember
him; Criedir had reason to remember him; so had Myerst; so had William
Webster. But between a quarter past three, when he left the London and
Universal Safe Deposit, and a quarter past nine, when he sat down by
Webster’s side in the lobby of the House of Commons, nobody seemed to
have any recollection of him except Mr. Fiskie, the hatter, and he only
remembered him faintly, and because Marbury had bought a fashionable
cloth cap at his shop. At any rate, by noon of that day, nobody had
come forward with any recollection of him. He must have gone West from
seeing Myerst, because he bought his cap at Fiskie’s; he must
eventually have gone South-West, because he turned up at Westminster.
But where else did he go? What did he do? To whom did he speak? No
answer came to these questions.

“That shows,” observed young Mr. Ronald Breton, lazing an hour away in
Spargo’s room at the _Watchman_ at that particular hour which is
neither noon nor afternoon, wherein even busy men do nothing, “that
shows how a chap can go about London as if he were merely an ant that
had strayed into another ant-heap than his own. Nobody notices.”

“You’d better go and read up a little elementary entomology, Breton,”
said Spargo. “I don’t know much about it myself, but I’ve a pretty good
idea that when an ant walks into the highways and byways of a colony to
which he doesn’t belong he doesn’t survive his intrusion by many
seconds.”

“Well, you know what I mean,” said Breton. “London’s an ant-heap, isn’t
it? One human ant more or less doesn’t count. This man Marbury must
have gone about a pretty tidy lot during those six hours. He’d ride on
a ’bus—almost certain. He’d get into a taxi-cab—I think that’s much
more certain, because it would be a novelty to him. He’d want some
tea—anyway, he’d be sure to want a drink, and he’d turn in somewhere to
get one or the other. He’d buy things in shops—these Colonials always
do. He’d go somewhere to get his dinner. He’d—but what’s the use of
enumeration in this case?”

“A mere piling up of platitudes,” answered Spargo.

“What I mean is,” continued Breton, “that piles of people must have
seen him, and yet it’s now hours and hours since your paper came out
this morning, and nobody’s come forward to tell anything. And when you
come to think of it, why should they? Who’d remember an ordinary man in
a grey tweed suit?”

“‘An ordinary man in a grey tweed suit,’” repeated Spargo. “Good line.
You haven’t any copyright in it, remember. It would make a good
cross-heading.”

Breton laughed. “You’re a queer chap, Spargo,” he said. “Seriously, do
you think you’re getting any nearer anything?”

“I’m getting nearer something with everything that’s done,” Spargo
answered. “You can’t start on a business like this without evolving
something out of it, you know.”

“Well,” said Breton, “to me there’s not so much mystery in it. Mr.
Aylmore’s explained the reason why my address was found on the body;
Criedir, the stamp-man, has explained—”

Spargo suddenly looked up.

“What?” he said sharply.

“Why, the reason of Marbury’s being found where he was found,” replied
Breton. “Of course, I see it all! Marbury was mooning around Fleet
Street; he slipped into Middle Temple Lane, late as it was, just to see
where old Cardlestone hangs out, and he was set upon and done for. The
thing’s plain to me. The only thing now is to find who did it.”

“Yes, that’s it,” agreed Spargo. “That’s it.” He turned over the leaves
of the diary which lay on his desk. “By the by,” he said, looking up
with some interest, “the adjourned inquest is at eleven o’clock
tomorrow morning. Are you going?”

“I shall certainly go,” answered Breton. “What’s more, I’m going to
take Miss Aylmore and her sister. As the gruesome details were over at
the first sitting, and as there’ll be nothing but this new evidence
tomorrow, and as they’ve never been in a coroner’s court——”

“Mr. Aylmore’ll be the principal witness tomorrow,” interrupted Spargo.
“I suppose he’ll be able to tell a lot more than he told—me.”

Breton shrugged his shoulders.

“I don’t see that there’s much more to tell,” he said. “But,” he added,
with a sly laugh, “I suppose you want some more good copy, eh?”

Spargo glanced at his watch, rose, and picked up his hat. “I’ll tell
you what I want,” he said. “I want to know who John Marbury was. That
would make good copy. Who he was—twenty—twenty-five—forty years ago.
Eh?”

“And you think Mr. Aylmore can tell?” asked Breton.

“Mr. Aylmore,” answered Spargo as they walked towards the door, “is the
only person I have met so far who has admitted that he knew John
Marbury in the—past. But he didn’t tell me—much. Perhaps he’ll tell the
coroner and his jury—more. Now, I’m off Breton—I’ve an appointment.”

And leaving Breton to find his own way out, Spargo hurried away, jumped
into a taxi-cab and speeded to the London and Universal Safe Deposit.
At the corner of its building he found Rathbury awaiting him.

“Well?” said Spargo, as he sprang out: “How is it?”

“It’s all right,” answered Rathbury. “You can be present: I got the
necessary permission. As there are no relations known, there’ll only be
one or two officials and you, and the Safe Deposit people, and myself.
Come on—it’s about time.”

“It sounds,” observed Spargo, “like an exhumation.”

Rathbury laughed. “Well, we’re certainly going to dig up a dead man’s
secrets,” he said. “At least, we may be going to do so. In my opinion,
Mr. Spargo, we’ll find some clue in this leather box.”

Spargo made no answer. They entered the office, to be shown into a room
where were already assembled Mr. Myerst, a gentleman who turned out to
be the chairman of the company, and the officials of whom Rathbury had
spoken. And in another moment Spargo heard the chairman explaining that
the company possessed duplicate keys to all safes, and that the proper
authorization having been received from the proper authorities, those
present would now proceed to the safe recently tenanted by the late Mr.
John Marbury, and take from it the property which he himself had
deposited there, a small leather box, which they would afterwards bring
to that room and cause to be opened in each other’s presence.

It seemed to Spargo that there was an unending unlocking of bolts and
bars before he and his fellow-processionists came to the safe so
recently rented by the late Mr. John Marbury, now undoubtedly deceased.
And at first sight of it, he saw that it was so small an affair that it
seemed ludicrous to imagine that it could contain anything of any
importance. In fact, it looked to be no more than a plain wooden
locker, one amongst many in a small strong room: it reminded Spargo
irresistibly of the locker in which, in his school days, he had kept
his personal belongings and the jam tarts, sausage rolls, and hardbake
smuggled in from the tuck-shop. Marbury’s name had been newly painted
upon it; the paint was scarcely dry. But when the wooden door—the front
door, as it were, of this temple of mystery, had been solemnly opened
by the chairman, a formidable door of steel was revealed, and
expectation still leapt in the bosoms of the beholders.

“The duplicate key, Mr. Myerst, if you please,” commanded the chairman,
“the duplicate key!”

Myerst, who was fully as solemn as his principal, produced a
curious-looking key: the chairman lifted his hand as if he were about
to christen a battleship: the steel door swung slowly back. And there,
in a two-foot square cavity, lay the leather box.

It struck Spargo as they filed back to the secretary’s room that the
procession became more funereal-like than ever. First walked the
chairman, abreast with the high official, who had brought the necessary
authorization from the all-powerful quarter; then came Myerst carrying
the box: followed two other gentlemen, both legal lights, charged with
watching official and police interests; Rathbury and Spargo brought up
the rear. He whispered something of his notions to the detective;
Rathbury nodded a comprehensive understanding.

“Let’s hope we’re going to see—something!” he said.

In the secretary’s room a man waited who touched his forelock
respectfully as the heads of the procession entered. Myerst set the box
on the table: the man made a musical jingle of keys: the other members
of the procession gathered round.

“As we naturally possess no key to this box,” announced the chairman in
grave tones, “it becomes our duty to employ professional assistance in
opening it. Jobson!”

He waved a hand, and the man of the keys stepped forward with alacrity.
He examined the lock of the box with a knowing eye; it was easy to see
that he was anxious to fall upon it. While he considered matters,
Spargo looked at the box. It was pretty much what it had been described
to him as being; a small, square box of old cow-hide, very strongly
made, much worn and tarnished, fitted with a handle projecting from the
lid, and having the appearance of having been hidden away somewhere for
many a long day.

There was a click, a spring: Jobson stepped back.

“That’s it, if you please, sir,” he said.

The chairman motioned to the high official.

“If you would be good enough to open the box, sir,” he said. “Our duty
is now concluded.”

As the high official laid his hand on the lid the other men gathered
round with craning necks and expectant eyes. The lid was lifted:
somebody sighed deeply. And Spargo pushed his own head and eyes nearer.

The box was empty!

Empty, as anything that can be empty is empty! thought Spargo: there
was literally nothing in it. They were all staring into the interior of
a plain, time-worn little receptacle, lined out with old-fashioned
chintz stuff, such as our Mid-Victorian fore-fathers were familiar
with, and containing—nothing.

“God bless my soul!” exclaimed the chairman. “This is—dear me!—why,
there is nothing in the box!”

“That,” remarked the high official, drily, “appears to be obvious.”

The chairman looked at the secretary.

“I understood the box was valuable, Mr. Myerst,” he said, with the
half-injured air of a man who considers himself to have been robbed of
an exceptionally fine treat. “Valuable!”

Myerst coughed.

“I can only repeat what I have already said, Sir Benjamin,” he
answered. “The—er late Mr. Marbury spoke of the deposit as being of
great value to him; he never permitted it out of his hand until he
placed it in the safe. He appeared to regard it as of the greatest
value.”

“But we understand from the evidence of Mr. Criedir, given to the
_Watchman_ newspaper, that it was full of papers and—and other
articles,” said the chairman. “Criedir saw papers in it about an hour
before it was brought here.”

Myerst spread out his hands.

“I can only repeat what I have said, Sir Benjamin,” he answered. “I
know nothing more.”

“But why should a man deposit an empty box?” began the chairman. “I—”

The high official interposed.

“That the box is empty is certain,” he observed. “Did you ever handle
it yourself, Mr. Myerst?”

Myerst smiled in a superior fashion.

“I have already observed, sir, that from the time the deceased entered
this room until the moment he placed the box in the safe which he
rented, the box was never out of his hands,” he replied.

Then there was silence. At last the high official turned to the
chairman.

“Very well,” he said. “We’ve made the enquiry. Rathbury, take the box
away with you and lock it up at the Yard.”

So Spargo went out with Rathbury and the box; and saw excellent, if
mystifying, material for the article which had already become the daily
feature of his paper.




CHAPTER ELEVEN
MR. AYLMORE IS QUESTIONED


It seemed to Spargo as he sat listening to the proceedings at the
adjourned inquest next day that the whole story of what was now
world-famous as the Middle Temple Murder Case was being reiterated
before him for the thousandth time. There was not a detail of the story
with which he had not become familiar to fulness. The first proceeding
before the coroner had been of a merely formal nature; these were
thorough and exhaustive; the representative of the Crown and twelve
good men and true of the City of London were there to hear and to find
out and to arrive at a conclusion as to how the man known as John
Marbury came by his death. And although he knew all about it, Spargo
found himself tabulating the evidence in a professional manner, and
noting how each successive witness contributed, as it were, a chapter
to the story. The story itself ran quite easily, naturally,
consecutively—you could make it in sections. And Spargo, sitting merely
to listen, made them:

1. The Temple porter and Constable Driscoll proved the finding of the
body.

2. The police surgeon testified as to the cause of death—the man had
been struck down from behind by a blow, a terrible blow—from some heavy
instrument, and had died immediately.

3. The police and the mortuary officials proved that when the body was
examined nothing was found in the clothing but the now famous scrap of
grey paper.

4. Rathbury proved that by means of the dead man’s new fashionable
cloth cap, bought at Fiskie’s well-known shop in the West-End, he
traced Marbury to the Anglo-Orient Hotel in the Waterloo District.

5. Mr. and Mrs. Walters gave evidence of the arrival of Marbury at the
Anglo-Orient Hotel, and of his doings while he was in and about there.

6. The purser of the ss. _Wambarino_ proved that Marbury sailed from
Melbourne to Southampton on that ship, excited no remark, behaved
himself like any other well-regulated passenger, and left the
_Wambarino_ at Southampton early in the morning of what was to be the
last day of his life in just the ordinary manner.

7. Mr. Criedir gave evidence of his rencontre with Marbury in the
matter of the stamps.

8. Mr. Myerst told of Marbury’s visit to the Safe Deposit, and further
proved that the box which he placed there proved, on official
examination, to be empty.

9. William Webster re-told the story of his encounter with Marbury in
one of the vestibules of the House of Commons, and of his witnessing
the meeting between him and the gentleman whom he (Webster) now knew to
be Mr. Aylmore, a Member of Parliament.

All this led up to the appearance of Mr. Aylmore, M.P., in the
witness-box. And Spargo knew and felt that it was that appearance for
which the crowded court was waiting. Thanks to his own vivid and
realistic specials in the _Watchman_, everybody there had already
become well and thoroughly acquainted with the mass of evidence
represented by the nine witnesses who had been in the box before Mr.
Aylmore entered it. They were familiar, too, with the facts which Mr.
Aylmore had permitted Spargo to print after the interview at the club,
which Ronald Breton arranged. Why, then, the extraordinary interest
which the Member of Parliament’s appearance aroused? For everybody was
extraordinarily interested; from the Coroner downwards to the last man
who had managed to squeeze himself into the last available inch of the
public gallery, all who were there wanted to hear and see the man who
met Marbury under such dramatic circumstances, and who went to his
hotel with him, hobnobbed with him, gave him advice, walked out of the
hotel with him for a stroll from which Marbury never returned. Spargo
knew well why the interest was so keen—everybody knew that Aylmore was
the only man who could tell the court anything really pertinent about
Marbury; who he was, what he was after; what his life had been.

He looked round the court as the Member of Parliament entered the
witness-box—a tall, handsome, perfectly-groomed man, whose beard was
only slightly tinged with grey, whose figure was as erect as a
well-drilled soldier’s, who carried about him an air of conscious
power. Aylmore’s two daughters sat at a little distance away, opposite
Spargo, with Ronald Breton in attendance upon them; Spargo had
encountered their glance as they entered the court, and they had given
him a friendly nod and smile. He had watched them from time to time; it
was plain to him that they regarded the whole affair as a novel sort of
entertainment; they might have been idlers in some Eastern bazaar,
listening to the unfolding of many tales from the professional
tale-tellers. Now, as their father entered the box, Spargo looked at
them again; he saw nothing more than a little heightening of colour in
their cheeks, a little brightening of their eyes.

“All that they feel,” he thought, “is a bit of extra excitement at the
idea that their father is mixed up in this delightful mystery. Um!
Well—now how much is he mixed up?”

And he turned to the witness-box and from that moment never took his
eyes off the man who now stood in it. For Spargo had ideas about the
witness which he was anxious to develop.

The folk who expected something immediately sensational in Mr.
Aylmore’s evidence were disappointed. Aylmore, having been sworn, and
asked a question or two by the Coroner, requested permission to tell,
in his own way, what he knew of the dead man and of this sad affair;
and having received that permission, he went on in a calm,
unimpassioned manner to repeat precisely what he had told Spargo. It
sounded a very plain, ordinary story. He had known Marbury many years
ago. He had lost sight of him for—oh, quite twenty years. He had met
him accidentally in one of the vestibules of the House of Commons on
the evening preceding the murder. Marbury had asked his advice. Having
no particular duty, and willing to do an old acquaintance a good turn,
he had gone back to the Anglo-Orient Hotel with Marbury, had remained
awhile with him in his room, examining his Australian diamonds, and had
afterwards gone out with him. He had given him the advice he wanted;
they had strolled across Waterloo Bridge; shortly afterwards they had
parted. That was all he knew.

The court, the public, Spargo, everybody there, knew all this already.
It had been in print, under a big headline, in the _Watchman_. Aylmore
had now told it again; having told it, he seemed to consider that his
next step was to leave the box and the court, and after a perfunctory
question or two from the Coroner and the foreman of the jury he made a
motion as if to step down. But Spargo, who had been aware since the
beginning of the enquiry of the presence of a certain eminent counsel
who represented the Treasury, cocked his eye in that gentleman’s
direction, and was not surprised to see him rise in his well-known,
apparently indifferent fashion, fix his monocle in his right eye, and
glance at the tall figure in the witness-box.

“The fun is going to begin,” muttered Spargo.

The Treasury representative looked from Aylmore to the Coroner and made
a jerky bow; from the Coroner to Aylmore and straightened himself. He
looked like a man who is going to ask indifferent questions about the
state of the weather, or how Smith’s wife was last time you heard of
her, or if stocks are likely to rise or fall. But Spargo had heard this
man before, and he knew many signs of his in voice and manner and
glance.

“I want to ask you a few questions, Mr. Aylmore, about your
acquaintanceship with the dead man. It was an acquaintanceship of some
time ago?” began the suave, seemingly careless voice.

“A considerable time ago,” answered Aylmore.

“How long—roughly speaking?”

“I should say from twenty to twenty-two or three years.”

“Never saw him during that time until you met accidentally in the way
you have described to us?”

“Never.”

“Ever heard from him?”

“No.”

“Ever heard of him?”

“No.”

“But when you met, you knew each other at once?”

“Well—almost at once.”

“Almost at once. Then, I take it, you were very well known to each
other twenty or twenty-two years ago?”

“We were—yes, well known to each other.”

“Close friends?”

“I said we were acquaintances.”

“Acquaintances. What was his name when you knew him at that time?”

“His name? It was—Marbury.”

“Marbury—the same name. Where did you know him?”

“I—oh, here in London.”

“What was he?”

“Do you mean—what was his occupation?”

“What was his occupation?”

“I believe he was concerned in financial matters.”

“Concerned in financial matters. Had you dealings with him?”

“Well, yes—on occasions.”

“What was his business address in London?”

“I can’t remember that.”

“What was his private address?”

“That I never knew.”

“Where did you transact your business with him?”

“Well, we met, now and then.”

“Where? What place, office, resort?”

“I can’t remember particular places. Sometimes—in the City.”

“In the City. Where in the City? Mansion House, or Lombard Street, or
St. Paul’s Churchyard, or the Old Bailey, or where?”

“I have recollections of meeting him outside the Stock Exchange.”

“Oh! Was he a member of that institution?”

“Not that I know of.”

“Were you?”

“Certainly not!”

“What were the dealings that you had with him?”

“Financial dealings—small ones.”

“How long did your acquaintanceship with him last—what period did it
extend over?”

“I should say about six months to nine months.”

“No more?”

“Certainly no more.”

“It was quite a slight acquaintanceship, then?”

“Oh, quite!”

“And yet, after losing sight of this merely slight acquaintance for
over twenty years, you, on meeting him, take great interest in him?”

“Well, I was willing to do him a good turn, I was interested in what he
told me the other evening.”

“I see. Now you will not object to my asking you a personal question or
two. You are a public man, and the facts about the lives of public men
are more or less public property. You are represented in this work of
popular reference as coming to this country in 1902, from Argentina,
where you made a considerable fortune. You have told us, however, that
you were in London, acquainted with Marbury, about the years, say 1890
to 1892. Did you then leave England soon after knowing Marbury?”

“I did. I left England in 1891 or 1892—I am not sure which.”

“We are wanting to be very sure about this matter, Mr. Aylmore. We want
to solve the important question—who is, who was John Marbury, and how
did he come by his death? You seem to be the only available person who
knows anything about him. What was your business before you left
England?”

“I was interested in financial affairs.”

“Like Marbury. Where did you carry on your business?”

“In London, of course.”

“At what address?”

For some moments Aylmore had been growing more and more restive. His
brow had flushed; his moustache had begun to twitch. And now he squared
his shoulders and faced his questioner defiantly.

“I resent these questions about my private affairs!” he snapped out.

“Possibly. But I must put them. I repeat my last question.”

“And I refuse to answer it.”

“Then I ask you another. Where did you live in London at the time you
are telling us of, when you knew John Marbury?”

“I refuse to answer that question also!”

The Treasury Counsel sat down and looked at the Coroner.




CHAPTER TWELVE
THE NEW WITNESS


The voice of the Coroner, bland, suave, deprecating, broke the silence.
He was addressing the witness.

“I am sure, Mr. Aylmore,” he said, “there is no wish to trouble you
with unnecessary questions. But we are here to get at the truth of this
matter of John Marbury’s death, and as you are the only witness we have
had who knew him personally—”

Aylmore turned impatiently to the Coroner.

“I have every wish to respect your authority, sir!” he exclaimed. “And
I have told you all that I know of Marbury and of what happened when I
met him the other evening. But I resent being questioned on my private
affairs of twenty years ago—I very much resent it! Any question that is
really pertinent I will answer, but I will not answer questions that
seem to me wholly foreign to the scope of this enquiry.”

The Treasury Counsel rose again. His manner had become of the quietest,
and Spargo again became keenly attentive.

“Perhaps I can put a question or two to Mr. Aylmore which will not
yield him offence,” he remarked drily. He turned once more to the
witness, regarding him as if with interest. “Can you tell us of any
person now living who knew Marbury in London at the time under
discussion—twenty to twenty-two or three years ago?” he asked.

Aylmore shook his head angrily.

“No, I can’t,” he replied.

“And yet you and he must have had several business acquaintances at
that time who knew you both!”

“Possibly—at that time. But when I returned to England my business and
my life lay in different directions to those of that time. I don’t know
of anybody who knew Marbury then—anybody.”

The Counsel turned to a clerk who sat behind him, whispered to him;
Spargo saw the clerk make a sidelong motion of his head towards the
door of the court. The Counsel looked again at the witness.

“One more question. You told the court a little time since that you
parted with Marbury on the evening preceding his death at the end of
Waterloo Bridge—at, I think you said, a quarter to twelve.”

“About that time.”

“And at that place?”

“Yes.”

“That is all I want to ask you, Mr. Aylmore—just now,” said the
Counsel. He turned to the Coroner. “I am going to ask you, sir, at this
point to call a witness who has volunteered certain evidence to the
police authorities this morning. That evidence is of a very important
nature, and I think that this is the stage at which it ought to be
given to you and the jury. If you would be pleased to direct that David
Lyell be called—”

Spargo turned instinctively to the door, having seen the clerk who had
sat behind the Treasury Counsel make his way there. There came into
view, ushered by the clerk, a smart-looking, alert, self-confident
young man, evidently a Scotsman, who, on the name of David Lyell being
called, stepped jauntily and readily into the place which the member of
Parliament just vacated. He took the oath—Scotch fashion—with the same
readiness and turned easily to the Treasury Counsel. And Spargo,
glancing quickly round, saw that the court was breathless with
anticipation, and that its anticipation was that the new witness was
going to tell something which related to the evidence just given by
Aylmore.

“Your name is David Lyell?”

“That is my name, sir.”

“And you reside at 23, Cumbrae Side, Kilmarnock, Scotland?”

“I do.”

“What are you, Mr. Lyell?”

“Traveller, sir, for the firm of Messrs. Stevenson, Robertson & Soutar,
distillers, of Kilmarnock.”

“Your duties take you, I think, over to Paris occasionally?”

“They do—once every six weeks I go to Paris.”

“On the evening of June 21st last were you in London on your way to
Paris?”

“I was.”

“I believe you stayed at De Keyser’s Hotel, at the Blackfriars end of
the Embankment?”

“I did—it’s handy for the continental trains.”

“About half-past eleven, or a little later, that evening, did you go
along the Embankment, on the Temple Gardens side, for a walk?”

“I did, sir. I’m a bad sleeper, and it’s a habit of mine to take a walk
of half an hour or so last thing before I go to bed.”

“How far did you walk?”

“As far as Waterloo Bridge.”

“Always on the Temple side?”

“Just so, sir—straight along on that side.”

“Very good. When you got close to Waterloo Bridge, did you meet anybody
you knew?”

“Yes.”

“Mr. Aylmore, the Member of Parliament.”

Spargo could not avoid a glance at the two sisters. The elder’s head
was averted; the younger was staring at the witness steadily. And
Breton was nervously tapping his fingers on the crown of his shining
silk hat.

“Mr. Aylmore, the Member of Parliament,” repeated the Counsel’s suave,
clear tones. “Oh! And how did you come to recognize Mr. Aylmore, Member
of Parliament?”

“Well, sir, in this way. At home, I’m the secretary of our Liberal Ward
Club, and last year we had a demonstration, and it fell to me to
arrange with the principal speakers. I got Mr. Aylmore to come and
speak, and naturally I met him several times, in London and in
Scotland.”

“So that you knew him quite well?”

“Oh yes, sir.”

“Do you see him now, Mr. Lyell?”

Lyell smiled and half turned in the box.

“Why, of course!” he answered. “There is Mr. Aylmore.”

“There is Mr. Aylmore. Very good. Now we go on. You met Mr. Aylmore
close to Waterloo Bridge? How close?”

“Well, sir, to be exact, Mr. Aylmore came down the steps from the
bridge on to the Embankment.”

“Alone?”

“No.”

“Who was with him?”

“A man, sir.”

“Did you know the man?”

“No. But seeing who he was with. I took a good look at him. I haven’t
forgotten his face.”

“You haven’t forgotten his face. Mr. Lyell—has anything recalled that
face to you within this last day or two?”

“Yes, sir, indeed!”

“What?”

“The picture of the man they say was murdered—John Marbury.”

“You’re sure of that?”

“I’m as certain, sir, as that my name’s what it is.”

“It is your belief that Mr. Aylmore, when you met him, was accompanied
by the man who, according to the photographs, was John Marbury?”

“It is, sir!”

“Very well. Now, having seen Mr. Aylmore and his companion, what did
you do?”

“Oh, I just turned and walked after them.”

“You walked after them? They were going eastward, then?”

“They were walking by the way I’d come.”

“You followed them eastward?”

“I did—I was going back to the hotel, you see.”

“What were they doing?”

“Talking uncommonly earnestly, sir.”

“How far did you follow them?”

“I followed them until they came to the Embankment lodge of Middle
Temple Lane, sir.”

“And then?”

“Why, sir, they turned in there, and I went straight on to De Keyser’s,
and to my bed.”

There was a deeper silence in court at that moment than at any other
period of the long day, and it grew still deeper when the quiet, keen
voice put the next question.

“You swear on your oath that you saw Mr. Aylmore take his companion
into the Temple by the Embankment entrance of Middle Temple Lane on the
occasion in question?”

“I do! I could swear no other, sir.”

“Can you tell us, as near as possible, what time that would be?”

“Yes. It was, to a minute or so, about five minutes past twelve.”

The Treasury Counsel nodded to the Coroner, and the Coroner, after a
whispered conference with the foreman of the jury, looked at the
witness.

“You have only just given this information to the police, I
understand?” he said.

“Yes, sir. I have been in Paris, and in Amiens, and I only returned by
this morning’s boat. As soon as I had read all the news in the
papers—the English papers—and seen the dead man’s photographs I
determined to tell the police what I knew, and I went to New Scotland
Yard as soon as I got to London this morning.”

Nobody else wanted to ask Mr. David Lyell any questions, and he stepped
down. And Mr. Aylmore suddenly came forward again, seeking the
Coroner’s attention.

“May I be allowed to make an explanation, sir?” he began. “I—”

But the Treasury Counsel was on his feet, this time stern and
implacable. “I would point out, sir, that you have had Mr. Aylmore in
the box, and that he was not then at all ready to give explanations, or
even to answer questions,” he said. “And before you allow him to make
any explanation now, I ask you to hear another witness whom I wish to
interpose at this stage. That witness is——”

Mr. Aylmore turned almost angrily to the Coroner.

“After the evidence of the last witness, I think I have a right to be
heard at once!” he said with emphasis. “As matters stand at present, it
looks as if I had trifled, sir, with you and the jury, whereas if I am
allowed to make an explanation—”

“I must respectfully ask that before Mr. Aylmore is allowed to make any
explanation, the witness I have referred to is heard,” said the
Treasury Counsel sternly. “There are weighty reasons.”

“I am afraid you must wait a little, Mr. Aylmore, if you wish to give
an explanation,” said the Coroner. He turned to the Counsel. “Who is
this other witness?” he asked.

Aylmore stepped back. And Spargo noticed that the younger of his two
daughters was staring at him with an anxious expression. There was no
distrust of her father in her face; she was anxious. She, too, slowly
turned to the next witness. This man was the porter of the Embankment
lodge of Middle Temple Lane. The Treasury Counsel put a straight
question to him at once.

“You see that gentleman,” he said, pointing to Aylmore. “Do you know
him as an inmate of the Temple?”

The man stared at Aylmore, evidently confused.

“Why, certainly, sir!” he answered. “Quite well, sir.”

“Very good. And now—what name do you know him by?”

The man grew evidently more bewildered.

“Name, sir. Why, Mr. Anderson, sir!” he replied. “Mr. Anderson!”




CHAPTER THIRTEEN
UNDER SUSPICION


A distinct, uncontrollable murmur of surprise ran round the packed
court as this man in the witness-box gave this answer. It signified
many things—that there were people present who had expected some such
dramatic development; that there were others present who had not; that
the answer itself was only a prelude to further developments. And
Spargo, looking narrowly about him, saw that the answer had aroused
different feelings in Aylmore’s two daughters. The elder one had
dropped her face until it was quite hidden; the younger was sitting
bolt upright, staring at her father in utter and genuine bewilderment.
And for the first time, Aylmore made no response to her.

But the course of things was going steadily forward. There was no
stopping the Treasury Counsel now; he was going to get at some truth in
his own merciless fashion. He had exchanged one glance with the
Coroner, had whispered a word to the solicitor who sat close by him,
and now he turned again to the witness.

“So you know that gentleman—make sure now—as Mr. Anderson, an inmate of
the Temple?”

“Yes, sir.”

“You don’t know him by any other name?”

“No, sir, I don’t.”

“How long have you known him by that name?”

“I should say two or three years, sir.”

“See him go in and out regularly?”

“No, sir—not regularly.”

“How often, then?”

“Now and then, sir—perhaps once a week.”

“Tell us what you know of Mr. Anderson’s goings-in-and-out.”

“Well, sir, I might see him two nights running; then I mightn’t see him
again for perhaps a week or two. Irregular, as you might say, sir.”

“You say ‘nights.’ Do I understand that you never see Mr. Anderson
except at night?”

“Yes, sir. I’ve never seen him except at night. Always about the same
time, sir.”

“What time?”

“Just about midnight, sir.”

“Very well. Do you remember the midnight of June 21st-22nd?”

“I do, sir.”

“Did you see Mr. Anderson enter then?”

“Yes, sir, just after twelve.”

“Was he alone?”

“No, sir; there was another gentleman with him.”

“Remember anything about that other gentleman?”

“Nothing, sir, except that I noticed as they walked through, that the
other gentleman had grey clothes on.”

“Had grey clothes on. You didn’t see his face?”

“Not to remember it, sir. I don’t remember anything but what I’ve told
you, sir.”

“That is that the other gentleman wore a grey suit. Where did Mr.
Anderson and this gentleman in the grey suit go when they’d passed
through?”

“Straight up the Lane, sir.”

“Do you know where Mr. Anderson’s rooms in the Temple are?”

“Not exactly, sir, but I understood in Fountain Court.”

“Now, on that night in question, did Mr. Anderson leave again by your
lodge?”

“No, sir.”

“You heard of the discovery of the body of a dead man in Middle Temple
Lane next morning?”

“I did, sir.”

“Did you connect that man with the gentleman in the grey suit?”

“No, sir, I didn’t. It never occurred to me. A lot of the gentlemen who
live in the Temple bring friends in late of nights; I never gave the
matter any particular thought.”

“Never mentioned it to anybody until now, when you were sent for to
come here?”

“No, sir, never, to anybody.”

“And you have never known the gentleman standing there as anybody but
Mr. Anderson?”

“No, sir, never heard any other name but Anderson.”

The Coroner glanced at the Counsel.

“I think this may be a convenient opportunity for Mr. Aylmore to give
the explanation he offered a few minutes ago,” he said. “Do you suggest
anything?”

“I suggest, sir, that if Mr. Aylmore desires to give any explanation he
should return to the witness-box and submit himself to examination
again on his oath,” replied the Counsel. “The matter is in your hands.”

The Coroner turned to Aylmore.

“Do you object to that?” he asked.

Aylmore stepped boldly forward and into the box.

“I object to nothing,” he said in clear tones, “except to being asked
to reply to questions about matters of the past which have not and
cannot have anything to do with this case. Ask me what questions you
like, arising out of the evidence of the last two witnesses, and I will
answer them so far as I see myself justified in doing so. Ask me
questions about matters of twenty years ago, and I shall answer them or
not as I see fit. And I may as well say that I will take all the
consequences of my silence or my speech.”

The Treasury Counsel rose again.

“Very well, Mr. Aylmore,” he said. “I will put certain questions to
you. You heard the evidence of David Lyell?”

“I did.”

“Was that quite true as regards yourself?”

“Quite true—absolutely true.”

“And you heard that of the last witness. Was that also true!”

“Equally true.”

“Then you admit that the evidence you gave this morning, before these
witnesses came on the scene, was not true?”

“No, I do not! Most emphatically I do not. It was true.”

“True? You told me, on oath, that you parted from John Marbury on
Waterloo Bridge!”

“Pardon me, I said nothing of the sort. I said that from the
Anglo-Orient Hotel we strolled across Waterloo Bridge, and that shortly
afterwards we parted—I did not say where we parted. I see there is a
shorthand writer here who is taking everything down—ask him if that is
not exactly what I said?”

A reference to the stenographer proved Aylmore to be right, and the
Treasury Counsel showed plain annoyance.

“Well, at any rate, you so phrased your answer that nine persons out of
ten would have understood that you parted from Marbury in the open
streets after crossing Waterloo Bridge,” he said. “Now—?”

Aylmore smiled.

“I am not responsible for the understanding of nine people out of ten
any more than I am for your understanding,” he said, with a sneer. “I
said what I now repeat—Marbury and I walked across Waterloo Bridge, and
shortly afterwards we parted. I told you the truth.”

“Indeed! Perhaps you will continue to tell us the truth. Since you have
admitted that the evidence of the last two witnesses is absolutely
correct, perhaps you will tell us exactly where you and Marbury did
part?”

“I will—willingly. We parted at the door of my chambers in Fountain
Court.”

“Then—to reiterate—it was you who took Marbury into the Temple that
night?”

“It was certainly I who took Marbury into the Temple that night.”

There was another murmur amongst the crowded benches. Here at any rate
was fact—solid, substantial fact. And Spargo began to see a possible
course of events which he had not anticipated.

“That is a candid admission, Mr. Aylmore. I suppose you see a certain
danger to yourself in making it.”

“I need not say whether I do or I do not. I have made it.”

“Very good. Why did you not make it before?”

“For my own reasons. I told you as much as I considered necessary for
the purpose of this enquiry. I have virtually altered nothing now. I
asked to be allowed to make a statement, to give an explanation, as
soon as Mr. Lyell had left this box: I was not allowed to do so. I am
willing to make it now.”

“Make it then.”

“It is simply this,” said Aylmore, turning to the Coroner. “I have
found it convenient, during the past three years, to rent a simple set
of chambers in the Temple, where I could occasionally—very
occasionally, as a rule—go late at night. I also found it convenient,
for my own reasons—with which, I think, no one has anything to do—to
rent those chambers under the name of Mr. Anderson. It was to my
chambers that Marbury accompanied me for a few moments on the midnight
with which we are dealing. He was not in them more than five minutes at
the very outside: I parted from him at my outer door, and I understood
that he would leave the Temple by the way we had entered and would
drive or walk straight back to his hotel. That is the whole truth. I
wish to add that I ought perhaps to have told all this at first. I had
reasons for not doing so. I told what I considered necessary, that I
parted from Marbury, leaving him well and alive, soon after midnight.”

“What reasons were or are they which prevented you from telling all
this at first?” asked the Treasury Counsel.

“Reasons which are private to me.”

“Will you tell them to the court?”

“No!”

“Then will you tell us why Marbury went with you to the chambers in
Fountain Court which you tenant under the name of Anderson?”

“Yes. To fetch a document which I had in my keeping, and had kept for
him for twenty years or more.”

“A document of importance?”

“Of very great importance.”

“He would have it on him when he was—as we believe he was—murdered and
robbed?”

“He had it on him when he left me.”

“Will you tell us what it was?”

“Certainly not!”

“In fact, you won’t tell us any more than you choose to tell?”

“I have told you all I can tell of the events of that night.”

“Then I am going to ask you a very pertinent question. Is it not a fact
that you know a great deal more about John Marbury than you have told
this court?”

“That I shall not answer.”

“Is it not a fact that you could, if you would, tell this court more
about John Marbury and your acquaintanceship with him twenty years
ago?”

“I also decline to answer that.”

The Treasury Counsel made a little movement of his shoulders and turned
to the Coroner.

“I should suggest, sir, that you adjourn this enquiry,” he said
quietly.

“For a week,” assented the Coroner, turning to the jury.

The crowd surged out of the court, chattering, murmuring, exclaiming—
spectators, witnesses, jurymen, reporters, legal folk, police folk, all
mixed up together. And Spargo, elbowing his own way out, and busily
reckoning up the value of the new complexions put on everything by the
day’s work, suddenly felt a hand laid on his arm. Turning he found
himself gazing at Jessie Aylmore.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN
THE SILVER TICKET


With a sudden instinct of protection, Spargo quickly drew the girl
aside from the struggling crowd, and within a moment had led her into a
quiet by-street. He looked down at her as she stood recovering her
breath.

“Yes?” he said quietly.

Jessie Aylmore looked up at him, smiling faintly.

“I want to speak to you,” she said. “I must speak to you.”

“Yes,” said Spargo. “But—the others? Your sister?—Breton?”

“I left them on purpose to speak to you,” she answered. “They knew I
did. I am well accustomed to looking after myself.”

Spargo moved down the by-street, motioning his companion to move with
him.

“Tea,” he said, “is what you want. I know a queer, old-fashioned place
close by here where you can get the best China tea in London. Come and
have some.”

Jessie Aylmore smiled and followed her guide obediently. And Spargo
said nothing, marching stolidly along with his thumbs in his waistcoat
pockets, his fingers playing soundless tunes outside, until he had
installed himself and his companion in a quiet nook in the old
tea-house he had told her of, and had given an order for tea and hot
tea-cakes to a waitress who evidently knew him. Then he turned to her.

“You want,” he said, “to talk to me about your father.”

“Yes,” she answered. “I do.”

“Why?” asked Spargo.

The girl gave him a searching look.

“Ronald Breton says you’re the man who’s written all those special
articles in the _Watchman_ about the Marbury case,” she answered. “Are
you?”

“I am,” said Spargo.

“Then you’re a man of great influence,” she went on. “You can stir the
public mind. Mr. Spargo—what are you going to write about my father and
today’s proceedings?”

Spargo signed to her to pour out the tea which had just arrived. He
seized, without ceremony, upon a piece of the hot buttered tea-cake,
and bit a great lump out of it.

“Frankly,” he mumbled, speaking with his mouth full, “frankly, I don’t
know. I don’t know—yet. But I’ll tell you this—it’s best to be candid—I
shouldn’t allow myself to be prejudiced or biassed in making up my
conclusions by anything that you may say to me. Understand?”

Jessie Aylmore took a sudden liking to Spargo because of the
unconventionality and brusqueness of his manners.

“I’m not wanting to prejudice or bias you,” she said. “All I want is
that you should be very sure before you say—anything.”

“I’ll be sure,” said Spargo. “Don’t bother. Is the tea all right?”

“Beautiful!” she answered, with a smile that made Spargo look at her
again. “Delightful! Mr. Spargo, tell me!—what did you think about—about
what has just happened?”

Spargo, regardless of the fact that his fingers were liberally
ornamented with butter, lifted a hand and rubbed his always untidy
hair. Then he ate more tea-cake and gulped more tea.

“Look here!” he said suddenly. “I’m no great hand at talking. I can
write pretty decently when I’ve a good story to tell, but I don’t talk
an awful lot, because I never can express what I mean unless I’ve got a
pen in my hand. Frankly, I find it hard to tell you what I think. When
I write my article this evening, I’ll get all these things marshalled
in proper form, and I shall write clearly about ’em. But I’ll tell you
one thing I do think—I wish your father had made a clean breast of
things to me at first, when he gave me that interview, or had told
everything when he first went into that box.”

“Why?” she asked.

“Because he’s now set up an atmosphere of doubt and suspicion around
himself. People’ll think—Heaven knows what they’ll think! They already
know that he knows more about Marbury than he’ll tell, that—”

“But does he?” she interrupted quickly. “Do you think he does?”

“Yes!” replied Spargo, with emphasis. “I do. A lot more! If he had only
been explicit at first—however, he wasn’t. Now it’s done. As things
stand—look here, does it strike you that your father is in a very
serious position?”

“Serious?” she exclaimed.

“Dangerous! Here’s the fact—he’s admitted that he took Marbury to his
rooms in the Temple that midnight. Well, next morning Marbury’s found
robbed and murdered in an entry, not fifty yards off!”

“Does anybody suppose that my father would murder him for the sake of
robbing him of whatever he had on him?” she laughed scornfully. “My
father is a very wealthy man, Mr. Spargo.”

“May be,” answered Spargo. “But millionaires have been known to murder
men who held secrets.”

“Secrets!” she exclaimed.

“Have some more tea,” said Spargo, nodding at the teapot. “Look
here—this way it is. The theory that people—some people—will build up
(I won’t say that it hasn’t suggested itself to me) is this:—There’s
some mystery about the relationship, acquaintanceship, connection, call
it what you like, of your father and Marbury twenty odd years ago. Must
be. There’s some mystery about your father’s life, twenty odd years
ago. Must be—or else he’d have answered those questions. Very well.
‘Ha, ha!’ says the general public. ‘Now we have it!’ ‘Marbury,’ says
the general public, ‘was a man who had a hold on Aylmore. He turned up.
Aylmore trapped him into the Temple, killed him to preserve his own
secret, and robbed him of all he had on him as a blind.’ Eh?”

“You think—people will say that?” she exclaimed.

“Cock-sure! They’re saying it. Heard half a dozen of ’em say it, in
more or less elegant fashion as I came out of that court. Of course,
they’ll say it. Why, what else could they say?”

For a moment Jessie Aylmore sat looking silently into her tea-cup. Then
she turned her eyes on Spargo, who immediately manifested a new
interest in what remained of the tea-cakes.

“Is that what you’re going to say in your article tonight?” she asked,
quietly.

“No!” replied Spargo, promptly. “It isn’t. I’m going to sit on the
fence tonight. Besides, the case is _sub judice_. All I’m going to do
is to tell, in my way, what took place at the inquest.”

The girl impulsively put her hand across the table and laid it on
Spargo’s big fist.

“Is it what you think?” she asked in a low voice.

“Honour bright, no!” exclaimed Spargo. “It isn’t—it isn’t! I don’t
think it. I think there’s a most extraordinary mystery at the bottom of
Marbury’s death, and I think your father knows an enormous lot about
Marbury that he won’t tell, but I’m certain sure that he neither killed
Marbury nor knows anything whatever about his death. And as I’m out to
clear this mystery up, and mean to do it, nothing’ll make me more glad
than to clear your father. I say, do have some more tea-cake? We’ll
have fresh ones—and fresh tea.”

“No, thank you,” she said smiling. “And thank you for what you’ve just
said. I’m going now, Mr. Spargo. You’ve done me good.”

“Oh, rot!” exclaimed Spargo. “Nothing—nothing! I’ve just told you what
I’m thinking. You must go?…”

He saw her into a taxi-cab presently, and when she had gone stood
vacantly staring after the cab until a hand clapped him smartly on the
shoulder. Turning, he found Rathbury grinning at him.

“All right, Mr. Spargo, I saw you!” he said. “Well, it’s a pleasant
change to squire young ladies after being all day in that court. Look
here, are you going to start your writing just now?”

“I’m not going to start my writing as you call it, until after I’ve
dined at seven o’clock and given myself time to digest my modest
dinner,” answered Spargo. “What is it?”

“Come back with me and have another look at that blessed leather box,”
said Rathbury. “I’ve got it in my room, and I’d like to examine it for
myself. Come on!”

“The thing’s empty,” said Spargo.

“There might be a false bottom in it,” remarked Rathbury. “One never
knows. Here, jump into this!”

He pushed Spargo into a passing taxi-cab, and following, bade the
driver go straight to the Yard. Arrived there, he locked Spargo and
himself into the drab-visaged room in which the journalist had seen him
before.

“What d’ye think of today’s doings, Spargo?” he asked, as he proceeded
to unlock a cupboard.

“I think,” said Spargo, “that some of you fellows must have had your
ears set to tingling.”

“That’s so,” assented Rathbury. “Of course, the next thing’ll be to
find out all about the Mr. Aylmore of twenty years since. When a man
won’t tell you where he lived twenty years ago, what he was exactly
doing, what his precise relationship with another man was—why, then,
you’ve just got to find out, eh? Oh, some of our fellows are at work on
the life history of Stephen Aylmore, Esq., M.P., already—you bet! Well,
now, Spargo, here’s the famous box.”

The detective brought the old leather case out of the cupboard in which
he had been searching, and placed it on his desk. Spargo threw back the
lid and looked inside, measuring the inner capacity against the
exterior lines.

“No false bottom in that, Rathbury,” he said. “There’s just the outer
leather case, and the inner lining, of this old bed-hanging stuff, and
that’s all. There’s no room for any false bottom or anything of that
sort, d’you see?”

Rathbury also sized up the box’s capacity.

“Looks like it,” he said disappointedly. “Well, what about the lid,
then? I remember there was an old box like this in my grandmother’s
farmhouse, where I was reared—there was a pocket in the lid. Let’s see
if there’s anything of the sort here?”

He threw the lid back and began to poke about the lining of it with the
tips of his fingers, and presently he turned to his companion with a
sharp exclamation.

“By George, Spargo!” he said. “I don’t know about any pocket, but
there’s something under this lining. Feels like—here, you feel.
There—and there.”

Spargo put a finger on the places indicated.

“Yes, that’s so,” he agreed. “Feels like two cards—a large and a small
one. And the small one’s harder than the other. Better cut that lining
out, Rathbury.”

“That,” remarked Rathbury, producing a pen-knife, “is just what I’m
going to do. We’ll cut along this seam.”

He ripped the lining carefully open along the upper part of the lining
of the lid, and looking into the pocket thus made, drew out two objects
which he dropped on his blotting pad.

“A child’s photograph,” he said, glancing at one of them. “But what on
earth is that?”

The object to which he pointed was a small, oblong piece of thin,
much-worn silver, about the size of a railway ticket. On one side of it
was what seemed to be a heraldic device or coat-of-arms, almost
obliterated by rubbing; on the other, similarly worn down by friction,
was the figure of a horse.

“That’s a curious object,” remarked Spargo, picking it up. “I never saw
anything like that before. What can it be?”

“Don’t know—I never saw anything of the sort either,” said Rathbury.
“Some old token, I should say. Now this photo. Ah—you see, the
photographer’s name and address have been torn away or broken
off—there’s nothing left but just two letters of what’s apparently been
the name of the town—see. Er—that’s all there is. Portrait of a baby,
eh?”

Spargo gave, what might have been called in anybody else but him, a
casual glance at the baby’s portrait. He picked up the silver ticket
again and turned it over and over.

“Look here, Rathbury,” he said. “Let me take this silver thing. I know
where I can find out what it is. At least, I think I do.”

“All right,” agreed the detective, “but take the greatest care of it,
and don’t tell a soul that we found it in this box, you know. No
connection with the Marbury case, Spargo, remember.”

“Oh, all right,” said Spargo. “Trust me.”

He put the silver ticket in his pocket, and went back to the office,
wondering about this singular find. And when he had written his article
that evening, and seen a proof of it, Spargo went into Fleet Street
intent on seeking peculiar information.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN
MARKET MILCASTER


The haunt of well-informed men which Spargo had in view when he turned
out of the _Watchman_ office lay well hidden from ordinary sight and
knowledge in one of those Fleet Street courts the like of which is not
elsewhere in the world. Only certain folk knew of it. It was, of
course, a club; otherwise it would not have been what it was. It is the
simplest thing in life, in England, at any rate, to form a club of
congenial spirits. You get so many of your choice friends and
acquaintances to gather round you; you register yourselves under a name
of your own choosing; you take a house and furnish it according to your
means and your taste: you comply with the very easy letter of the law,
and there you are. Keep within that easy letter, and you can do what
you please on your own premises. It is much more agreeable to have a
small paradise of your own of this description than to lounge about
Fleet Street bars.

The particular club to which Spargo bent his steps was called the
Octoneumenoi. Who evolved this extraordinary combination of Latin and
Greek was a dark mystery: there it was, however, on a tiny brass plate
you once reached the portals. The portals were gained by devious ways.
You turned out of Fleet Street by an alley so narrow that it seemed as
if you might suddenly find yourself squeezed between the ancient walls.
Then you suddenly dived down another alley and found yourself in a
small court, with high walls around you and a smell of printer’s ink in
your nose and a whirring of printing presses in your ears. You made
another dive into a dark entry, much encumbered by bales of paper,
crates of printing material, jars of printing ink; after falling over a
few of these you struck an ancient flight of stairs and went up past
various landings, always travelling in a state of gloom and fear. After
a lot of twisting and turning you came to the very top of the house and
found it heavily curtained off. You lifted a curtain and found yourself
in a small entresol, somewhat artistically painted—the whole and sole
work of an artistic member who came one day with a formidable array of
lumber and paint-pots and worked his will on the ancient wood. Then you
saw the brass plate and its fearful name, and beneath it the formal
legal notice that this club was duly registered and so on, and if you
were a member you went in, and if you weren’t a member you tinkled an
electric bell and asked to see a member—if you knew one.

Spargo was not a member, but he knew many members, and he tinkled the
bell, and asked the boy who answered it for Mr. Starkey. Mr. Starkey, a
young gentleman with the biceps of a prize-fighter and a head of curly
hair that would have done credit to Antinous, came forth in due course
and shook Spargo by the hand until his teeth rattled.

“Had we known you were coming,” said Mr. Starkey, “we’d have had a
brass band on the stairs.”

“I want to come in,” remarked Spargo.

“Sure!” said Mr. Starkey. “That’s what you’ve come for.”

“Well, stand out of the way, then, and let’s get in,” said Spargo.
“Look here,” he continued when they had penetrated into a small
vestibule, “doesn’t old Crowfoot turn in here about this time every
night?”

“Every night as true as the clock, my son Spargo, Crowfoot puts his
nose in at precisely eleven, having by that time finished that daily
column wherein he informs a section of the populace as to the prospects
of their spotting a winner tomorrow,” answered Mr. Starkey. “It’s five
minutes to his hour now. Come in and drink till he comes. Want him?”

“A word with him,” answered Spargo. “A mere word—or two.”

He followed Starkey into a room which was so filled with smoke and
sound that for a moment it was impossible to either see or hear. But
the smoke was gradually making itself into a canopy, and beneath the
canopy Spargo made out various groups of men of all ages, sitting
around small tables, smoking and drinking, and all talking as if the
great object of their lives was to get as many words as possible out of
their mouths in the shortest possible time. In the further corner was a
small bar; Starkey pulled Spargo up to it.

“Name it, my son,” commanded Starkey. “Try the Octoneumenoi very extra
special. Two of ’em, Dick. Come to beg to be a member, Spargo?”

“I’ll think about being a member of this ante-room of the infernal
regions when you start a ventilating fan and provide members with a
route-map of the way from Fleet Street,” answered Spargo, taking his
glass. “Phew!—what an atmosphere!”

“We’re considering a ventilating fan,” said Starkey. “I’m on the house
committee now, and I brought that very matter up at our last meeting.
But Templeson, of the _Bulletin_—you know Templeson—he says what we
want is a wine-cooler to stand under that sideboard—says no club is
proper without a wine-cooler, and that he knows a chap—second-hand
dealer, don’t you know—what has a beauty to dispose of in old Sheffield
plate. Now, if you were on our house committee, Spargo, old man, would
you go in for the wine-cooler or the ventilating fan? You see—”

“There is Crowfoot,” said Spargo. “Shout him over here, Starkey, before
anybody else collars him.”

Through the door by which Spargo had entered a few minutes previously
came a man who stood for a moment blinking at the smoke and the lights.
He was a tall, elderly man with a figure and bearing of a soldier; a
big, sweeping moustache stood well out against a square-cut jaw and
beneath a prominent nose; a pair of keen blue eyes looked out from
beneath a tousled mass of crinkled hair. He wore neither hat nor cap;
his attire was a carelessly put on Norfolk suit of brown tweed; he
looked half-unkempt, half-groomed. But knotted at the collar of his
flannel shirt were the colours of one of the most famous and exclusive
cricket clubs in the world, and everybody knew that in his day their
wearer had been a mighty figure in the public eye.

“Hi, Crowfoot!” shouted Starkey above the din and babel. “Crowfoot,
Crowfoot! Come over here, there’s a chap dying to see you!”

“Yes, that’s the way to get him, isn’t it?” said Spargo. “Here, I’ll
get him myself.”

He went across the room and accosted the old sporting journalist.

“I want a quiet word with you,” he said. “This place is like a
pandemonium.”

Crowfoot led the way into a side alcove and ordered a drink.

“Always is, this time,” he said, yawning. “But it’s companionable. What
is it, Spargo?”

Spargo took a pull at the glass which he had carried with him. “I
should say,” he said, “that you know as much about sporting matters as
any man writing about ’em?”

“Well, I think you might say it with truth,” answered Crowfoot.

“And old sporting matters?” said Spargo.

“Yes, and old sporting matters,” replied the other with a sudden flash
of the eye. “Not that they greatly interest the modern generation, you
know.”

“Well, there’s something that’s interesting me greatly just now,
anyway,” said Spargo. “And I believe it’s got to do with old sporting
affairs. And I came to you for information about it, believing you to
be the only man I know of that could tell anything.”

“Yes—what is it?” asked Crowfoot.

Spargo drew out an envelope, and took from it the carefully-wrapped-up
silver ticket. He took off the wrappings and laid the ticket on
Crowfoot’s outstretched palm.

“Can you tell me what that is?” he asked.

Another sudden flash came into the old sportsman’s eyes—he eagerly
turned the silver ticket over.

“God bless my soul!” he exclaimed. “Where did you get this?”

“Never mind, just now,” replied Spargo. “You know what it is?”

“Certainly I know what it is! But—Gad! I’ve not seen one of these
things for Lord knows how many years. It makes me feel something like a
young ’un again!” said Crowfoot. “Quite a young ’un!”

“But what is it?” asked Spargo.

Crowfoot turned the ticket over, showing the side on which the heraldic
device was almost worn away.

“It’s one of the original silver stand tickets of the old racecourse at
Market Milcaster,” answered Crowfoot. “That’s what it is. One of the
old original silver stand tickets. There are the arms of Market
Milcaster, you see, nearly worn away by much rubbing. There, on the
obverse, is the figure of a running horse. Oh, yes, that’s what it is!
Bless me!—most interesting.”

“Where’s Market Milcaster?” enquired Spargo. “Don’t know it.”

“Market Milcaster,” replied Crowfoot, still turning the silver ticket
over and over, “is what the topographers call a decayed town in
Elmshire. It has steadily decayed since the river that led to it got
gradually silted up. There used to be a famous race-meeting there in
June every year. It’s nearly forty years since that meeting fell
through. I went to it often when I was a lad—often!”

“And you say that’s a ticket for the stand?” asked Spargo.

“This is one of fifty silver tickets, or passes, or whatever you like
to call ’em, which were given by the race committee to fifty burgesses
of the town,” answered Crowfoot. “It was, I remember, considered a
great privilege to possess a silver ticket. It admitted its
possessor—for life, mind you!—to the stand, the paddocks, the ring,
anywhere. It also gave him a place at the annual race-dinner. Where on
earth did you get this, Spargo?”

Spargo took the ticket and carefully re-wrapped it, this time putting
it in his purse.

“I’m awfully obliged to you, Crowfoot,” he said, “The fact is, I can’t
tell you where I got it just now, but I’ll promise you that I will tell
you, and all about it, too, as soon as my tongue’s free to do so.”

“Some mystery, eh?” suggested Crowfoot.

“Considerable,” answered Spargo. “Don’t mention to anyone that I showed
it to you. You shall know everything eventually.”

“Oh, all right, my boy, all right!” said Crowfoot. “Odd how things turn
up, isn’t it? Now, I’ll wager anything that there aren’t half a dozen
of these old things outside Market Milcaster itself. As I said, there
were only fifty, and they were all in possession of burgesses. They
were so much thought of that they were taken great care of. I’ve been
in Market Milcaster myself since the races were given up, and I’ve seen
these tickets carefully framed and hung over mantelpieces—oh, yes!”

Spargo caught at a notion.

“How do you get to Market Milcaster?” he asked.

“Paddington,” replied Crowfoot. “It’s a goodish way.”

“I wonder,” said Spargo, “if there’s any old sporting man there who
could remember—things. Anything about this ticket, for instance?”

“Old sporting man!” exclaimed Crowfoot. “Egad!—but no, he must be
dead—anyhow, if he isn’t dead, he must be a veritable patriarch. Old
Ben Quarterpage, he was an auctioneer in the town, and a rare
sportsman.”

“I may go down there,” said Spargo. “I’ll see if he’s alive.”

“Then, if you do go down,” suggested Crowfoot, “go to the old ‘Yellow
Dragon’ in the High Street, a fine old place. Quarterpage’s place of
business and his private house were exactly opposite the ‘Dragon.’ But
I’m afraid you’ll find him dead—it’s five and twenty years since I was
in Market Milcaster, and he was an old bird then. Let’s see, now. If
Old Ben Quarterpage is alive, Spargo, he’ll be ninety years of age!”

“Well, I’ve known men of ninety who were spry enough, even in my bit of
experience,” said Spargo. “I know one—now—my own grandfather. Well, the
best of thanks, Crowfoot, and I’ll tell you all about it some day.”

“Have another drink?” suggested Crowfoot.

But Spargo excused himself. He was going back to the office, he said;
he still had something to do. And he got himself away from the
Octoneumenoi, in spite of Starkey, who wished to start a general debate
on the wisest way of expending the club’s ready money balance, and went
back to the _Watchman_, and there he sought the presence of the editor,
and in spite of the fact that it was the busiest hour of the night, saw
him and remained closeted with him for the extraordinary space of ten
minutes. And after that Spargo went home and fell into bed.

But next morning, bright and early, he was on the departure platform at
Paddington, suit-case in hand, and ticket in pocket for Market
Milcaster, and in the course of that afternoon he found himself in an
old-fashioned bedroom looking out on Market Milcaster High Street. And
there, right opposite him, he saw an ancient house, old brick,
ivy-covered, with an office at its side, over the door of which was the
name, _Benjamin Quarterpage_.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN
THE “YELLOW DRAGON”


Spargo, changing his clothes, washing away the dust of his journey, in
that old-fashioned lavender-scented bedroom, busied his mind in further
speculations on his plan of campaign in Market Milcaster. He had no
particularly clear plan. The one thing he was certain of was that in
the old leather box which the man whom he knew as John Marbury had
deposited with the London and Universal Safe Deposit Company, he and
Rathbury had discovered one of the old silver tickets of Market
Milcaster racecourse, and that he, Spargo, had come to Market
Milcaster, with the full approval of his editor, in an endeavour to
trace it. How was he going to set about this difficult task?

“The first thing,” said Spargo to himself as he tied a new tie, “is to
have a look round. That’ll be no long job.”

For he had already seen as he approached the town, and as he drove from
the station to the “Yellow Dragon” Hotel, that Market Milcaster was a
very small place. It chiefly consisted of one long, wide
thoroughfare—the High Street—with smaller streets leading from it on
either side. In the High Street seemed to be everything that the town
could show—the ancient parish church, the town hall, the market cross,
the principal houses and shops, the bridge, beneath which ran the river
whereon ships had once come up to the town before its mouth, four miles
away, became impassably silted up. It was a bright, clean, little town,
but there were few signs of trade in it, and Spargo had been quick to
notice that in the “Yellow Dragon,” a big, rambling old hostelry,
reminiscent of the old coaching days, there seemed to be little doing.
He had eaten a bit of lunch in the coffee-room immediately on his
arrival; the coffee-room was big enough to accommodate a hundred and
fifty people, but beyond himself, an old gentleman and his daughter,
evidently tourists, two young men talking golf, a man who looked like
an artist, and an unmistakable honeymooning couple, there was no one in
it. There was little traffic in the wide street beneath Spargo’s
windows; little passage of people to and fro on the sidewalks; here a
countryman drove a lazy cow as lazily along; there a farmer in his
light cart sat idly chatting with an aproned tradesman, who had come
out of his shop to talk to him. Over everything lay the quiet of the
sunlight of the summer afternoon, and through the open windows stole a
faint, sweet scent of the new-mown hay lying in the meadows outside the
old houses.

“A veritable Sleepy Hollow,” mused Spargo. “Let’s go down and see if
there’s anybody to talk to. Great Scott!—to think that I was in the
poisonous atmosphere of the Octoneumenoi only sixteen hours ago!”

Spargo, after losing himself in various corridors and passages, finally
landed in the wide, stone-paved hall of the old hotel, and with a sure
instinct turned into the bar-parlour which he had noticed when he
entered the place. This was a roomy, comfortable, bow-windowed
apartment, looking out upon the High Street, and was furnished and
ornamented with the usual appurtenances of country-town hotels. There
were old chairs and tables and sideboards and cupboards, which had
certainly been made a century before, and seemed likely to endure for a
century or two longer; there were old prints of the road and the chase,
and an old oil-painting or two of red-faced gentlemen in pink coats;
there were foxes’ masks on the wall, and a monster pike in a glass case
on a side-table; there were ancient candlesticks on the mantelpiece and
an antique snuff-box set between them. Also there was a small,
old-fashioned bar in a corner of the room, and a new-fashioned young
woman seated behind it, who was yawning over a piece of fancy
needlework, and looked at Spargo when he entered as Andromeda may have
looked at Perseus when he made arrival at her rock. And Spargo,
treating himself to a suitable drink and choosing a cigar to accompany
it, noted the look, and dropped into the nearest chair.

“This,” he remarked, eyeing the damsel with enquiry, “appears to me to
be a very quiet place.”

“Quiet!” exclaimed the lady. “Quiet?”

“That,” continued Spargo, “is precisely what I observed. Quiet. I see
that you agree with me. You expressed your agreement with two shades of
emphasis, the surprised and the scornful. We may conclude, thus far,
that the place is undoubtedly quiet.”

The damsel looked at Spargo as if she considered him in the light of a
new specimen, and picking up her needlework she quitted the bar and
coming out into the room took a chair near his own.

“It makes you thankful to see a funeral go by here,” she remarked.
“It’s about all that one ever does see.”

“Are there many?” asked Spargo. “Do the inhabitants die much of
inanition?”

The damsel gave Spargo another critical inspection.

“Oh, you’re joking!” she said. “It’s well you can. Nothing ever happens
here. This place is a back number.”

“Even the back numbers make pleasant reading at times,” murmured
Spargo. “And the backwaters of life are refreshing. Nothing doing in
this town, then?” he added in a louder voice.

“Nothing!” replied his companion. “It’s fast asleep. I came here from
Birmingham, and I didn’t know what I was coming to. In Birmingham you
see as many people in ten minutes as you see here in ten months.”

“Ah!” said Spargo. “What you are suffering from is dulness. You must
have an antidote.”

“Dulness!” exclaimed the damsel. “That’s the right word for Market
Milcaster. There’s just a few regular old customers drop in here of a
morning, between eleven and one. A stray caller looks in—perhaps during
the afternoon. Then, at night, a lot of old fogies sit round that end
of the room and talk about old times. Old times, indeed!—what they want
in Market Milcaster is new times.”

Spargo pricked up his ears.

“Well, but it’s rather interesting to hear old fogies talk about old
times,” he said. “I love it!”

“Then you can get as much of it as ever you want here,” remarked the
barmaid. “Look in tonight any time after eight o’clock, and if you
don’t know more about the history of Market Milcaster by ten than you
did when you sat down, you must be deaf. There are some old gentlemen
drop in here every night, regular as clockwork, who seem to feel that
they couldn’t go to bed unless they’ve told each other stories about
old days which I should think they’ve heard a thousand times already!”

“Very old men?” asked Spargo.

“Methuselahs,” replied the lady. “There’s old Mr. Quarterpage, across
the way there, the auctioneer, though he doesn’t do any business
now—they say he’s ninety, though I’m sure you wouldn’t take him for
more than seventy. And there’s Mr. Lummis, further down the street—he’s
eighty-one. And Mr. Skene, and Mr. Kaye—they’re regular patriarchs.
I’ve sat here and listened to them till I believe I could write a
history of Market Milcaster since the year One.”

“I can conceive of that as a pleasant and profitable occupation,” said
Spargo.

He chatted a while longer in a fashion calculated to cheer the
barmaid’s spirits, after which he went out and strolled around the town
until seven o’clock, the “Dragon’s” hour for dinner. There were no more
people in the big coffee-room than there had been at lunch and Spargo
was glad, when his solitary meal was over, to escape to the
bar-parlour, where he took his coffee in a corner near to that sacred
part in which the old townsmen had been reported to him to sit.

“And mind you don’t sit in one of their chairs,” said the barmaid,
warningly. “They all have their own special chairs and their special
pipes there on that rack, and I suppose the ceiling would fall in if
anybody touched pipe or chair. But you’re all right there, and you’ll
hear all they’ve got to say.”

To Spargo, who had never seen anything of the sort before, and who,
twenty-four hours previously, would have believed the thing impossible,
the proceedings of that evening in the bar-parlour of the “Yellow
Dragon” at Market Milcaster were like a sudden transference to the
eighteenth century. Precisely as the clock struck eight and a bell
began to toll somewhere in the recesses of the High Street, an old
gentleman walked in, and the barmaid, catching Spargo’s eye, gave him a
glance which showed that the play was about to begin.

“Good evening, Mr. Kaye,” said the barmaid. “You’re first tonight.”

“Evening,” said Mr. Kaye and took a seat, scowled around him, and
became silent. He was a tall, lank old gentleman, clad in rusty black
clothes, with a pointed collar sticking up on both sides of his fringe
of grey whisker and a voluminous black neckcloth folded several times
round his neck, and by the expression of his countenance was inclined
to look on life severely. “Nobody been in yet?” asked Mr. Kaye. “No,
but here’s Mr. Lummis and Mr. Skene,” replied the barmaid.

Two more old gentlemen entered the bar-parlour. Of these, one was a
little, dapper-figured man, clad in clothes of an eminently sporting
cut, and of very loud pattern; he sported a bright blue necktie, a
flower in his lapel, and a tall white hat, which he wore at a rakish
angle. The other was a big, portly, bearded man with a Falstaffian
swagger and a rakish eye, who chaffed the barmaid as he entered, and
gave her a good-humoured chuck under the chin as he passed her. These
two also sank into chairs which seemed to have been specially designed
to meet them, and the stout man slapped the arms of his as familiarly
as he had greeted the barmaid. He looked at his two cronies.

“Well?” he said, “Here’s three of us. And there’s a symposium.”

“Wait a bit, wait a bit,” said the dapper little man. “Grandpa’ll be
here in a minute. We’ll start fair.”

The barmaid glanced out of the window.

“There’s Mr. Quarterpage coming across the street now,” she announced.
“Shall I put the things on the table?”

“Aye, put them on, my dear, put them on!” commanded the fat man. “Have
all in readiness.”

The barmaid thereupon placed a round table before the sacred chairs,
set out upon it a fine old punch-bowl and the various ingredients for
making punch, a box of cigars, and an old leaden tobacco-box, and she
had just completed this interesting prelude to the evening’s discourse
when the door opened again and in walked one of the most remarkable old
men Spargo had ever seen. And by this time, knowing that this was the
venerable Mr. Benjamin Quarterpage, of whom Crowfoot had told him, he
took good stock of the newcomer as he took his place amongst his
friends, who on their part received him with ebullitions of delight
which were positively boyish.

Mr. Quarterpage was a youthful buck of ninety—a middle-sized,
sturdily-built man, straight as a dart, still active of limb,
clear-eyed, and strong of voice. His clean-shaven old countenance was
ruddy as a sun-warmed pippin; his hair was still only silvered; his
hand was steady as a rock. His clothes of buff-coloured whipcord were
smart and jaunty, his neckerchief as gay as if he had been going to a
fair. It seemed to Spargo that Mr. Quarterpage had a pretty long lease
of life before him even at his age.

Spargo, in his corner, sat fascinated while the old gentlemen began
their symposium. Another, making five, came in and joined them—the five
had the end of the bar-parlour to themselves. Mr. Quarterpage made the
punch with all due solemnity and ceremony; when it was ladled out each
man lighted his pipe or took a cigar, and the tongues began to wag.
Other folk came and went; the old gentlemen were oblivious of anything
but their own talk. Now and then a young gentleman of the town dropped
in to take his modest half-pint of bitter beer and to dally in the
presence of the barmaid; such looked with awe at the patriarchs: as for
the patriarchs themselves they were lost in the past.

Spargo began to understand what the damsel behind the bar meant when
she said that she believed she could write a history of Market
Milcaster since the year One. After discussing the weather, the local
events of the day, and various personal matters, the old fellows got to
reminiscences of the past, telling tale after tale, recalling incident
upon incident of long years before. At last they turned to memories of
racing days at Market Milcaster. And at that Spargo determined on a
bold stroke. Now was the time to get some information. Taking the
silver ticket from his purse, he laid it, the heraldic device
uppermost, on the palm of his hand, and approaching the group with a
polite bow, said quietly:

“Gentlemen, can any of you tell me anything about that?”




CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
MR. QUARTERPAGE HARKS BACK


If Spargo had upset the old gentlemen’s bowl of punch—the second of the
evening—or had dropped an infernal machine in their midst, he could
scarcely have produced a more startling effect than that wrought upon
them by his sudden production of the silver ticket. Their babble of
conversation died out; one of them dropped his pipe; another took his
cigar out of his mouth as if he had suddenly discovered that he was
sucking a stick of poison; all lifted astonished faces to the
interrupter, staring from him to the shining object exhibited in his
outstretched palm, from it back to him. And at last Mr. Quarterpage, to
whom Spargo had more particularly addressed himself, spoke, pointing
with great _empressement_ to the ticket.

“Young gentleman!” he said, in accents that seemed to Spargo to tremble
a little, “young gentleman, where did you get that?”

“You know what it is, then?” asked Spargo, willing to dally a little
with the matter. “You recognize it?”

“Know it! Recognize it!” exclaimed Mr. Quarterpage. “Yes, and so does
every gentleman present. And it is just because I see you are a
stranger to this town that I ask you where you got it. Not, I think,
young gentleman, in this town.”

“No,” replied Spargo. “Certainly not in this town. How should I get it
in this town if I’m a stranger?”

“Quite true, quite true!” murmured Mr. Quarterpage. “I cannot conceive
how any person in the town who is in possession of one of those—what
shall we call them—heirlooms?—yes, heirlooms of antiquity, could
possibly be base enough to part with it. Therefore, I ask again—Where
did you get that, young gentleman?”

“Before I tell you that,” answered Spargo, who, in answer to a silent
sign from the fat man had drawn a chair amongst them, “perhaps you will
tell me exactly what this is? I see it to be a bit of old, polished,
much worn silver, having on the obverse the arms or heraldic bearings
of somebody or something; on the reverse the figure of a running horse.
But—what is it?”

The five old men all glanced at each other and made simultaneous
grunts. Then Mr. Quarterpage spoke.

“It is one of the original fifty burgess tickets of Market Milcaster,
young sir, which gave its holder special and greatly valued privileges
in respect to attendance at our once famous race-meeting, now
unfortunately a thing of the past,” he added. “Fifty—aye, forty!—years
ago, to be in possession of one of those tickets was—was—”

“A grand thing!” said one of the old gentlemen.

“Mr. Lummis is right,” said Mr. Quarterpage. “It was a grand thing—a
very grand thing. Those tickets, sir, were treasured—are treasured. And
yet you, a stranger, show us one! You got it, sir—”

Spargo saw that it was now necessary to cut matters short.

“I found this ticket—under mysterious circumstances—in London,” he
answered. “I want to trace it. I want to know who its original owner
was. That is why I have come to Market Milcaster.”

Mr. Quarterpage slowly looked round the circle of faces.

“Wonderful!” he said. “Wonderful! He found this ticket—one of our
famous fifty—in London, and under mysterious circumstances. He wants to
trace it—he wants to know to whom it belonged! That is why he has come
to Market Milcaster. Most extraordinary! Gentlemen, I appeal to you if
this is not the most extraordinary event that has happened in Market
Milcaster for—I don’t know how many years?”

There was a general murmur of assent, and Spargo found everybody
looking at him as if he had just announced that he had come to buy the
whole town.

“But—why?” he asked, showing great surprise. “Why?”

“Why?” exclaimed Mr. Quarterpage. “Why? He asks—why? Because, young
gentleman, it is the greatest surprise to me, and to these friends of
mine, too, every man jack of ’em, to hear that any one of our fifty
tickets ever passed out of the possession of any of the fifty families
to whom they belonged! And unless I am vastly, greatly, most
unexplainably mistaken, young sir, you are not a member of any Market
Milcaster family.”

“No, I’m not,” admitted Spargo. And he was going to add that until the
previous evening he had never even heard of Market Milcaster, but he
wisely refrained. “No, I’m certainly not,” he added.

Mr. Quarterpage waved his long pipe.

“I believe,” he said, “I believe that if the evening were not drawing
to a close—it is already within a few minutes of our departure, young
gentleman—I believe, I say, that if I had time, I could, from memory,
give the names of the fifty families who held those tickets when the
race-meeting came to an end. I believe I could!”

“I’m sure you could!” asserted the little man in the loud suit. “Never
was such a memory as yours, never!”

“Especially for anything relating to the old racing matters,” said the
fat man. “Mr. Quarterpage is a walking encyclopaedia.”

“My memory is good,” said Mr. Quarterpage. “It’s the greatest blessing
I have in my declining years. Yes, I am sure I could do that, with a
little thought. And what’s more, nearly every one of those fifty
families is still in the town, or if not in the town, close by it, or
if not close by it, I know where they are. Therefore, I cannot make out
how this young gentleman—from London, did you say, sir?”

“From London,” answered Spargo.

“This young gentleman from London comes to be in possession of one of
our tickets,” continued Mr. Quarterpage. “It is—wonderful! But I tell
you what, young gentleman from London, if you will do me the honour to
breakfast with me in the morning, sir, I will show you my racing books
and papers and we will speedily discover who the original holder of
that ticket was. My name, sir, is Quarterpage—Benjamin Quarterpage—and
I reside at the ivy-covered house exactly opposite this inn, and my
breakfast hour is nine o’clock sharp, and I shall bid you heartily
welcome!”

Spargo made his best bow.

“Sir,” he said, “I am greatly obliged by your kind invitation, and I
shall consider it an honour to wait upon you to the moment.”

Accordingly, at five minutes to nine next morning, Spargo found himself
in an old-fashioned parlour, looking out upon a delightful garden, gay
with summer flowers, and being introduced by Mr. Quarterpage, Senior,
to Mr. Quarterpage, Junior—a pleasant gentleman of sixty, always
referred to by his father as something quite juvenile—and to Miss
Quarterpage, a young-old lady of something a little less elderly than
her brother, and to a breakfast table bounteously spread with all the
choice fare of the season. Mr. Quarterpage, Senior, was as fresh and
rosy as a cherub; it was a revelation to Spargo to encounter so old a
man who was still in possession of such life and spirits, and of such a
vigorous and healthy appetite.

Naturally, the talk over the breakfast table ran on Spargo’s possession
of the old silver ticket, upon which subject it was evident Mr.
Quarterpage was still exercising his intellect. And Spargo, who had
judged it well to enlighten his host as to who he was, and had
exhibited a letter with which the editor of the _Watchman_ had
furnished him, told how in the exercise of his journalistic duties he
had discovered the ticket in the lining of an old box. But he made no
mention of the Marbury matter, being anxious to see first whither Mr.
Quarterpage’s revelations would lead him.

“You have no idea, Mr. Spargo,” said the old gentleman, when, breakfast
over, he and Spargo were closeted together in a little library in which
were abundant evidences of the host’s taste in sporting matters; “you
have no idea of the value which was attached to the possession of one
of those silver tickets. There is mine, as you see, securely framed and
just as securely fastened to the wall. Those fifty silver tickets, my
dear sir, were made when our old race-meeting was initiated, in the
year 1781. They were made in the town by a local silversmith, whose
great-great-grandson still carries on the business. The fifty were
distributed amongst the fifty leading burgesses of the town to be kept
in their families for ever—nobody ever anticipated in those days that
our race-meeting would ever be discontinued. The ticket carried great
privileges. It made its holder, and all members of his family, male and
female, free of the stands, rings, and paddocks. It gave the holder
himself and his eldest son, if of age, the right to a seat at our grand
race banquet—at which, I may tell you, Mr. Spargo, Royalty itself has
been present in the good old days. Consequently, as you see, to be the
holder of a silver ticket was to be somebody.”

“And when the race-meeting fell through?” asked Spargo. “What then?”

“Then, of course, the families who held the tickets looked upon them as
heirlooms, to be taken great care of,” replied Mr. Quarterpage. “They
were dealt with as I dealt with mine—framed on velvet, and hung up—or
locked away: I am sure that anybody who had one took the greatest care
of it. Now, I said last night, over there at the ‘Dragon,’ that I could
repeat the names of all the families who held these tickets. So I can.
But here”—the old gentleman drew out a drawer and produced from it a
parchment-bound book which he handled with great reverence—“here is a
little volume of my own handwriting—memoranda relating to Market
Milcaster Races—in which is a list of the original holders, together
with another list showing who held the tickets when the races were
given up. I make bold to say, Mr. Spargo, that by going through the
second list, I could trace every ticket—except the one you have in your
purse.”

“Every one?” said Spargo, in some surprise.

“Every one! For as I told you,” continued Mr. Quarterpage, “the
families are either in the town (we’re a conservative people here in
Market Milcaster and we don’t move far afield) or they’re just outside
the town, or they’re not far away. I can’t conceive how the ticket you
have—and it’s genuine enough—could ever get out of possession of one of
these families, and—”

“Perhaps,” suggested Spargo, “it never has been out of possession. I
told you it was found in the lining of a box—that box belonged to a
dead man.”

“A dead man!” exclaimed Mr. Quarterpage. “A dead man! Who could—ah!
Perhaps—perhaps I have an idea. Yes!—an idea. I remember something now
that I had never thought of.”

The old gentleman unfastened the clasp of his parchment-bound book, and
turned over its pages until he came to one whereon was a list of names.
He pointed this out to Spargo.

“There is the list of holders of the silver tickets at the time the
race-meetings came to an end,” he said. “If you were acquainted with
this town you would know that those are the names of our best-known
inhabitants—all, of course, burgesses. There’s mine, you
see—Quarterpage. There’s Lummis, there’s Kaye, there’s Skene, there’s
Templeby—the gentlemen you saw last night. All good old town names.
They all are—on this list. I know every family mentioned. The holders
of that time are many of them dead; but their successors have the
tickets. Yes—and now that I think of it, there’s only one man who held
a ticket when this list was made about whom I don’t know anything—at
least, anything recent. The ticket, Mr. Spargo, which you’ve found must
have been his. But I thought—I thought somebody else had it!”

“And this man, sir? Who was he?” asked Spargo, intuitively conscious
that he was coming to news. “Is his name there?”

The old man ran the tip of his finger down the list of names.

“There it is!” he said. “John Maitland.”

Spargo bent over the fine writing.

“Yes, John Maitland,” he observed. “And who was John Maitland?”

Mr. Quarterpage shook his head. He turned to another of the many
drawers in an ancient bureau, and began to search amongst a mass of old
newspapers, carefully sorted into small bundles and tied up.

“If you had lived in Market Milcaster one-and-twenty years ago, Mr.
Spargo,” he said, “you would have known who John Maitland was. For some
time, sir, he was the best-known man in the place—aye, and in this
corner of the world. But—aye, here it is—the newspaper of October 5th,
1891. Now, Mr. Spargo, you’ll find in this old newspaper who John
Maitland was, and all about him. Now, I’ll tell you what to do. I’ve
just got to go into my office for an hour to talk the day’s business
over with my son—you take this newspaper out into the garden there with
one of these cigars, and read what’ll you find in it, and when you’ve
read that we’ll have some more talk.”

Spargo carried the old newspaper into the sunlit garden.




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
AN OLD NEWSPAPER


As soon as Spargo unfolded the paper he saw what he wanted on the
middle page, headed in two lines of big capitals. He lighted a cigar
and settled down to read.

“MARKET MILCASTER QUARTER SESSIONS
“TRIAL OF JOHN MAITLAND


“The Quarter Sessions for the Borough of Market Milcaster were held on
Wednesday last, October 3rd, 1891, in the Town Hall, before the
Recorder, Henry John Campernowne, Esq., K.C., who was accompanied on
the bench by the Worshipful the Mayor of Market Milcaster (Alderman
Pettiford), the Vicar of Market Milcaster (the Rev. P.B. Clabberton,
M.A., R.D.), Alderman Banks, J.P., Alderman Peters, J.P., Sir Gervais
Racton, J.P., Colonel Fludgate, J.P., Captain Murrill, J.P., and other
magistrates and gentlemen. There was a crowded attendance of the public
in anticipation of the trial of John Maitland, ex-manager of the Market
Milcaster Bank, and the reserved portions of the Court were filled with
the _élite_ of the town and neighbourhood, including a considerable
number of ladies who manifested the greatest interest in the
proceedings.

“The Recorder, in charging the Grand Jury, said he regretted that the
very pleasant and gratifying experience which had been his upon the
occasion of his last two official visits to Market Milcaster—he
referred to the fact that on both those occasions his friend the
Worshipful Mayor had been able to present him with a pair of white
gloves—was not to be repeated on the present occasion. It would be
their sad and regrettable lot to have before them a fellow-townsman
whose family had for generations occupied a foremost position in the
life of the borough. That fellow-townsman was charged with one of the
most serious offences known to a commercial nation like ours: the
offence of embezzling the moneys of the bank of which he had for many
years been the trusted manager, and with which he had been connected
all his life since his school days. He understood that the prisoner who
would shortly be put before the court on his trial was about to plead
guilty, and there would accordingly be no need for him to direct the
gentlemen of the Grand Jury on this matter—what he had to say
respecting the gravity and even enormity of the offence he would
reserve. The Recorder then addressed himself to the Grand Jury on the
merits of two minor cases, which came before the court at a later
period of the morning, after which they retired, and having formally
returned a true bill against the prisoner, and a petty jury, chosen
from well-known burgesses of the town having been duly sworn.

“JOHN MAITLAND, aged 42, bank manager, of the Bank House, High Street,
Market Milcaster, was formally charged with embezzling, on April 23rd,
1891, the sum of £4,875 10_s_. 6_d_., the moneys of his employers, the
Market Milcaster Banking Company Ltd., and converting the same to his
own use. The prisoner, who appeared to feel his position most acutely,
and who looked very pale and much worn, was represented by Mr. Charles
Doolittle, the well-known barrister of Kingshaven; Mr. Stephens, K.C.,
appeared on behalf of the prosecution.

“Maitland, upon being charged, pleaded guilty.

“Mr. Stephens, K.C., addressing the Recorder, said that without any
desire to unduly press upon the prisoner, who, he ventured to think,
had taken a very wise course in pleading guilty to that particular
count in the indictment with which he stood charged, he felt bound, in
the interests of justice, to set forth to the Court some particulars of
the defalcations which had arisen through the prisoner’s much lamented
dishonesty. He proposed to offer a clear and succinct account of the
matter. The prisoner, John Maitland, was the last of an old Market
Milcaster family—he was, in fact, he believed, with the exception of
his own infant son, the very last of the race. His father had been
manager of the bank before him. Maitland himself had entered the
service of the bank at the age of eighteen, when he left the local
Grammar School; he succeeded his father as manager at the age of
thirty-two; he had therefore occupied this highest position of trust
for ten years. His directors had the fullest confidence in him; they
relied on his honesty and his honour; they gave him discretionary
powers such as no bank-manager, probably, ever enjoyed or held before.
In fact, he was so trusted that he was, to all intents and purposes,
the Market Milcaster Banking Company; in other words he was allowed
full control over everything, and given full licence to do what he
liked. Whether the directors were wise in extending such liberty to
even the most trusted servant, it was not for him (Mr. Stephens) to
say; it was some consolation, under the circumstances, to know that the
loss would fall upon the directors, inasmuch as they themselves held
nearly the whole of the shares. But he had to speak of the loss—of the
serious defalcations which Maitland had committed. The prisoner had
wisely pleaded guilty to the first count of the indictment. But there
were no less than seventeen counts in the indictment. He had pleaded
guilty to embezzling a sum of £4,875 odd. But the total amount of the
defalcations, comprised in the seventeen counts, was no less—it seemed
a most amazing sum!—than £221,573 8_s_. 6_d_.! There was the fact—the
banking company had been robbed of over two hundred thousand pounds by
the prisoner in the dock before a mere accident, the most trifling
chance, had revealed to the astounded directors that he was robbing
them at all. And the most serious feature of the whole case was that
not one penny of this money had been, or ever could be, recovered. He
believed that the prisoner’s learned counsel was about to urge upon the
Court that the prisoner himself had been tricked and deceived by
another man, unfortunately not before the Court—a man, he understood,
also well known in Market Milcaster, who was now dead, and therefore
could not be called, but whether he was so tricked or deceived was no
excuse for his clever and wholesale robbing of his employers. He had
thought it necessary to put these facts—which would not be
denied—before the Court, in order that it might be known how heavy the
defalcations really had been, and that they should be considered in
dealing with the prisoner.

“The Recorder asked if there was no possibility of recovering any part
of the vast sum concerned.

“Mr. Stephens replied that they were informed that there was not the
remotest chance—the money, it was said by prisoner and those acting on
his behalf, had utterly vanished with the death of the man to whom he
had just made reference.

“Mr. Doolittle, on behalf of the prisoner, craved to address a few
words to the Court in mitigation of sentence. He thanked Mr. Stephens
for the considerate and eminently dispassionate manner in which he had
outlined the main facts of the case. He had no desire to minimize the
prisoner’s guilt. But, on prisoner’s behalf, he desired to tell the
true story as to how these things came to be. Until as recently as
three years previously the prisoner had never made the slightest
deviation from the straight path of integrity. Unfortunately for him,
and, he believed, for some others in Market Milcaster, there came to
the town three years before the present proceedings, a man named
Chamberlayne, who commenced business in the High Street as a
stock-and-share broker. A man of good address and the most plausible
manners, Chamberlayne attracted a good many people—amongst them his
unfortunate client. It was matter of common knowledge that Chamberlayne
had induced numerous persons in Market Milcaster to enter into
financial transactions with him; it was matter of common repute that
those transactions had not always turned out well for Chamberlayne’s
clients. Unhappily for himself, Maitland had great faith in
Chamberlayne. He had begun to have transactions with him in a large
way; they had gone on and on in a large way until he was involved to
vast amounts. Believing thoroughly in Chamberlayne and his methods, he
had entrusted him with very large sums of money.

“The Recorder interrupted Mr. Doolittle at this point to ask if he was
to understand that Mr. Doolittle was referring to the prisoner’s own
money.

“Mr. Doolittle replied that he was afraid the large sums he referred to
were the property of the bank. But the prisoner had such belief in
Chamberlayne that he firmly anticipated that all would be well, and
that these sums would be repaid, and that a vast profit would result
from their use.

“The Recorder remarked that he supposed the prisoner intended to put
the profit into his own pockets.

“Mr. Doolittle said at any rate the prisoner assured him that of the
two hundred and twenty thousand pounds which was in question,
Chamberlayne had had the immediate handling of at least two hundred
thousand, and he, the prisoner, had not the ghost of a notion as to
what Chamberlayne had done with it. Unfortunately for everybody, for
the bank, for some other people, and especially for his unhappy client,
Chamberlayne died, very suddenly, just as these proceedings were
instituted, and so far it had been absolutely impossible to trace
anything of the moneys concerned. He had died under mysterious
circumstances, and there was just as much mystery about his affairs.

“The Recorder observed that he was still waiting to hear what Mr.
Doolittle had to urge in mitigation of any sentence he, the Recorder,
might think fit to pass.

“Mr. Doolittle said that he would trouble the Court with as few remarks
as possible. All that he could urge on behalf of the unfortunate man in
the dock was that until three years ago he had borne a most exemplary
character, and had never committed a dishonest action. It had been his
misfortune, his folly, to allow a plausible man to persuade him to
these acts of dishonesty. That man had been called to another account,
and the prisoner was left to bear the consequences of his association
with him. It seemed as if Chamberlayne had made away with the money for
his own purposes, and it might be that it would yet be recovered. He
would only ask the Court to remember the prisoner’s antecedents and his
previous good conduct, and to bear in mind that whatever his near
future might be he was, in a commercial sense, ruined for life.

“The Recorder, in passing sentence, said that he had not heard a single
word of valid excuse for Maitland’s conduct. Such dishonesty must be
punished in the most severe fashion, and the prisoner must go to penal
servitude for ten years.

“Maitland, who heard the sentence unmoved, was removed from the town
later in the day to the county jail at Saxchester.”

Spargo read all this swiftly; then went over it again, noting certain
points in it. At last he folded up the newspaper and turned to the
house—to see old Quarterpage beckoning to him from the library window.




CHAPTER NINETEEN
THE CHAMBERLAYNE STORY


“I perceive, sir,” said Mr. Quarterpage, as Spargo entered the library,
“that you have read the account of the Maitland trial.”

“Twice,” replied Spargo.

“And you have come to the conclusion that—but what conclusion have you
come to?” asked Mr. Quarterpage.

“That the silver ticket in my purse was Maitland’s property,” said
Spargo, who was not going to give all his conclusions at once.

“Just so,” agreed the old gentleman. “I think so—I can’t think anything
else. But I was under the impression that I could have accounted for
that ticket, just as I am sure I can account for the other forty-nine.”

“Yes—and how?” asked Spargo.

Mr. Quarterpage turned to a corner cupboard and in silence produced a
decanter and two curiously-shaped old wine-glasses. He carefully
polished the glasses with a cloth which he took from a drawer, and set
glasses and decanter on a table in the window, motioning Spargo to take
a chair in proximity thereto. He himself pulled up his own elbow-chair.

“We’ll take a glass of my old brown sherry,” he said. “Though I say it
as shouldn’t, as the saying goes, I don’t think you could find better
brown sherry than that from Land’s End to Berwick-upon-Tweed, Mr.
Spargo—no, nor further north either, where they used to have good taste
in liquor in my young days! Well, here’s your good health, sir, and
I’ll tell you about Maitland.”

“I’m curious,” said Spargo. “And about more than Maitland. I want to
know about a lot of things arising out of that newspaper report. I want
to know something about the man referred to so much—the stockbroker,
Chamberlayne.”

“Just so,” observed Mr. Quarterpage, smiling. “I thought that would
touch your sense of the inquisitive. But Maitland first. Now, when
Maitland went to prison, he left behind him a child, a boy, just then
about two years old. The child’s mother was dead. Her sister, a Miss
Baylis, appeared on the scene—Maitland had married his wife from a
distance—and took possession of the child and of Maitland’s personal
effects. He had been made bankrupt while he was awaiting his trial, and
all his household goods were sold. But this Miss Baylis took some small
personal things, and I always believed that she took the silver ticket.
And she may have done, for anything I know to the contrary. Anyway, she
took the child away, and there was an end of the Maitland family in
Market Milcaster. Maitland, of course, was in due procedure of things
removed to Dartmoor, and there he served his term. There were people
who were very anxious to get hold of him when he came out—the bank
people, for they believed that he knew more about the disposition of
that money than he’d ever told, and they wanted to induce him to tell
what they hoped he knew—between ourselves, Mr. Spargo, they were going
to make it worth his while to tell.”

Spargo tapped the newspaper, which he had retained while the old
gentleman talked.

“Then they didn’t believe what his counsel said—that Chamberlayne got
all the money?” he asked.

Mr. Quarterpage laughed.

“No—nor anybody else!” he answered. “There was a strong idea in the
town—you’ll see why afterwards—that it was all a put-up job, and that
Maitland cheerfully underwent his punishment knowing that there was a
nice fortune waiting for him when he came out. And as I say, the bank
people meant to get hold of him. But though they sent a special agent
to meet him on his release, they never did get hold of him. Some
mistake arose—when Maitland was released, he got clear away. Nobody’s
ever heard a word of him from that day to this. Unless Miss Baylis
has.”

“Where does this Miss Baylis live?” asked Spargo.

“Well, I don’t know,” replied Mr. Quarterpage. “She did live in
Brighton when she took the child away, and her address was known, and I
have it somewhere. But when the bank people sought her out after
Maitland’s release, she, too, had clean disappeared, and all efforts to
trace her failed. In fact, according to the folks who lived near her in
Brighton, she’d completely disappeared, with the child, five years
before. So there wasn’t a clue to Maitland. He served his time—made a
model prisoner—they did find that much out!—earned the maximum
remission, was released, and vanished. And for that very reason there’s
a theory about him in this very town to this very day!”

“What?” asked Spargo.

“This. That he’s now living comfortably, luxuriously abroad on what he
got from the bank,” replied Mr. Quarterpage. “They say that the
sister-in-law was in at the game; that when she disappeared with the
child, she went abroad somewhere and made a home ready for Maitland,
and that he went off to them as soon as he came out. Do you see?”

“I suppose that was possible,” said Spargo.

“Quite possible, sir. But now,” continued the old gentleman,
replenishing the glasses, “now we come on to the Chamberlayne story.
It’s a good deal more to do with the Maitland story than appears at
first sight, I’ll tell it to you and you can form your own conclusions.
Chamberlayne was a man who came to Market Milcaster—I don’t know from
where—in 1886—five years before the Maitland smash-up. He was then
about Maitland’s age—a man of thirty-seven or eight. He came as clerk
to old Mr. Vallas, the rope and twine manufacturer: Vallas’s place is
still there, at the bottom of the High Street, near the river, though
old Vallas is dead. He was a smart, cute, pushing chap, this
Chamberlayne; he made himself indispensable to old Vallas, and old
Vallas paid him a rare good salary. He settled down in the town, and he
married a town girl, one of the Corkindales, the saddlers, when he’d
been here three years. Unfortunately she died in childbirth within a
year of their marriage. It was very soon after that that Chamberlayne
threw up his post at Vallas’s, and started business as a
stock-and-share broker. He’d been a saving man; he’d got a nice bit of
money with his wife; he always let it be known that he had money of his
own, and he started in a good way. He was a man of the most plausible
manners: he’d have coaxed butter out of a dog’s throat if he’d wanted
to. The moneyed men of the town believed in him—I believed in him
myself, Mr. Spargo—I’d many a transaction with him, and I never lost
aught by him—on the contrary, he did very well for me. He did well for
most of his clients—there were, of course, ups and downs, but on the
whole he satisfied his clients uncommonly well. But, naturally, nobody
ever knew what was going on between him and Maitland.”

“I gather from this report,” said Spargo, “that everything came out
suddenly—unexpectedly?”

“That was so, sir,” replied Mr. Quarterpage. “Sudden? Unexpected? Aye,
as a crack of thunder on a fine winter’s day. Nobody had the ghost of a
notion that anything was wrong. John Maitland was much respected in the
town; much thought of by everybody; well known to everybody. I can
assure you, Mr. Spargo, that it was no pleasant thing to have to sit on
that grand jury as I did—I was its foreman, sir,—and hear a man
sentenced that you’d regarded as a bosom friend. But there it was!”

“How was the thing discovered?” asked Spargo, anxious to get at facts.

“In this way,” replied Mr. Quarterpage. “The Market Milcaster Bank is
in reality almost entirely the property of two old families in the
town, the Gutchbys and the Hostables. Owing to the death of his father,
a young Hostable, fresh from college, came into the business. He was a
shrewd, keen young fellow; he got some suspicion, somehow, about
Maitland, and he insisted on the other partners consenting to a special
investigation, and on their making it suddenly. And Maitland was caught
before he had a chance. But we’re talking about Chamberlayne.”

“Yes, about Chamberlayne,” agreed Spargo.

“Well, now, Maitland was arrested one evening,” continued Mr.
Quarterpage. “Of course, the news of his arrest ran through the town
like wild-fire. Everybody was astonished; he was at that time—aye, and
had been for years—a churchwarden at the Parish Church, and I don’t
think there could have been more surprise if we’d heard that the Vicar
had been arrested for bigamy. In a little town like this, news is all
over the place in a few minutes. Of course, Chamberlayne would hear
that news like everybody else. But it was remembered, and often
remarked upon afterwards, that from the moment of Maitland’s arrest
nobody in Market Milcaster ever had speech with Chamberlayne again.
After his wife’s death he’d taken to spending an hour or so of an
evening across there at the ‘Dragon,’ where you saw me and my friends
last night, but on that night he didn’t go to the ‘Dragon.’ And next
morning he caught the eight o’clock train to London. He happened to
remark to the stationmaster as he got into the train that he expected
to be back late that night, and that he should have a tiring day of it.
But Chamberlayne didn’t come back that night, Mr. Spargo. He didn’t
come back to Market Milcaster for four days, and when he did come back
it was in a coffin!”

“Dead?” exclaimed Spargo. “That was sudden!”

“Very sudden,” agreed Mr. Quarterpage. “Yes, sir, he came back in his
coffin, did Chamberlayne. On the very evening on which he’d spoken of
being back, there came a telegram here to say that he’d died very
suddenly at the Cosmopolitan Hotel. That telegram came to his
brother-in-law, Corkindale, the saddler—you’ll find him down the
street, opposite the Town Hall. It was sent to Corkindale by a nephew
of Chamberlayne’s, another Chamberlayne, Stephen, who lived in London,
and was understood to be on the Stock Exchange there. I saw that
telegram, Mr. Spargo, and it was a long one. It said that Chamberlayne
had had a sudden seizure, and though a doctor had been got to him he’d
died shortly afterwards. Now, as Chamberlayne had his nephew and
friends in London, his brother-in-law, Tom Corkindale, didn’t feel that
there was any necessity for him to go up to town, so he just sent off a
wire to Stephen Chamberlayne asking if there was aught he could do. And
next morning came another wire from Stephen saying that no inquest
would be necessary, as the doctor had been present and able to certify
the cause of death, and would Corkindale make all arrangements for the
funeral two days later. You see, Chamberlayne had bought a vault in our
cemetery when he buried his wife, so naturally they wished to bury him
in it, with her.”

Spargo nodded. He was beginning to imagine all sorts of things and
theories; he was taking everything in.

“Well,” continued Mr. Quarterpage, “on the second day after that, they
brought Chamberlayne’s body down. Three of ’em came with it—Stephen
Chamberlayne, the doctor who’d been called in, and a solicitor.
Everything was done according to proper form and usage. As Chamberlayne
had been well known in the town, a good number of townsfolk met the
body at the station and followed it to the cemetery. Of course, many of
us who had been clients of Chamberlayne’s were anxious to know how he
had come to such a sudden end. According to Stephen Chamberlayne’s
account, our Chamberlayne had wired to him and to his solicitor to meet
him at the Cosmopolitan to do some business. They were awaiting him
there when he arrived, and they had lunch together. After that, they
got to their business in a private room. Towards the end of the
afternoon, Chamberlayne was taken suddenly ill, and though they got a
doctor to him at once, he died before evening. The doctor said he’d a
diseased heart. Anyhow, he was able to certify the cause of his death,
so there was no inquest and they buried him, as I have told you.”

The old gentleman paused and, taking a sip at his sherry, smiled at
some reminiscence which occurred to him.

“Well,” he said, presently going on, “of course, on that came all the
Maitland revelations, and Maitland vowed and declared that Chamberlayne
had not only had nearly all the money, but that he was absolutely
certain that most of it was in his hands in hard cash. But
Chamberlayne, Mr. Spargo, had left practically nothing. All that could
be traced was about three or four thousand pounds. He’d left everything
to his nephew, Stephen. There wasn’t a trace, a clue to the vast sums
with which Maitland had entrusted him. And then people began to talk,
and they said what some of them say to this very day!”

“What’s that?” asked Spargo.

Mr. Quarterpage leaned forward and tapped his guest on the arm.

“That Chamberlayne never did die, and that that coffin was weighted
with lead!” he answered.




CHAPTER TWENTY
MAITLAND _ALIAS_ MARBURY


This remarkable declaration awoke such a new conception of matters in
Spargo’s mind, aroused such infinitely new possibilities in his
imagination, that for a full moment he sat silently staring at his
informant, who chuckled with quiet enjoyment at his visitor’s surprise.

“Do you mean to tell me,” said Spargo at last, “that there are people
in this town who still believe that the coffin in your cemetery which
is said to contain Chamberlayne’s body contains—lead?”

“Lots of ’em, my dear sir!” replied Mr. Quarterpage. “Lots of ’em! Go
out in the street and ask the first six men you meet, and I’ll go bail
that four out of the six believe it.”

“Then why, in the sacred name of common sense did no one ever take
steps to make certain?” asked Spargo. “Why didn’t they get an order for
exhumation?”

“Because it was nobody’s particular business to do so,” answered Mr.
Quarterpage. “You don’t know country-town life, my dear sir. In towns
like Market Milcaster folks talk and gossip a great deal, but they’re
always slow to do anything. It’s a case of who’ll start first—of
initiative. And if they see it’s going to cost anything—then they’ll
have nothing to do with it.”

“But—the bank people?” suggested Spargo.

Mr. Quarterpage shook his head.

“They’re amongst the lot who believe that Chamberlayne did die,” he
said. “They’re very old-fashioned, conservative-minded people, the
Gutchbys and the Hostables, and they accepted the version of the
nephew, and the doctor, and the solicitor. But now I’ll tell you
something about those three. There was a man here in the town, a
gentleman of your own profession, who came to edit that paper you’ve
got on your knee. He got interested in this Chamberlayne case, and he
began to make enquiries with the idea of getting hold of some good—what
do you call it?”

“I suppose he’d call it ‘copy,’” said Spargo.

“‘Copy’—that was his term,” agreed Mr. Quarterpage. “Well, he took the
trouble to go to London to ask some quiet questions of the nephew,
Stephen. That was just twelve months after Chamberlayne had been
buried. But he found that Stephen Chamberlayne had left England—months
before. Gone, they said, to one of the colonies, but they didn’t know
which. And the solicitor had also gone. And the doctor—couldn’t be
traced, no, sir, not even through the Medical Register. What do you
think of all that, Mr. Spargo?”

“I think,” answered Spargo, “that Market Milcaster folk are
considerably slow. I should have had that death and burial enquired
into. The whole thing looks to me like a conspiracy.”

“Well, sir, it was, as I say, nobody’s business,” said Mr. Quarterpage.
“The newspaper gentleman tried to stir up interest in it, but it was no
good, and very soon afterwards he left. And there it is.”

“Mr. Quarterpage,” said Spargo, “what’s your own honest opinion?”

The old gentleman smiled.

“Ah!” he said. “I’ve often wondered, Mr. Spargo, if I really have an
opinion on that point. I think that what I probably feel about the
whole affair is that there was a good deal of mystery attaching to it.
But we seem, sir, to have gone a long way from the question of that old
silver ticket which you’ve got in your purse. Now——”

“No!” said Spargo, interrupting his host with an accompanying wag of
his forefinger. “No! I think we’re coming nearer to it. Now you’ve
given me a great deal of your time, Mr. Quarterpage, and told me a lot,
and, first of all, before I tell you a lot, I’m going to show you
something.”

And Spargo took out of his pocket-book a carefully-mounted photograph
of John Marbury—the original of the process-picture which he had had
made for the _Watchman_. He handed it over.

“Do you recognize that photograph as that of anybody you know?” he
asked. “Look at it well and closely.”

Mr. Quarterpage put on a special pair of spectacles and studied the
photograph from several points of view.

“No, sir,” he said at last with a shake of the head. “I don’t recognize
it at all.”

“Can’t see in it any resemblance to any man you’ve ever known?” asked
Spargo.

“No, sir, none!” replied Mr. Quarterpage. “None whatever.”

“Very well,” said Spargo, laying the photograph on the table between
them. “Now, then, I want you to tell me what John Maitland was like
when you knew him. Also, I want you to describe Chamberlayne as he was
when he died, or was supposed to die. You remember them, of course,
quite well?”

Mr. Quarterpage got up and moved to the door.

“I can do better than that,” he said. “I can show you photographs of
both men as they were just before Maitland’s trial. I have a photograph
of a small group of Market Milcaster notabilities which was taken at a
municipal garden-party; Maitland and Chamberlayne are both in it. It’s
been put away in a cabinet in my drawing-room for many a long year, and
I’ve no doubt it’s as fresh as when it was taken.”

He left the room and presently returned with a large mounted photograph
which he laid on the table before his visitor.

“There you are, sir,” he said. “Quite fresh, you see—it must be getting
on to twenty years since that was taken out of the drawer that it’s
been kept in. Now, that’s Maitland. And that’s Chamberlayne.”

Spargo found himself looking at a group of men who stood against an
ivy-covered wall in the stiff attitudes in which photographers arrange
masses of sitters. He fixed his attention on the two figures indicated
by Mr. Quarterpage, and saw two medium-heighted, rather sturdily-built
men about whom there was nothing very specially noticeable.

“Um!” he said, musingly. “Both bearded.”

“Yes, they both wore beards—full beards,” assented Mr. Quarterpage.
“And you see, they weren’t so much alike. But Maitland was a much
darker man than Chamberlayne, and he had brown eyes, while
Chamberlayne’s were rather a bright blue.”

“The removal of a beard makes a great difference,” remarked Spargo. He
looked at the photograph of Maitland in the group, comparing it with
that of Marbury which he had taken from his pocket. “And twenty years
makes a difference, too,” he added musingly.

“To some people twenty years makes a vast difference, sir,” said the
old gentleman. “To others it makes none—I haven’t changed much, they
tell me, during the past twenty years. But I’ve known men change—age,
almost beyond recognition!—in five years. It depends, sir, on what they
go through.”

Spargo suddenly laid aside the photographs, put his hands in his
pockets, and looked steadfastly at Mr. Quarterpage.

“Look here!” he said. “I’m going to tell you what I’m after, Mr.
Quarterpage. I’m sure you’ve heard all about what’s known as the Middle
Temple Murder—the Marbury case?”

“Yes, I’ve read of it,” replied Mr. Quarterpage.

“Have you read the accounts of it in my paper, the _Watchman_?” asked
Spargo.

Mr. Quarterpage shook his head.

“I’ve only read one newspaper, sir, since I was a young man,” he
replied. “I take the _Times_, sir—we always took it, aye, even in the
days when newspapers were taxed.”

“Very good,” said Spargo. “But perhaps I can tell you a little more
than you’ve read, for I’ve been working up that case ever since the
body of the man known as John Marbury was found. Now, if you’ll just
give me your attention, I’ll tell you the whole story from that moment
until—now.”

And Spargo, briefly, succinctly, re-told the story of the Marbury case
from the first instant of his own connection with it until the
discovery of the silver ticket, and Mr. Quarterpage listened in rapt
attention, nodding his head from time to time as the younger man made
his points.

“And now, Mr. Quarterpage,” concluded Spargo, “this is the point I’ve
come to. I believe that the man who came to the Anglo-Orient Hotel as
John Marbury and who was undoubtedly murdered in Middle Temple Lane
that night, was John Maitland—I haven’t a doubt about it after learning
what you tell me about the silver ticket. I’ve found out a great deal
that’s valuable here, and I think I’m getting nearer to a solution of
the mystery. That is, of course, to find out who murdered John
Maitland, or Marbury. What you have told me about the Chamberlayne
affair has led me to think this—there may have been people, or a
person, in London, who was anxious to get Marbury, as we’ll call him,
out of the way, and who somehow encountered him that night—anxious to
silence him, I mean, because of the Chamberlayne affair. And I
wondered, as there is so much mystery about him, and as he won’t give
any account of himself, if this man Aylmore was really Chamberlayne.
Yes, I wondered that! But Aylmore’s a tall, finely-built man, quite six
feet in height, and his beard, though it’s now getting grizzled, has
been very dark, and Chamberlayne, you say, was a medium-sized, fair
man, with blue eyes.”

“That’s so, sir,” assented Mr. Quarterpage. “Yes, a middling-sized man,
and fair—very fair. Deary me, Mr. Spargo!—this is a revelation. And you
really think, sir, that John Maitland and John Marbury are one and the
same person?”

“I’m sure of it, now,” said Spargo. “I see it in this way. Maitland, on
his release, went out to Australia, and there he stopped. At last he
comes back, evidently well-to-do. He’s murdered the very day of his
arrival. Aylmore is the only man who knows anything of him—Aylmore
won’t tell all he knows; that’s flat. But Aylmore’s admitted that he
knew him at some vague date, say from twenty-one to twenty-two or three
years ago. Now, where did Aylmore know him? He says in London. That’s a
vague term. He won’t say where—he won’t say anything definite—he won’t
even say what he, Aylmore, himself was in those days. Do you recollect
anything of anybody like Aylmore coming here to see Maitland, Mr.
Quarterpage?”

“I don’t,” answered Mr. Quarterpage. “Maitland was a very quiet,
retiring fellow, sir: he was about the quietest man in the town. I
never remember that he had visitors; certainly I’ve no recollection of
such a friend of his as this Aylmore, from your description of him,
would be at that time.”

“Did Maitland go up to London much in those days?” asked Spargo.

Mr. Quarterpage laughed.

“Well, now, to show you what a good memory I have,” he said, “I’ll tell
you of something that occurred across there at the ‘Dragon’ only a few
months before the Maitland affair came out. There were some of us in
there one evening, and, for a rare thing, Maitland came in with
Chamberlayne. Chamberlayne happened to remark that he was going up to
town next day—he was always to and fro—and we got talking about London.
And Maitland said in course of conversation, that he believed he was
about the only man of his age in England—and, of course, he meant of
his class and means—who’d never even seen London! And I don’t think he
ever went there between that time and his trial: in fact, I’m sure he
didn’t, for if he had, I should have heard of it.”

“Well, that’s queer,” remarked Spargo. “It’s very queer. For I’m
certain Maitland and Marbury are one and the same person. My theory
about that old leather box is that Maitland had that carefully planted
before his arrest; that he dug it up when he came put of Dartmoor; that
he took it off to Australia with him; that he brought it back with him;
and that, of course, the silver ticket and the photograph had been in
it all these years. Now——”

At that moment the door of the library was opened, and a parlourmaid
looked in at her master.

“There’s the boots from the ‘Dragon’ at the front door, sir,” she said.
“He’s brought two telegrams across from there for Mr. Spargo, thinking
he might like to have them at once.”




CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
ARRESTED


Spargo hurried out to the hall, took the two telegrams from the boots
of the “Dragon,” and, tearing open the envelopes, read the messages
hastily. He went back to Mr. Quarterpage.

“Here’s important news,” he said as he closed the library door and
resumed his seat. “I’ll read these telegrams to you, sir, and then we
can discuss them in the light of what we’ve been talking about this
morning. The first is from our office. I told you we sent over to
Australia for a full report about Marbury at the place he said he
hailed from—Coolumbidgee. That report’s just reached the _Watchman_,
and they’ve wired it on to me. It’s from the chief of police at
Coolumbidgee to the editor of the _Watchman_, London:—

“John Marbury came to Coolumbidgee in the winter of 1898-9. He was
unaccompanied. He appeared to be in possession of fairly considerable
means and bought a share in a small sheep-farm from its proprietor,
Andrew Robertson, who is still here, and who says that Marbury never
told him anything about himself except that he had emigrated for health
reasons and was a widower. He mentioned that he had had a son who was
dead, and was now without relations. He lived a very quiet, steady life
on the sheep-farm, never leaving it for many years. About six months
ago, however, he paid a visit to Melbourne, and on returning told
Robertson that he had decided to return to England in consequence of
some news he had received, and must therefore sell his share in the
farm. Robertson bought it from him for three thousand pounds, and
Marbury shortly afterwards left for Melbourne. From what we could
gather, Robertson thinks Marbury was probably in command of five or six
thousand when he left Coolumbidgee. He told Robertson that he had met a
man in Melbourne who had given him news that surprised him, but did not
say what news. He had in his possession when he left Robertson exactly
the luggage he brought with him when he came—a stout portmanteau and a
small, square leather box. There are no effects of his left behind at
Coolumbidgee.”


“That’s all,” said Spargo, laying the first of the telegrams on the
table. “And it seems to me to signify a good deal. But now here’s more
startling news. This is from Rathbury, the Scotland Yard detective that
I told you of, Mr. Quarterpage—he promised, you know, to keep me posted
in what went on in my absence. Here’s what he says:

“Fresh evidence tending to incriminate Aylmore has come to hand.
Authorities have decided to arrest him on suspicion. You’d better hurry
back if you want material for to-morrow’s paper.”


Spargo threw that telegram down, too, waited while the old gentleman
glanced at both of them with evident curiosity, and then jumped up.

“Well, I shall have to go, Mr. Quarterpage,” he said. “I looked the
trains out this morning so as to be in readiness. I can catch the 1.20
to Paddington—that’ll get me in before half-past four. I’ve an hour
yet. Now, there’s another man I want to see in Market Milcaster. That’s
the photographer—or a photographer. You remember I told you of the
photograph found with the silver ticket? Well, I’m calculating that
that photograph was taken here, and I want to see the man who took
it—if he’s alive and I can find him.”

Mr. Quarterpage rose and put on his hat.

“There’s only one photographer in this town, sir,” he said, “and he’s
been here for a good many years—Cooper. I’ll take you to him—it’s only
a few doors away.”

Spargo wasted no time in letting the photographer know what he wanted.
He put a direct question to Mr. Cooper—an elderly man.

“Do you remember taking a photograph of the child of John Maitland, the
bank manager, some twenty or twenty-one years ago?” he asked, after Mr.
Quarterpage had introduced him as a gentleman from London who wanted to
ask a few questions.

“Quite well, sir,” replied Mr. Cooper. “As well as if it had been
yesterday.”

“Do you still happen to have a copy of it?” asked Spargo.

But Mr. Cooper had already turned to a row of file albums. He took down
one labelled 1891, and began to search its pages. In a minute or two he
laid it on his table before his callers.

“There you are, sir,” he said. “That’s the child!”

Spargo gave one glance at the photograph and turned to Mr. Quarterpage.
“Just as I thought,” he said. “That’s the same photograph we found in
the leather box with the silver ticket. I’m obliged to you, Mr. Cooper.
Now, there’s just one more question I want to ask. Did you ever supply
any further copies of this photograph to anybody after the Maitland
affair?—that is; after the family had left the town?”

“Yes,” replied the photographer. “I supplied half a dozen copies to
Miss Baylis, the child’s aunt, who, as a matter of fact, brought him
here to be photographed. And I can give you her address, too,” he
continued, beginning to turn over another old file. “I have it
somewhere.”

Mr. Quarterpage nudged Spargo.

“That’s something I couldn’t have done!” he remarked. “As I told you,
she’d disappeared from Brighton when enquiries were made after
Maitland’s release.”

“Here you are,” said Mr. Cooper. “I sent six copies of that photograph
to Miss Baylis in April, 1895. Her address was then 6, Chichester
Square, Bayswater, W.”

Spargo rapidly wrote this address down, thanked the photographer for
his courtesy, and went out with Mr. Quarterpage. In the street he
turned to the old gentleman with a smile.

“Well, I don’t think there’s much doubt about that!” he exclaimed.
“Maitland and Marbury are the same man, Mr. Quarterpage. I’m as certain
of that as that I see your Town Hall there.”

“And what will you do next, sir?” enquired Mr. Quarterpage.

“Thank you—as I do—for all your kindness and assistance, and get off to
town by this 1.20,” replied Spargo. “And I shan’t fail to let you know
how things go on.”

“One moment,” said the old gentleman, as Spargo was hurrying away, “do
you think this Mr. Aylmore really murdered Maitland?”

“No!” answered Spargo with emphasis. “I don’t! And I think we’ve got a
good deal to do before we find out who did.”

Spargo purposely let the Marbury case drop out of his mind during his
journey to town. He ate a hearty lunch in the train and talked with his
neighbours; it was a relief to let his mind and attention turn to
something else than the theme which had occupied it unceasingly for so
many days. But at Reading the newspaper boys were shouting the news of
the arrest of a Member of Parliament, and Spargo, glancing out of the
window, caught sight of a newspaper placard:

THE MARBURY MURDER CASE
ARREST OF MR. AYLMORE


He snatched a paper from a boy as the train moved out and, unfolding
it, found a mere announcement in the space reserved for stop-press
news:

“Mr. Stephen Aylmore, M.P., was arrested at two o’clock this afternoon,
on his way to the House of Commons, on a charge of being concerned in
the murder of John Marbury in Middle Temple Lane on the night of June
21st last. It is understood he will be brought up at Bow Street at ten
o’clock tomorrow morning.”


Spargo hurried to New Scotland Yard as soon as he reached Paddington.
He met Rathbury coming away from his room. At sight of him, the
detective turned back.

“Well, so there you are!” he said. “I suppose you’ve heard the news?”

Spargo nodded as he dropped into a chair.

“What led to it?” he asked abruptly. “There must have been something.”

“There was something,” he replied. “The thing—stick, bludgeon, whatever
you like to call it, some foreign article—with which Marbury was struck
down was found last night.”

“Well?” asked Spargo.

“It was proved to be Aylmore’s property,” answered Rathbury. “It was a
South American curio that he had in his rooms in Fountain Court.”

“Where was it found?” asked Spargo.

Rathbury laughed.

“He was a clumsy fellow who did it, whether he was Aylmore or whoever
he was!” he replied. “Do you know, it had been dropped into a
sewer-trap in Middle Temple Lane—actually! Perhaps the murderer thought
it would be washed out into the Thames and float away. But, of course,
it was bound to come to light. A sewer man found it yesterday evening,
and it was quickly recognized by the woman who cleans up for Aylmore as
having been in his rooms ever since she knew them.”

“What does Aylmore say about it?” asked Spargo. “I suppose he’s said
something?”

“Says that the bludgeon is certainly his, and that he brought it from
South America with him,” announced Rathbury; “but that he doesn’t
remember seeing it in his rooms for some time, and thinks that it was
stolen from them.”

“Um!” said Spargo, musingly. “But—how do you know that was the thing
that Marbury was struck down with?”

Rathbury smiled grimly.

“There’s some of his hair on it—mixed with blood,” he answered. “No
doubt about that. Well—anything come of your jaunt westward?”

“Yes,” replied Spargo. “Lots!”

“Good?” asked Rathbury.

“Extra good. I’ve found out who Marbury really was.”

“No! Really?”

“No doubt, to my mind. I’m certain of it.”

Rathbury sat down at his desk, watching Spargo with rapt attention.

“And who was he?” he asked.

“John Maitland, once of Market Milcaster,” replied Spargo. “Ex-bank
manager. Also ex-convict.”

“Ex-convict!”

“Ex-convict. He was sentenced, at Market Milcaster Quarter Sessions, in
autumn, 1891, to ten years’ penal servitude, for embezzling the bank’s
money, to the tune of over two hundred thousand pounds. Served his term
at Dartmoor. Went to Australia as soon, or soon after, he came out.
That’s who Marbury was—Maitland. Dead—certain!”

Rathbury still stared at his caller.

“Go on!” he said. “Tell all about it, Spargo. Let’s hear every detail.
I’ll tell you all I know after. But what I know’s nothing to that.”

Spargo told him the whole story of his adventures at Market Milcaster,
and the detective listened with rapt attention.

“Yes,” he said at the end. “Yes—I don’t think there’s much doubt about
that. Well, that clears up a lot, doesn’t it?”

Spargo yawned.

“Yes, a whole slate full is wiped off there,” he said. “I haven’t so
much interest in Marbury, or Maitland now. My interest is all in
Aylmore.”

Rathbury nodded.

“Yes,” he said. “The thing to find out is—who is Aylmore, or who was
he, twenty years ago?”

“Your people haven’t found anything out, then?” asked Spargo.

“Nothing beyond the irreproachable history of Mr. Aylmore since he
returned to this country, a very rich man, some ten years since,”
answered Rathbury, smiling. “They’ve no previous dates to go on. What
are you going to do next, Spargo?”

“Seek out that Miss Baylis,” replied Spargo.

“You think you could get something there?” asked Rathbury.

“Look here!” said Spargo. “I don’t believe for a second Aylmore killed
Marbury. I believe I shall get at the truth by following up what I call
the Maitland trail. This Miss Baylis must know something—if she’s
alive. Well, now I’m going to report at the office. Keep in touch with
me, Rathbury.”

He went on then to the _Watchman_ office, and as he got out of his
taxi-cab at its door, another cab came up and set down Mr. Aylmore’s
daughters.




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
THE BLANK PAST


Jessie Aylmore came forward to meet Spargo with ready confidence; the
elder girl hung back diffidently.

“May we speak to you?” said Jessie. “We have come on purpose to speak
to you. Evelyn didn’t want to come, but I made her come.”

Spargo shook hands silently with Evelyn Aylmore and motioned them both
to follow him. He took them straight upstairs to his room and bestowed
them in his easiest chairs before he addressed them.

“I’ve only just got back to town,” he said abruptly. “I was sorry to
hear the news about your father. That’s what’s brought you here, of
course. But—I’m afraid I can’t do much.”

“I told you that we had no right to trouble Mr. Spargo, Jessie,” said
Evelyn Aylmore. “What can he do to help us?”

Jessie shook her head impatiently.

“The _Watchman’s_ about the most powerful paper in London, isn’t it?”
she said. “And isn’t Mr. Spargo writing all these articles about the
Marbury case? Mr. Spargo, you must help us!”

Spargo sat down at his desk and began turning over the letters and
papers which had accumulated during his absence.

“To be absolutely frank with you,” he said, presently, “I don’t see how
anybody’s going to help, so long as your father keeps up that mystery
about the past.”

“That,” said Evelyn, quietly, “is exactly what Ronald says, Jessie. But
we can’t make our father speak, Mr. Spargo. That he is as innocent as
we are of this terrible crime we are certain, and we don’t know why he
wouldn’t answer the questions put to him at the inquest. And—we know no
more than you know or anyone knows, and though I have begged my father
to speak, he won’t say a word. We saw his danger: Ronald—Mr.
Breton—told us, and we implored him to tell everything he knew about
Mr. Marbury. But so far he has simply laughed at the idea that he had
anything to do with the murder, or could be arrested for it, and now——”

“And now he’s locked up,” said Spargo in his usual matter-of-fact
fashion. “Well, there are people who have to be saved from themselves,
you know. Perhaps you’ll have to save your father from the consequences
of his own—shall we say obstinacy? Now, look here, between ourselves,
how much do you know about your father’s—past?”

The two sisters looked at each other and then at Spargo.

“Nothing,” said the elder.

“Absolutely nothing!” said the younger.

“Answer a few plain questions,” said Spargo. “I’m not going to print
your replies, nor make use of them in any way: I’m only asking the
questions with a desire to help you. Have you any relations in
England?”

“None that we know of,” replied Evelyn.

“Nobody you could go to for information about the past?” asked Spargo.

“No—nobody!”

Spargo drummed his fingers on his blotting-pad. He was thinking hard.

“How old is your father?” he asked suddenly.

“He was fifty-nine a few weeks ago,” answered Evelyn.

“And how old are you, and how old is your sister?” demanded Spargo.

“I am twenty, and Jessie is nearly nineteen.”

“Where were you born?”

“Both of us at San Gregorio, which is in the San José province of
Argentina, north of Monte Video.”

“Your father was in business there?”

“He was in business in the export trade, Mr. Spargo. There’s no secret
about that. He exported all sorts of things to England and to
France—skins, hides, wools, dried salts, fruit. That’s how he made his
money.”

“You don’t know how long he’d been there when you were born?”

“No.”

“Was he married when he went out there?”

“No, he wasn’t. We do know that. He’s told us the circumstances of his
marriage, because they were romantic. When he sailed from England to
Buenos Ayres, he met on the steamer a young lady who, he said, was like
himself, relationless and nearly friendless. She was going out to
Argentina as a governess. She and my father fell in love with each
other, and they were married in Buenos Ayres soon after the steamer
arrived.”

“And your mother is dead?”

“My mother died before we came to England. I was eight years old, and
Jessie six, then.”

“And you came to England—how long after that?”

“Two years.”

“So that you’ve been in England ten years. And you know nothing
whatever of your father’s past beyond what you’ve told me?”

“Nothing—absolutely nothing.”

“Never heard him talk of—you see, according to your account, your
father was a man of getting on to forty when he went out to Argentina.
He must have had a career of some sort in this country. Have you never
heard him speak of his boyhood? Did he never talk of old times, or that
sort of thing?”

“I never remember hearing my father speak of any period antecedent to
his marriage,” replied Evelyn.

“I once asked him a question about his childhood.” said Jessie. “He
answered that his early days had not been very happy ones, and that he
had done his best to forget them. So I never asked him anything again.”

“So that it really comes to this,” remarked Spargo. “You know nothing
whatever about your father, his family, his fortunes, his life, beyond
what you yourselves have observed since you were able to observe?
That’s about it, isn’t it?”

“I should say that that is exactly it,” answered Evelyn.

“Just so,” said Spargo. “And therefore, as I told your sister the other
day, the public will say that your father has some dark secret behind
him, and that Marbury had possession of it, and that your father killed
him in order to silence him. That isn’t my view. I not only believe
your father to be absolutely innocent, but I believe that he knows no
more than a child unborn of Marbury’s murder, and I’m doing my best to
find out who that murderer was. By the by, since you’ll see all about
it in tomorrow morning’s _Watchman_, I may as well tell you that I’ve
found out who Marbury really was. He——”

At this moment Spargo’s door was opened and in walked Ronald Breton. He
shook his head at sight of the two sisters.

“I thought I should find you here,” he said. “Jessie said she was
coming to see you, Spargo. I don’t know what good you can do—I don’t
see what good the most powerful newspaper in the world can do. My
God!—everything’s about as black as ever it can be. Mr. Aylmore—I’ve
just come away from him; his solicitor, Stratton, and I have been with
him for an hour—is obstinate as ever—he will not tell more than he has
told. Whatever good can you do, Spargo, when he won’t speak about that
knowledge of Marbury which he must have?”

“Oh, well!” said Spargo. “Perhaps we can give him some information
about Marbury. Mr. Aylmore has forgotten that it’s not such a difficult
thing to rake up the past as he seems to think it is. For example, as I
was just telling these young ladies, I myself have discovered who
Marbury really was.”

Breton started.

“You have? Without doubt?” he exclaimed.

“Without reasonable doubt. Marbury was an ex-convict.”

Spargo watched the effect of this sudden announcement. The two girls
showed no sign of astonishment or of unusual curiosity; they received
the news with as much unconcern as if Spargo had told them that Marbury
was a famous musician. But Ronald Breton started, and it seemed to
Spargo that he saw a sense of suspicion dawn in his eyes.

“Marbury—an ex-convict!” he exclaimed. “You mean that?”

“Read your _Watchman_ in the morning,” said Spargo. “You’ll find the
whole story there—I’m going to write it tonight when you people have
gone. It’ll make good reading.”

Evelyn and Jessie Aylmore took Spargo’s hint and went away, Spargo
seeing them to the door with another assurance of his belief in their
father’s innocence and his determination to hunt down the real
criminal. Ronald Breton went down with them to the street and saw them
into a cab, but in another minute he was back in Spargo’s room as
Spargo had expected. He shut the door carefully behind him and turned
to Spargo with an eager face.

“I say, Spargo, is that really so?” he asked. “About Marbury being an
ex-convict?”

“That’s so, Breton. I’ve no more doubt about it than I have that I see
you. Marbury was in reality one John Maitland, a bank manager, of
Market Milcaster, who got ten years’ penal servitude in 1891 for
embezzlement.”

“In 1891? Why—that’s just about the time that Aylmore says he knew
him!”

“Exactly. And—it just strikes me,” said Spargo, sitting down at his
desk and making a hurried note, “it just strikes me—didn’t Aylmore say
he knew Marbury in London?”

“Certainly,” replied Breton. “In London.”

“Um!” mused Spargo. “That’s queer, because Maitland had never been in
London up to the time of his going to Dartmoor, whatever he may have
done when he came out of Dartmoor, and, of course, Aylmore had gone to
South America long before that. Look here, Breton,” he continued,
aloud, “have you access to Aylmore? Will you, can you, see him before
he’s brought up at Bow Street tomorrow?”

“Yes,” answered Breton. “I can see him with his solicitor.”

“Then listen,” said Spargo. “Tomorrow morning you’ll find the whole
story of how I proved Marbury’s identity with Maitland in the
_Watchman_. Read it as early as you can; get an interview with Aylmore
as early as you can; make him read it, every word, before he’s brought
up. Beg him if he values his own safety and his daughters’ peace of
mind to throw away all that foolish reserve, and to tell all he knows
about Maitland twenty years ago. He should have done that at first.
Why, I was asking his daughters some questions before you came in—they
know absolutely nothing of their father’s history previous to the time
when they began to understand things! Don’t you see that Aylmore’s
career, previous to his return to England, is a blank past!”

“I know—I know!” said Breton. “Yes—although I’ve gone there a great
deal, I never heard Aylmore speak of anything earlier than his
Argentine experiences. And yet, he must have been getting on when he
went out there.”

“Thirty-seven or eight, at least,” remarked Spargo. “Well, Aylmore’s
more or less of a public man, and no public man can keep his life
hidden nowadays. By the by, how did you get to know the Aylmores?”

“My guardian, Mr. Elphick, and I met them in Switzerland,” answered
Breton. “We kept up the acquaintance after our return.”

“Mr. Elphick still interesting himself in the Marbury case?” asked
Spargo.

“Very much so. And so is old Cardlestone, at the foot of whose stairs
the thing came off. I dined with them last night and they talked of
little else,” said Breton.

“And their theory—”

“Oh, still the murder for the sake of robbery!” replied Breton. “Old
Cardlestone is furious that such a thing could have happened at his
very door. He says that there ought to be a thorough enquiry into every
tenant of the Temple.”

“Longish business that,” observed Spargo. “Well, run away now, Breton—I
must write.”

“Shall you be at Bow Street tomorrow morning?” asked Breton as he moved
to the door. “It’s to be at ten-thirty.”

“No, I shan’t!” replied Spargo. “It’ll only be a remand, and I know
already just as much as I should hear there. I’ve got something much
more important to do. But you’ll remember what I asked of you—get
Aylmore to read my story in the _Watchman_, and beg him to speak out
and tell all he knows—all!”

And when Breton had gone, Spargo again murmured those last words: “All
he knows—all!”




CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
MISS BAYLIS


Next day, a little before noon, Spargo found himself in one of those
pretentious yet dismal Bayswater squares, which are almost entirely
given up to the trade, calling, or occupation of the lodging and
boarding-house keeper. They are very pretentious, those squares, with
their many-storied houses, their stuccoed frontages, and their
pilastered and balconied doorways; innocent country folk, coming into
them from the neighbouring station of Paddington, take them to be the
residences of the dukes and earls who, of course, live nowhere else but
in London. They are further encouraged in this belief by the fact that
young male persons in evening dress are often seen at the doorways in
more or less elegant attitudes. These, of course, are taken by the
country folk to be young lords enjoying the air of Bayswater, but
others, more knowing, are aware that they are Swiss or German waiters
whose linen might be cleaner.

Spargo gauged the character of the house at which he called as soon as
the door was opened to him. There was the usual smell of eggs and
bacon, of fish and chops; the usual mixed and ancient collection of
overcoats, wraps, and sticks in the hall; the usual sort of parlourmaid
to answer the bell. And presently, in answer to his enquiries, there
was the usual type of landlady confronting him, a more than middle-aged
person who desired to look younger, and made attempts in the way of
false hair, teeth, and a little rouge, and who wore that somewhat air
and smile which in its wearer—under these circumstances—always means
that she is considering whether you will be able to cheat her or
whether she will be able to see you.

“You wish to see Miss Baylis?” said this person, examining Spargo
closely. “Miss Baylis does not often see anybody.”

“I hope,” said Spargo politely, “that Miss Baylis is not an invalid?”

“No, she’s not an invalid,” replied the landlady; “but she’s not as
young as she was, and she’s an objection to strangers. Is it anything I
can tell her?”

“No,” said Spargo. “But you can, if you please, take her a message from
me. Will you kindly give her my card, and tell her that I wish to ask
her a question about John Maitland of Market Milcaster, and that I
should be much obliged if she would give me a few minutes.”

“Perhaps you will sit down,” said the landlady. She led Spargo into a
room which opened out upon a garden; in it two or three old ladies,
evidently inmates, were sitting. The landlady left Spargo to sit with
them and to amuse himself by watching them knit or sew or read the
papers, and he wondered if they always did these things every day, and
if they would go on doing them until a day would come when they would
do them no more, and he was beginning to feel very dreary when the door
opened and a woman entered whom Spargo, after one sharp glance at her,
decided to be a person who was undoubtedly out of the common. And as
she slowly walked across the room towards him he let his first glance
lengthen into a look of steady inspection.

The woman whom Spargo thus narrowly inspected was of very remarkable
appearance. She was almost masculine; she stood nearly six feet in
height; she was of a masculine gait and tread, and spare, muscular, and
athletic. What at once struck Spargo about her face was the strange
contrast between her dark eyes and her white hair; the hair, worn in
abundant coils round a well-shaped head, was of the most snowy
whiteness; the eyes of a real coal-blackness, as were also the eyebrows
above them. The features were well-cut and of a striking firmness; the
jaw square and determined. And Spargo’s first thought on taking all
this in was that Miss Baylis seemed to have been fitted by Nature to be
a prison wardress, or the matron of a hospital, or the governess of an
unruly girl, and he began to wonder if he would ever manage to extract
anything out of those firmly-locked lips.

Miss Baylis, on her part, looked Spargo over as if she was half-minded
to order him to instant execution. And Spargo was so impressed by her
that he made a profound bow and found a difficulty in finding his
tongue.

“Mr. Spargo?” she said in a deep voice which seemed peculiarly suited
to her. “Of, I see, the _Watchman_? You wish to speak to me?”

Spargo again bowed in silence. She signed him to the window near which
they were standing.

“Open the casement, if you please,” she commanded him. “We will walk in
the garden. This is not private.”

Spargo obediently obeyed her orders; she swept through the opened
window and he followed her. It was not until they had reached the
bottom of the garden that she spoke again.

“I understand that you desire to ask me some question about John
Maitland, of Market Milcaster?” she said. “Before you put it. I must
ask you a question. Do you wish any reply I may give you for
publication?”

“Not without your permission,” replied Spargo. “I should not think of
publishing anything you may tell me except with your express
permission.”

She looked at him gloomily, seemed to gather an impression of his good
faith, and nodded her head.

“In that case,” she said, “what do you want to ask?”

“I have lately had reason for making certain enquiries about John
Maitland,” answered Spargo. “I suppose you read the newspapers and
possibly the _Watchman_, Miss Baylis?”

But Miss Baylis shook her head.

“I read no newspapers,” she said. “I have no interest in the affairs of
the world. I have work which occupies all my time: I give my whole
devotion to it.”

“Then you have not recently heard of what is known as the Marbury
case—a case of a man who was found murdered?” asked Spargo.

“I have not,” she answered. “I am not likely to hear such things.”

Spargo suddenly realized that the power of the Press is not quite as
great nor as far-reaching as very young journalists hold it to be, and
that there actually are, even in London, people who can live quite
cheerfully without a newspaper. He concealed his astonishment and went
on.

“Well,” he said, “I believe that the murdered man, known to the police
as John Marbury, was, in reality, your brother-in-law, John Maitland.
In fact, Miss Baylis, I’m absolutely certain of it!”

He made this declaration with some emphasis, and looked at his stern
companion to see how she was impressed. But Miss Baylis showed no sign
of being impressed.

“I can quite believe that, Mr. Spargo,” she said coldly. “It is no
surprise to me that John Maitland should come to such an end. He was a
thoroughly bad and unprincipled man, who brought the most terrible
disgrace on those who were, unfortunately, connected with him. He was
likely to die a bad man’s death.”

“I may ask you a few questions about him?” suggested Spargo in his most
insinuating manner.

“You may, so long as you do not drag my name into the papers,” she
replied. “But pray, how do you know that I have the sad shame of being
John Maitland’s sister-in-law?”

“I found that out at Market Milcaster,” said Spargo. “The photographer
told me—Cooper.”

“Ah!” she exclaimed.

“The questions I want to ask are very simple,” said Spargo. “But your
answers may materially help me. You remember Maitland going to prison,
of course?”

Miss Baylis laughed—a laugh of scorn.

“Could I ever forget it?” she exclaimed.

“Did you ever visit him in prison?” asked Spargo.

“Visit him in prison!” she said indignantly. “Visits in prison are to
be paid to those who deserve them, who are repentant; not to scoundrels
who are hardened in their sin!”

“All right. Did you ever see him after he left prison?”

“I saw him, for he forced himself upon me—I could not help myself. He
was in my presence before I was aware that he had even been released.”

“What did he come for?” asked Spargo.

“To ask for his son—who had been in my charge,” she replied.

“That’s a thing I want to know about,” said Spargo. “Do you know what a
certain lot of people in Market Milcaster say to this day, Miss
Baylis?—they say that you were in at the game with Maitland; that you
had a lot of the money placed in your charge; that when Maitland went
to prison, you took the child away, first to Brighton, then
abroad—disappeared with him—and that you made a home ready for Maitland
when he came out. That’s what’s said by some people in Market
Milcaster.”

Miss Baylis’s stern lips curled.

“People in Market Milcaster!” she exclaimed. “All the people I ever
knew in Market Milcaster had about as many brains between them as that
cat on the wall there. As for making a home for John Maitland, I would
have seen him die in the gutter, of absolute want, before I would have
given him a crust of dry bread!”

“You appear to have a terrible dislike of this man,” observed Spargo,
astonished at her vehemence.

“I had—and I have,” she answered. “He tricked my sister into a marriage
with him when he knew that she would rather have married an honest man
who worshipped her; he treated her with quiet, infernal cruelty; he
robbed her and me of the small fortunes our father left us.”

“Ah!” said Spargo. “Well, so you say Maitland came to you, when he came
out of prison, to ask for his boy. Did he take the boy?”

“No—the boy was dead.”

“Dead, eh? Then I suppose Maitland did not stop long with you?”

Miss Baylis laughed her scornful laugh.

“I showed him the door!” she said.

“Well, did he tell you that he was going to Australia?” enquired
Spargo.

“I should not have listened to anything that he told me, Mr. Spargo,”
she answered.

“Then, in short,” said Spargo, “you never heard of him again?”

“I never heard of him again,” she declared passionately, “and I only
hope that what you tell me is true, and that Marbury really was
Maitland!”




CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
MOTHER GUTCH


Spargo, having exhausted the list of questions which he had thought out
on his way to Bayswater, was about to take his leave of Miss Baylis,
when a new idea suddenly occurred to him, and he turned back to that
formidable lady.

“I’ve just thought of something else,” he said. “I told you that I’m
certain Marbury was Maitland, and that he came to a sad end—murdered.”

“And I’ve told you,” she replied scornfully, “that in my opinion no end
could be too bad for him.”

“Just so—I understand you,” said Spargo. “But I didn’t tell you that he
was not only murdered but robbed—robbed of probably a good deal.
There’s good reason to believe that he had securities, bank notes,
loose diamonds, and other things on him to the value of a large amount.
He’d several thousand pounds when he left Coolumbidgee, in New South
Wales, where he’d lived quietly for some years.”

Miss Baylis smiled sourly.

“What’s all this to me?” she asked.

“Possibly nothing. But you see, that money, those securities, may be
recovered. And as the boy you speak of is dead, there surely must be
somebody who’s entitled to the lot. It’s worth having, Miss Baylis, and
there’s strong belief on the part of the police that it will turn up.”

This was a bit of ingenious bluff on the part of Spargo; he watched its
effect with keen eyes. But Miss Baylis was adamant, and she looked as
scornful as ever.

“I say again what’s all that to me?” she exclaimed.

“Well, but hadn’t the dead boy any relatives on his father’s side?”
asked Spargo. “I know you’re his aunt on the mother’s side, and as
you’re indifferent perhaps, I can find some on the other side. It’s
very easy to find all these things out, you know.”

Miss Baylis, who had begun to stalk back to the house in gloomy and
majestic fashion, and had let Spargo see plainly that this part of the
interview was distasteful to her, suddenly paused in her stride and
glared at the young journalist.

“Easy to find all these things out?” she repeated.

Spargo caught, or fancied he caught, a note of anxiety in her tone. He
was quick to turn his fancy to practical purpose.

“Oh, easy enough!” he said. “I could find out all about Maitland’s
family through that boy. Quite, quite easily!”

Miss Baylis had stopped now, and stood glaring at him. “How?” she
demanded.

“I’ll tell you,” said Spargo with cheerful alacrity. “It is, of course,
the easiest thing in the world to trace all about his short life. I
suppose I can find the register of his birth at Market Milcaster, and
you, of course, will tell me where he died. By the by, when did he die,
Miss Baylis?”

But Miss Baylis was going on again to the house.

“I shall tell you nothing more,” she said angrily. “I’ve told you too
much already, and I believe all you’re here for is to get some news for
your paper. But I will, at any rate tell you this—when Maitland went to
prison his child would have been defenceless but for me; he’d have had
to go to the workhouse but for me; he hadn’t a single relation in the
world but me, on either father’s or mother’s side. And even at my age,
old woman as I am, I’d rather beg my bread in the street, I’d rather
starve and die, than touch a penny piece that had come from John
Maitland! That’s all.”

Then without further word, without offering to show Spargo the way out,
she marched in at the open window and disappeared. And Spargo, knowing
no other way, was about to follow her when he heard a sudden rustling
sound in the shadow by which they had stood, and the next moment a
queer, cracked, horrible voice, suggesting all sorts of things, said
distinctly and yet in a whisper:

“Young man!”

Spargo turned and stared at the privet hedge behind him. It was thick
and bushy, and in its full summer green, but it seemed to him that he
saw a nondescript shape behind. “Who’s there?” he demanded. “Somebody
listening?”

There was a curious cackle of laughter from behind the hedge; then the
cracked, husky voice spoke again.

“Young man, don’t you move or look as if you were talking to anybody.
Do you know where the ‘King of Madagascar’ public-house is in this
quarter of the town, young man?”

“No!” answered Spargo. “Certainly not!”

“Well, anybody’ll tell you when you get outside, young man,” continued
the queer voice of the unseen person. “Go there, and wait at the corner
by the ‘King of Madagascar,’ and I’ll come there to you at the end of
half an hour. Then I’ll tell you something, young man—I’ll tell you
something. Now run away, young man, run away to the ‘King of
Madagascar’—I’m coming!”

The voice ended in low, horrible cachinnation which made Spargo feel
queer. But he was young enough to be in love with adventure, and he
immediately turned on his heel without so much as a glance at the
privet hedge, and went across the garden and through the house, and let
himself out at the door. And at the next corner of the square he met a
policeman and asked him if he knew where the “King of Madagascar” was.

“First to the right, second to the left,” answered the policeman
tersely. “You can’t miss it anywhere round there—it’s a landmark.”

And Spargo found the landmark—a great, square-built tavern—easily, and
he waited at a corner of it wondering what he was going to see, and
intensely curious about the owner of the queer voice, with all its
suggestions of he knew not what. And suddenly there came up to him an
old woman and leered at him in a fashion that made him suddenly realize
how dreadful old age may be.

Spargo had never seen such an old woman as this in his life. She was
dressed respectably, better than respectably. Her gown was good; her
bonnet was smart; her smaller fittings were good. But her face was
evil; it showed unmistakable signs of a long devotion to the bottle;
the old eyes leered and ogled, the old lips were wicked. Spargo felt a
sense of disgust almost amounting to nausea, but he was going to hear
what the old harridan had to say and he tried not to look what he felt.

“Well?” he said, almost roughly. “Well?”

“Well, young man, there you are,” said his new acquaintance. “Let us go
inside, young man; there’s a quiet little place where a lady can sit
and take her drop of gin—I’ll show you. And if you’re good to me, I’ll
tell you something about that cat that you were talking to just now.
But you’ll give me a little matter to put in my pocket, young man? Old
ladies like me have a right to buy little comforts, you know, little
comforts.”

Spargo followed this extraordinary person into a small parlour within;
the attendant who came in response to a ring showed no astonishment at
her presence; he also seemed to know exactly what she required, which
was a certain brand of gin, sweetened, and warm. And Spargo watched her
curiously as with shaking hand she pushed up the veil which hid little
of her wicked old face, and lifted the glass to her mouth with a zest
which was not thirst but pure greed of liquor. Almost instantly he saw
a new light steal into her eyes, and she laughed in a voice that grew
clearer with every sound she made.

“Ah, young man!” she said with a confidential nudge of the elbow that
made Spargo long to get up and fly. “I wanted that! It’s done me good.
When I’ve finished that, you’ll pay for another for me—and perhaps
another? They’ll do me still more good. And you’ll give me a little
matter of money, won’t you, young man?”

“Not till I know what I’m giving it for,” replied Spargo.

“You’ll be giving it because I’m going to tell you that if it’s made
worth my while I can tell you, or somebody that sent you, more about
Jane Baylis than anybody in the world. I’m not going to tell you that
now, young man—I’m sure you don’t carry in your pocket what I shall
want for my secret, not you, by the look of you! I’m only going to show
you that I have the secret. Eh?”

“Who are you?” asked Spargo.

The woman leered and chuckled. “What are you going to give me, young
man?” she asked.

Spargo put his fingers in his pocket and pulled out two
half-sovereigns.

“Look here,” he said, showing his companion the coins, “if you can tell
me anything of importance you shall have these. But no trifling, now.
And no wasting of time. If you have anything to tell, out with it!”

The woman stretched out a trembling, claw-like hand.

“But let me hold one of those, young man!” she implored. “Let me hold
one of the beautiful bits of gold. I shall tell you all the better if I
hold one of them. Let me—there’s a good young gentleman.”

Spargo gave her one of the coins, and resigned himself to his fate,
whatever it might be.

“You won’t get the other unless you tell something,” he said. “Who are
you, anyway?”

The woman, who had begun mumbling and chuckling over the
half-sovereign, grinned horribly.

“At the boarding-house yonder, young man, they call me Mother Gutch,”
she answered; “but my proper name is Mrs. Sabina Gutch, and once upon a
time I was a good-looking young woman. And when my husband died I went
to Jane Baylis as housekeeper, and when she retired from that and came
to live in that boarding-house where we live now, she was forced to
bring me with her and to keep me. Why had she to do that, young man?”

“Heaven knows!” answered Spargo.

“Because I’ve got a hold on her, young man—I’ve got a secret of hers,”
continued Mother Gutch. “She’d be scared to death if she knew I’d been
behind that hedge and had heard what she said to you, and she’d be more
than scared if she knew that you and I were here, talking. But she’s
grown hard and near with me, and she won’t give me a penny to get a
drop of anything with, and an old woman like me has a right to her
little comforts, and if you’ll buy the secret, young man, I’ll split on
her, there and then, when you pay the money.”

“Before I talk about buying any secret,” said Spargo, “you’ll have to
prove to me that you’ve a secret to sell that’s worth my buying.”

“And I will prove it!” said Mother Gutch with sudden fierceness. “Touch
the bell, and let me have another glass, and then I’ll tell you. Now,”
she went on, more quietly—Spargo noticed that the more she drank, the
more rational she became, and that her nerves seemed to gain strength
and her whole appearance to be improved—“now, you came to her to find
out about her brother-in-law, Maitland, that went to prison, didn’t
you?”

“Well?” demanded Spargo.

“And about that boy of his?” she continued.

“You heard all that was said,” answered Spargo. “I’m waiting to hear
what you have to say.”

But Mother Gutch was resolute in having her own way. She continued her
questions:

“And she told you that Maitland came and asked for the boy, and that
she told him the boy was dead, didn’t she?” she went on.

“Well?” said Spargo despairingly. “She did. What then?”

Mother Gutch took an appreciative pull at her glass and smiled
knowingly. “What then?” she chuckled. “All lies, young man, the boy
isn’t dead—any more than I am. And my secret is—”

“Well?” demanded Spargo impatiently. “What is it?”

“This!” answered Mother Gutch, digging her companion in the ribs, “I
know what she did with him!”




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
REVELATIONS


Spargo turned on his disreputable and dissolute companion with all his
journalistic energies and instincts roused. He had not been sure, since
entering the “King of Madagascar,” that he was going to hear anything
material to the Middle Temple Murder; he had more than once feared that
this old gin-drinking harridan was deceiving him, for the purpose of
extracting drink and money from him. But now, at the mere prospect of
getting important information from her, he forgot all about Mother
Gutch’s unfortunate propensities, evil eyes, and sodden face; he only
saw in her somebody who could tell him something. He turned on her
eagerly.

“You say that John Maitland’s son didn’t die!” he exclaimed.

“The boy did not die,” replied Mother Gutch.

“And that you know where he is?” asked Spargo.

Mother Gutch shook her head.

“I didn’t say that I know where he is, young man,” she replied. “I said
I knew what she did with him.”

“What, then?” demanded Spargo.

Mother Gutch drew herself up in a vast assumption of dignity, and
favoured Spargo with a look.

“That’s the secret, young man,” she said. “I’m willing to sell that
secret, but not for two half-sovereigns and two or three drops of cold
gin. If Maitland left all that money you told Jane Baylis of, when I
was listening to you from behind the hedge, my secret’s worth
something.”

Spargo suddenly remembered his bit of bluff to Miss Baylis. Here was an
unexpected result of it.

“Nobody but me can help you to trace Maitland’s boy,” continued Mother
Gutch, “and I shall expect to be paid accordingly. That’s plain
language, young man.”

Spargo considered the situation in silence for a minute or two. Could
this wretched, bibulous old woman really be in possession of a secret
which would lead to the solving of the mystery of the Middle Temple
Murder? Well, it would be a fine thing for the _Watchman_ if the
clearing up of everything came through one of its men. And the
_Watchman_ was noted for being generous even to extravagance in laying
out money on all sorts of objects: it had spent money like water on
much less serious matters than this.

“How much do you want for your secret?” he suddenly asked, turning to
his companion.

Mother Gutch began to smooth out a pleat in her gown. It was really
wonderful to Spargo to find how very sober and normal this old harridan
had become; he did not understand that her nerves had been all a-quiver
and on edge when he first met her, and that a resort to her favourite
form of alcohol in liberal quantity had calmed and quickened them;
secretly he was regarding her with astonishment as the most
extraordinary old person he had ever met, and he was almost afraid of
her as he waited for her decision. At last Mother Gutch spoke.

“Well, young man,” she said, “having considered matters, and having a
right to look well to myself, I think that what I should prefer to have
would be one of those annuities. A nice, comfortable annuity, paid
weekly—none of your monthlies or quarterlies, but regular and punctual,
every Saturday morning. Or Monday morning, as was convenient to the
parties concerned—but punctual and regular. I know a good many ladies
in my sphere of life as enjoys annuities, and it’s a great comfort to
have ’em paid weekly.”

It occurred to Spargo that Mrs. Gutch would probably get rid of her
weekly dole on the day it was paid, whether that day happened to be
Monday or Saturday, but that, after all, was no concern of his, so he
came back to first principles.

“Even now you haven’t said how much,” he remarked.

“Three pound a week,” replied Mother Gutch. “And cheap, too!”

Spargo thought hard for two minutes. The secret might—might!—lead to
something big. This wretched old woman would probably drink herself to
death within a year or two. Anyhow, a few hundreds of pounds was
nothing to the _Watchman_. He glanced at his watch. At that hour—for
the next hour—the great man of the _Watchman_ would be at the office.
He jumped to his feet, suddenly resolved and alert.

“Here, I’ll take you to see my principals,” he said. “We’ll run along
in a taxi-cab.”

“With all the pleasure in the world, young man,” replied Mother Gutch;
“when you’ve given me that other half-sovereign. As for principals, I’d
far rather talk business with masters than with men—though I mean no
disrespect to you.”

Spargo, feeling that he was in for it, handed over the second
half-sovereign, and busied himself in ordering a taxi-cab. But when
that came round he had to wait while Mrs. Gutch consumed a third glass
of gin and purchased a flask of the same beverage to put in her pocket.
At last he got her off, and in due course to the _Watchman_ office,
where the hall-porter and the messenger boys stared at her in
amazement, well used as they were to seeing strange folk, and he got
her to his own room, and locked her in, and then he sought the presence
of the mighty.

What Spargo said to his editor and to the great man who controlled the
fortunes and workings of the _Watchman_ he never knew. It was probably
fortunate for him that they were both thoroughly conversant with the
facts of the Middle Temple Murder, and saw that there might be an
advantage in securing the revelations of which Spargo had got the
conditional promise. At any rate, they accompanied Spargo to his room,
intent on seeing, hearing and bargaining with the lady he had locked up
there.

Spargo’s room smelt heavily of unsweetened gin, but Mother Gutch was
soberer than ever. She insisted upon being introduced to proprietor and
editor in due and proper form, and in discussing terms with them before
going into any further particulars. The editor was all for temporizing
with her until something could be done to find out what likelihood of
truth there was in her, but the proprietor, after sizing her up in his
own shrewd fashion, took his two companions out of the room.

“We’ll hear what the old woman has to say on her own terms,” he said.
“She may have something to tell that is really of the greatest
importance in this case: she certainly has something to tell. And, as
Spargo says, she’ll probably drink herself to death in about as short a
time as possible. Come back—let’s hear her story.” So they returned to
the gin-scented atmosphere, and a formal document was drawn out by
which the proprietor of the _Watchman_ bound himself to pay Mrs. Gutch
the sum of three pounds a week for life (Mrs. Gutch insisting on the
insertion of the words “every Saturday morning, punctual and regular”)
and then Mrs. Gutch was invited to tell her tale. And Mrs. Gutch
settled herself to do so, and Spargo prepared to take it down, word for
word.

“Which the story, as that young man called it, is not so long as a
monkey’s tail nor so short as a Manx cat’s, gentlemen,” said Mrs.
Gutch; “but full of meat as an egg. Now, you see, when that Maitland
affair at Market Milcaster came off, I was housekeeper to Miss Jane
Baylis at Brighton. She kept a boarding-house there, in Kemp Town, and
close to the sea-front, and a very good thing she made out of it, and
had saved a nice bit, and having, like her sister, Mrs. Maitland, had a
little fortune left her by her father, as was at one time a publican
here in London, she had a good lump of money. And all that money was in
this here Maitland’s hands, every penny. I very well remember the day
when the news came about that affair of Maitland robbing the bank. Miss
Baylis, she was like a mad thing when she saw it in the paper, and
before she’d seen it an hour she was off to Market Milcaster. I went up
to the station with her, and she told me then before she got in the
train that Maitland had all her fortune and her savings, and her
sister’s, his wife’s, too, and that she feared all would be lost.”

“Mrs. Maitland was then dead,” observed Spargo without looking up from
his writing-block.

“She was, young man, and a good thing, too,” continued Mrs. Gutch.
“Well, away went Miss Baylis, and no more did I hear or see for nearly
a week, and then back she comes, and brings a little boy with her—which
was Maitland’s. And she told me that night that she’d lost every penny
she had in the world, and that her sister’s money, what ought to have
been the child’s, was gone, too, and she said her say about Maitland.
However, she saw well to that child; nobody could have seen better. And
very soon after, when Maitland was sent to prison for ten years, her
and me talked about things. ‘What’s the use,’ says I to her, ‘of your
letting yourself get so fond of that child, and looking after it as you
do, and educating it, and so on?’ I says. ‘Why not?’ says she. ‘’Tisn’t
yours,’ I says, ‘you haven’t no right to it,’ I says. ‘As soon as ever
its father comes out,’ says I,’ he’ll come and claim it, and you can’t
do nothing to stop him.’ Well, gentlemen, if you’ll believe me, never
did I see a woman look as she did when I says all that. And she up and
swore that Maitland should never see or touch the child again—not under
no circumstances whatever.”

Mrs. Gutch paused to take a little refreshment from her pocket-flask,
with an apologetic remark as to the state of her heart. She resumed,
presently, apparently refreshed.

“Well, gentlemen, that notion, about Maitland’s taking the child away
from her seemed to get on her mind, and she used to talk to me at times
about it, always saying the same thing—that Maitland should never have
him. And one day she told me she was going to London to see lawyers
about it, and she went, and she came back, seeming more satisfied, and
a day or two afterwards, there came a gentleman who looked like a
lawyer, and he stopped a day or two, and he came again and again, until
one day she came to me, and she says, ‘You don’t know who that
gentleman is that’s come so much lately?’ she says. ‘Not I,’ I says,
‘unless he’s after you.’ ‘After me!’ she says, tossing her head:
‘That’s the gentleman that ought to have married my poor sister if that
scoundrel Maitland hadn’t tricked her into throwing him over!’ ‘You
don’t say so!’ I says. ‘Then by rights he ought to have been the
child’s pa!’ ‘He’s going to be a father to the boy,’ she says. ‘He’s
going to take him and educate him in the highest fashion, and make a
gentleman of him,’ she says, ‘for his mother’s sake.’ ‘Mercy on us!’
says I. ‘What’ll Maitland say when he comes for him?’ ‘Maitland’ll
never come for him,’ she says, ‘for I’m going to leave here, and the
boy’ll be gone before then. This is all being done,’ she says, ‘so that
the child’ll never know his father’s shame—he’ll never know who his
father was.’ And true enough, the boy was taken away, but Maitland came
before she’d gone, and she told him the child was dead, and I never see
a man so cut up. However, it wasn’t no concern of mine. And so there’s
so much of the secret, gentlemen, and I would like to know if I ain’t
giving good value.”

“Very good,” said the proprietor. “Go on.” But Spargo intervened.

“Did you ever hear the name of the gentleman who took the boy away?” he
asked.

“Yes, I did,” replied Mrs. Gutch. “Of course I did. Which it was
Elphick.”




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
STILL SILENT


Spargo dropped his pen on the desk before him with a sharp clatter that
made Mrs. Gutch jump. A steady devotion to the bottle had made her
nerves to be none of the strongest, and she looked at the startler of
them with angry malevolence.

“Don’t do that again, young man!” she exclaimed sharply. “I can’t
a-bear to be jumped out of my skin, and it’s bad manners. I observed
that the gentleman’s name was Elphick.”

Spargo contrived to get in a glance at his proprietor and his editor—a
glance which came near to being a wink.

“Just so—Elphick,” he said. “A law gentleman I think you said, Mrs.
Gutch?”

“I said,” answered Mrs. Gutch, “as how he looked like a lawyer
gentleman. And since you’re so particular, young man, though I wasn’t
addressing you but your principals, he was a lawyer gentleman. One of
the sort that wears wigs and gowns—ain’t I seen his picture in Jane
Baylis’s room at the boarding-house where you saw her this morning?”

“Elderly man?” asked Spargo.

“Elderly he will be now,” replied the informant; “but when he took the
boy away he was a middle-aged man. About his age,” she added, pointing
to the editor in a fashion which made that worthy man wince and the
proprietor desire to laugh unconsumedly; “and not so very unlike him
neither, being one as had no hair on his face.”

“Ah!” said Spargo. “And where did this Mr. Elphick take the boy, Mrs.
Gutch?”

But Mrs. Gutch shook her head.

“Ain’t no idea,” she said. “He took him. Then, as I told you, Maitland
came, and Jane Baylis told him that the boy was dead. And after that
she never even told me anything about the boy. She kept a tight tongue.
Once or twice I asked her, and she says, ‘Never you mind,’ she says;
‘he’s all right for life, if he lives to be as old as Methusalem.’ And
she never said more, and I never said more. But,” continued Mrs. Gutch,
whose pocket-flask was empty, and who began to wipe tears away, “she’s
treated me hard has Jane Baylis, never allowing me a little comfort
such as a lady of my age should have, and when I hears the two of you
a-talking this morning the other side of that privet hedge, thinks I,
‘Now’s the time to have my knife into you, my fine madam!’ And I hope I
done it.”

Spargo looked at the editor and the proprietor, nodding his head
slightly. He meant them to understand that he had got all he wanted
from Mother Gutch.

“What are you going to do, Mrs. Gutch, when you leave here?” he asked.
“You shall be driven straight back to Bayswater, if you like.”

“Which I shall be obliged for, young man,” said Mrs. Gutch, “and
likewise for the first week of the annuity, and will call every
Saturday for the same at eleven punctual, or can be posted to me on a
Friday, whichever is agreeable to you gentlemen. And having my first
week in my purse, and being driven to Bayswater, I shall take my boxes
and go to a friend of mine where I shall be hearty welcome, shaking the
dust of my feet off against Jane Baylis and where I’ve been living with
her.”

“Yes, but, Mrs. Gutch,” said Spargo, with some anxiety, “if you go back
there tonight, you’ll be very careful not to tell Miss Baylis that
you’ve been here and told us all this?”

Mrs. Gutch rose, dignified and composed.

“Young man,” she said, “you mean well, but you ain’t used to dealing
with ladies. I can keep my tongue as still as anybody when I like. I
wouldn’t tell Jane Baylis my affairs—my new affairs, gentlemen, thanks
to you—not for two annuities, paid twice a week!”

“Take Mrs. Gutch downstairs, Spargo, and see her all right, and then
come to my room,” said the editor. “And don’t you forget, Mrs.
Gutch—keep a quiet tongue in your head—no more talk—or there’ll be no
annuities on Saturday mornings.”

So Spargo took Mother Gutch to the cashier’s department and paid her
her first week’s money, and he got her a taxi-cab, and paid for it, and
saw her depart, and then he went to the editor’s room, strangely
thoughtful. The editor and the proprietor were talking, but they
stopped when Spargo entered and looked at him eagerly. “I think we’ve
done it,” said Spargo quietly.

“What, precisely, have we found out?” asked the editor.

“A great deal more than I’d anticipated,” answered Spargo, “and I don’t
know what fields it doesn’t open out. If you look back, you’ll remember
that the only thing found on Marbury’s body was a scrap of grey paper
on which was a name and address—Ronald Breton, King’s Bench Walk.”

“Well?”

“Breton is a young barrister. Also he writes a bit—I have accepted two
or three articles of his for our literary page.”

“Well?”

“Further, he is engaged to Miss Aylmore, the eldest daughter of
Aylmore, the Member of Parliament who has been charged at Bow Street
today with the murder of Marbury.”

“I know. Well, what then, Spargo?”

“But the most important matter,” continued Spargo, speaking very
deliberately, “is this—that is, taking that old woman’s statement to be
true, as I personally believe it is—that Breton, as he has told me
himself (I have seen a good deal of him) was brought up by a guardian.
That guardian is Mr. Septimus Elphick, the barrister.”

The proprietor and the editor looked at each other. Their faces wore
the expression of men thinking on the same lines and arriving at the
same conclusion. And the proprietor suddenly turned on Spargo with a
sharp interrogation: “You think then——”

Spargo nodded.

“I think that Mr. Septimus Elphick is the Elphick, and that Breton is
the young Maitland of whom Mrs. Gutch has been talking,” he answered.

The editor got up, thrust his hands in his pockets, and began to pace
the room.

“If that’s so,” he said, “if that’s so, the mystery deepens. What do
you propose to do, Spargo?”

“I think,” said Spargo, slowly, “I think that without telling him
anything of what we have learnt, I should like to see young Breton and
get an introduction from him to Mr. Elphick. I can make a good excuse
for wanting an interview with him. If you will leave it in my hands—”

“Yes, yes!” said the proprietor, waving a hand. “Leave it entirely in
Spargo’s hands.”

“Keep me informed,” said the editor. “Do what you think. It strikes me
you’re on the track.”

Spargo left their presence, and going back to his own room, still
faintly redolent of the personality of Mrs. Gutch, got hold of the
reporter who had been present at Bow Street when Aylmore was brought up
that morning. There was nothing new; the authorities had merely asked
for another remand. So far as the reporter knew, Aylmore had said
nothing fresh to anybody.

Spargo went round to the Temple and up to Ronald Breton’s chambers. He
found the young barrister just preparing to leave, and looking
unusually grave and thoughtful. At sight of Spargo he turned back from
his outer door, beckoned the journalist to follow him, and led him into
an inner room.

“I say, Spargo!” he said, as he motioned his visitor to take a chair.
“This is becoming something more than serious. You know what you told
me to do yesterday as regards Aylmore?”

“To get him to tell all?—Yes,” said Spargo.

Breton shook his head.

“Stratton—his solicitor, you know—and I saw him this morning before the
police-court proceedings,” he continued. “I told him of my talk with
you; I even went as far as to tell him that his daughters had been to
the _Watchman_ office. Stratton and I both begged him to take your
advice and tell all, everything, no matter at what cost to his private
feelings. We pointed out to him the serious nature of the evidence
against him; how he had damaged himself by not telling the whole truth
at once; how he had certainly done a great deal to excite suspicion
against himself; how, as the evidence stands at present, any jury could
scarcely do less than convict him. And it was all no good, Spargo!”

“He won’t say anything?”

“He’ll say no more. He was adamant. ‘I told the entire truth in respect
to my dealings with Marbury on the night he met his death at the
inquest,’ he said, over and over again, ‘and I shall say nothing
further on any consideration. If the law likes to hang an innocent man
on such evidence as that, let it!’ And he persisted in that until we
left him. Spargo, I don’t know what’s to be done.”

“And nothing happened at the police-court?”

“Nothing—another remand. Stratton and I saw Aylmore again before he was
removed. He left us with a sort of sardonic remark—‘If you all want to
prove me innocent,’ he said, ‘find the guilty man.’”

“Well, there was a tremendous lot of common sense in that,” said
Spargo.

“Yes, of course, but how, how, how is it going to be done?” exclaimed
Breton. “Are you any nearer—is Rathbury any nearer? Is there the
slightest clue that will fasten the guilt on anybody else?”

Spargo gave no answer to these questions. He remained silent a while,
apparently thinking.

“Was Rathbury in court?” he suddenly asked.

“He was,” replied Breton. “He was there with two or three other men who
I suppose were detectives, and seemed to be greatly interested in
Aylmore.”

“If I don’t see Rathbury tonight I’ll see him in the morning,” said
Spargo. He rose as if to go, but after lingering a moment, sat down
again. “Look here,” he continued, “I don’t know how this thing stands
in law, but would it be a very weak case against Aylmore if the
prosecution couldn’t show some motive for his killing Marbury?”

Breton smiled.

“There’s no necessity to prove motive in murder,” he said. “But I’ll
tell you what, Spargo—if the prosecution can show that Aylmore had a
motive for getting rid of Marbury, if they could prove that it was to
Aylmore’s advantage to silence him—why, then, I don’t think he’s a
chance.”

“I see. But so far no motive, no reason for his killing Marbury has
been shown.”

“I know of none.”

Spargo rose and moved to the door.

“Well, I’m off,” he said. Then, as if he suddenly recollected
something, he turned back. “Oh, by the by,” he said, “isn’t your
guardian, Mr. Elphick, a big authority on philately?”

“One of the biggest. Awful enthusiast.”

“Do you think he’d tell me a bit about those Australian stamps which
Marbury showed to Criedir, the dealer?”

“Certain, he would—delighted. Here”—and Breton scribbled a few words on
a card—“there’s his address and a word from me. I’ll tell you when you
can always find him in, five nights out of seven—at nine o’clock, after
he’s dined. I’d go with you tonight, but I must go to Aylmore’s. The
two girls are in terrible trouble.”

“Give them a message from me,” said Spargo as they went out together.
“Tell them to keep up their hearts and their courage.”




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
MR. ELPHICK’S CHAMBERS


Spargo went round again to the Temple that night at nine o’clock,
asking himself over and over again two questions—the first, how much
does Elphick know? the second, how much shall I tell him?

The old house in the Temple to which he repaired and in which many a
generation of old fogies had lived since the days of Queen Anne, was
full of stairs and passages, and as Spargo had forgotten to get the
exact number of the set of chambers he wanted, he was obliged to wander
about in what was a deserted building. So wandering, he suddenly heard
steps, firm, decisive steps coming up a staircase which he himself had
just climbed. He looked over the banisters down into the hollow
beneath. And there, marching up resolutely, was the figure of a tall,
veiled woman, and Spargo suddenly realized, with a sharp quickening of
his pulses, that for the second time that day he was beneath one roof
with Miss Baylis.

Spargo’s mind acted quickly. Knowing what he now knew, from his
extraordinary dealings with Mother Gutch, he had no doubt whatever that
Miss Baylis had come to see Mr. Elphick—come, of course, to tell Mr.
Elphick that he, Spargo, had visited her that morning, and that he was
on the track of the Maitland secret history. He had never thought of it
before, for he had been busily engaged since the departure of Mother
Gutch; but, naturally, Miss Baylis and Mr. Elphick would keep in
communication with each other. At any rate, here she was, and her
destination was, surely, Elphick’s chambers. And the question for him,
Spargo, was—what to do?

What Spargo did was to remain in absolute silence, motionless, tense,
where he was on the stair, and to trust to the chance that the woman
did not look up. But Miss Baylis neither looked up nor down: she
reached a landing, turned along a corridor with decision, and marched
forward. A moment later Spargo heard a sharp double knock on a door: a
moment after that he heard a door heavily shut; he knew then that Miss
Baylis had sought and gained admittance—somewhere.

To find out precisely where that somewhere was drew Spargo down to the
landing which Miss Baylis had just left. There was no one about—he had
not, in fact, seen a soul since he entered the building. Accordingly he
went along the corridor into which he had seen Miss Baylis turn. He
knew that all the doors in that house were double ones, and that the
outer oak in each was solid and substantial enough to be sound proof.
Yet, as men will under such circumstances, he walked softly; he said to
himself, smiling at the thought, that he would be sure to start if
somebody suddenly opened a door on him. But no hand opened any door,
and at last he came to the end of the corridor and found himself
confronting a small board on which was painted in white letters on a
black ground, Mr. Elphick’s Chambers.

Having satisfied himself as to his exact whereabouts, Spargo drew back
as quietly as he had come. There was a window half-way along the
corridor from which, he had noticed as he came along, one could catch a
glimpse of the Embankment and the Thames; to this he withdrew, and
leaning on the sill looked out and considered matters. Should he go
and—if he could gain admittance—beard these two conspirators? Should he
wait until the woman came out and let her see that he was on the track?
Should he hide again until she went, and then see Elphick alone?

In the end Spargo did none of these things immediately. He let things
slide for the moment. He lighted a cigarette and stared at the river
and the brown sails, and the buildings across on the Surrey side. Ten
minutes went by—twenty minutes—nothing happened. Then, as half-past
nine struck from all the neighbouring clocks, Spargo flung away a
second cigarette, marched straight down the corridor and knocked boldly
at Mr. Elphick’s door.

Greatly to Spargo’s surprise, the door was opened before there was any
necessity to knock again. And there, calmly confronting him, a
benevolent, yet somewhat deprecating expression on his spectacled and
placid face, stood Mr. Elphick, a smoking cap on his head, a tasseled
smoking jacket over his dress shirt, and a short pipe in his hand.

Spargo was taken aback: Mr. Elphick apparently was not. He held the
door well open, and motioned the journalist to enter.

“Come in, Mr. Spargo,” he said. “I was expecting you. Walk forward into
my sitting-room.”

Spargo, much astonished at this reception, passed through an ante-room
into a handsomely furnished apartment full of books and pictures. In
spite of the fact that it was still very little past midsummer there
was a cheery fire in the grate, and on a table set near a roomy
arm-chair was set such creature comforts as a spirit-case, a syphon, a
tumbler, and a novel—from which things Spargo argued that Mr. Elphick
had been taking his ease since his dinner. But in another armchair on
the opposite side of the hearth was the forbidding figure of Miss
Baylis, blacker, gloomier, more mysterious than ever. She neither spoke
nor moved when Spargo entered: she did not even look at him. And Spargo
stood staring at her until Mr. Elphick, having closed his doors,
touched him on the elbow, and motioned him courteously to a seat.

“Yes, I was expecting you, Mr. Spargo,” he said, as he resumed his own
chair. “I have been expecting you at any time, ever since you took up
your investigation of the Marbury affair, in some of the earlier stages
of which you saw me, you will remember, at the mortuary. But since Miss
Baylis told me, twenty minutes ago, that you had been to her this
morning I felt sure that it would not be more than a few hours before
you would come to me.”

“Why, Mr. Elphick, should you suppose that I should come to you at
all?” asked Spargo, now in full possession of his wits.

“Because I felt sure that you would leave no stone unturned, no corner
unexplored,” replied Mr. Elphick. “The curiosity of the modern pressman
is insatiable.”

Spargo stiffened.

“I have no curiosity, Mr. Elphick,” he said. “I am charged by my paper
to investigate the circumstances of the death of the man who was found
in Middle Temple Lane, and, if possible, to track his murderer, and——”

Mr. Elphick laughed slightly and waved his hand.

“My good young gentleman!” he said. “You exaggerate your own
importance. I don’t approve of modern journalism nor of its methods. In
your own case you have got hold of some absurd notion that the man John
Marbury was in reality one John Maitland, once of Market Milcaster, and
you have been trying to frighten Miss Baylis here into——”

Spargo suddenly rose from his chair. There was a certain temper in him
which, when once roused, led him to straight hitting, and it was roused
now. He looked the old barrister full in the face.

“Mr. Elphick,” he said, “you are evidently unaware of all that I know.
So I will tell you what I will do. I will go back to my office, and I
will write down what I do know, and give the true and absolute proofs
of what I know, and, if you will trouble yourself to read the
_Watchman_ tomorrow morning, then you, too, will know.”

“Dear me—dear me!” said Mr. Elphick, banteringly. “We are so used to
ultra-sensational stories from the _Watchman_ that—but I am a curious
and inquisitive old man, my good young sir, so perhaps you will tell me
in a word what it is you do know, eh?”

Spargo reflected for a second. Then he bent forward across the tab