aoa Mp evnhscg still alive,) called Guz Beg; and
he gained for himself the name of the "Lion of Circassia." He was always
leading out little bands of men to attack the Russians. One day he found
some Russian soldiers reaping in the fields, and when he came near they
ran away in terror, leaving two hundred scythes in the field, which he
seized. But a great calamity befel this Lion. He had an only son. When he
first led the boy to the wars, he charged him never to shrink from the
enemy, but to cut his way through the very midst. One day Guz Beg had
ridden into the thick of the Russian soldiers, when suddenly a ball
pierced his horse, and he was thrown headlong on the ground. There lay
the Lion among the hunters. In another moment he would have been killed,
when suddenly a youthful warrior flew to his rescue;--it was his own son.
But what could _one_ do among so _many_! A troop of Circassian horse
rushed to the spot, and bore away Guz Beg; but they were too late to save
his son. They bore away the _body_ only of the brave boy. Guz Beg was
deeply grieved; but he continued still to fight for his country.

See those black heaps of ashes. In that spot there once lived a prince
named Zefri Bey, with his four hundred servants; but his dwellings were
burned to the ground by the Russians. That prince fled to Turkey to plead
for help. What would have become of his wife, and little girls, if a kind
friend had not taken them under his care? This friend was hump-backed,
but very brave. Some English travellers went to visit him, and were
received in the guest-house and regaled with a supper of many tables.
Next day the little girls came to the guest-house and kissed their hands.
The daughter of the hump-backed man accompanied them. The children were
delighted with some toys the traveller gave them, and the kind young lady
accepted needles and scissors. But where was the wife of Zefri Bey? A
servant was sent to inquire after her, and found her in rags, lying on a
mat, without even a counterpane, and weeping bitterly. Had no one given
her clothes, and coverings? Yes, but she gave everything away, for she
had been used, as a princess, to make presents, and now she cared for
nothing. Such are the miseries which the Russians bring upon Circassia.

THE GOVERNMENT.--There is no king of Circassia; but there are many
princes.

The people pay great respect to these princes, standing in their
presence, and giving them the first place at feasts, and in the
battle-field. But though the people honor them, they do not obey them.

There is a parliament in Circassia, but it does not meet in a house, but
in a grove. Every man who pleases may come, but only old men may speak.
If a young man were to give his opinions, no attention would be paid. The
warriors sit on the grass, and hang up their weapons of war on the boughs
above their heads, while they fasten their horses to the stems of the
trees.

The speakers are gentle in their tones of voice and behavior. The
Circassians admire sweet winning speeches. They say there are three
things which mark a great man; a sharp sword, a sweet tongue, and forty
tables. What do they mean by these? By a sharp sword they mean bravery,
by a sweet tongue they mean soft speeches, and by forty tables they mean
giving plentiful suppers to neighbors and to strangers. Are the
Circassians right in this way of thinking? No--for though bravery is
good, and speaking well is good, and giving away is good, these are not
the greatest virtues: and people may be brave, and speak well, and give
away much, and yet be wicked: for they may be without the love of God in
their hearts. What are the greatest virtues? These three, Faith, Hope,
and Charity. These are graces which come from God.

SERVANTS.--There are slaves in Circassia, called serfs. But they are so
well treated, that they are not like the slaves of other countries. They
live in huts round their master's dwelling; they work in the fields, and
wait upon the guests, and share in the good fare on the little tables.

When a Circassian takes a Russian prisoner, he makes him a slave, and
gives him the hardest work to do. Yet the Russians are much happier with
their Circassian masters than in their own country.

Once a Circassian said to his Russian slave, "I am going to send you back
to Russia." The man fell at his master's feet, saying, "Rather than do
so, use me as your dog; beat me, tie me up, and give me your bones to
pick." The master then told him that he had not spoken in earnest, and
that he would not send him away, and then the poor fellow began to shout,
and to jump with joy.

BROTHERHOODS.--There is a very remarkable plan in Circassia, unlike the
plans in other countries. A certain number of men agree to call
themselves "brothers." These brothers help each other on every occasion,
and visit at each other's houses frequently. They are not received in the
guest-house, but in the family-house, and are treated by all the family
as if they were really the brothers of the master.

A brotherhood sometimes consists of two thousand, but sometimes of only
twenty persons.

RELIGION.--Circassia, though beautiful, is an unhappy country. The
Russians keep the people in continual fear; this is a great evil. But
there is another nation who have done the Circassians still greater harm.
I mean the Turks. And what have they done to them? They have persuaded
them to turn Mahomedans. The greatest harm that can be done to any one,
is to give him a false religion. There are no grand mosques in Circassia,
because there are no towns: but in every little village there is a clay
cottage, where prayers are offered up in the name of Mahomet. There can
be no minaret to such a miserable mosque: so the man who calls the hours
of prayer, climbs a tall tree, by the help of notches, and getting into a
basket at the top, makes the rocks and hills resound with his cry. How
different shall be the sound one day heard in every land; when all people
shall believe in Jesus. "Then shall the inhabitants of the rocks
sing--then shall they shout from the top of the mountains, and give glory
unto the _Lord_" and not to Mahomet. (Is. xlii. 11, 12.)

But though the Circassians call themselves Mahomedans, they keep many of
their old customs, and these customs show that they once heard about
Christ.

It is their custom to dedicate every boy to God: but not really to _God_,
for in truth they dedicate him to the _cross_. Let me give you an account
of one of the feasts of dedication.

The place of meeting was a green, shaded by spreading oak-trees. In the
midst stood a cross. Each family who came to the feast, brought a little
table, and placed it before the cross; and on each table, there were
loaves, and a sort of bread called "pasta." There was a blazing fire on
the green, round which the elder women sat, while the younger preferred
the shade of a thicket. The priest took a loaf of bread in one hand, and
in the other, a large cup of shuat, (a kind of wine) and holding them out
towards the cross, blessed them. While he did this, men, women, and
children, knelt around, and bowed their heads to the ground. Afterwards,
the shuat and the bread were handed about amongst the company. But this
was only the beginning of the feast. Afterwards, a calf, a sheep, and two
goats were brought to the cross to be blessed. Then a little of their
hair was singed by a taper, and then they were taken away to be
slaughtered. Now the merriment began: some moved forward to cut up the
animals, and to boil their flesh in large kettles on fires kindled on the
green; many young men amused themselves with racing, leaping, and
hurling stones, while the elder people sat and talked. When the meat was
boiled, it was distributed among the sixty tables, and then the priest
blessed the food. And then the feasting began. Does it not seem as if the
Circassians must once have learned about Jesus crucified, and about his
supper of bread and wine, and about the Jewish feasts and sacrifices?
Once, perhaps, they knew the true religion, but they soon forgot it, and
though they still remember the _Cross_, they have forgotten _Christ_; and
though they still bless the bread and the cup, they know nothing of
redeeming love. Do you not long to send missionaries to Circassia? Well,
some good Scotch missionaries went there some years ago, but alas! the
Russians sent them away. Their thatched cottages may still be seen, and
their fruitful orchards, but they themselves are gone. There are,
however, a few German Christians in Circassia. They are not missionaries,
but only farmers, therefore the Russians allow them to remain. They have
a little church, where the Bible is read, and God is worshipped. You will
be glad to hear a few Circassians may be seen amongst the congregation;
they were converted by the Scotch missionaries, and they have remained
faithful amongst their heathen neighbors.

Circassia is situated between two seas:--

The Black Sea, and

The Caspian Sea.

What a wonderful place is the Caspian Sea. It is like a lake, only so
immensely large, that it is called a sea. The waters of lakes are fresh,
like those of rivers; but the waters of the Caspian are salt, but not so
salt as the salt sea. The shores of the Caspian are flat, and
unwholesome. You might think as you stood there, that you were by the
great ocean, for there are waves breaking on the sands, and water as far
as the eye can reach, but there is no freshness in the air as by the real
sea.

The mountains of Caucasus run through Circassia. They are quite low
compared to the Himalaya; they are about the height of the Alps, and the
tops are covered with snow. But the valleys between these mountains, are
not like the Swiss valleys, which are broad and pleasant; but these
valleys are narrow, and dark, and not fit to live in, yet they are of
great use as hiding-places for the Circassians. When pursued by a
Russian, a Circassian will urge his horse to dash down the dark valley,
and lest his horse should be alarmed by the sight of the dangerous depth
below, he will cover the animal's eyes with his cloak. Thus, many a bold
rider escapes from a cruel soldier.




GEORGIA.


When you hear of Circassia, you will generally hear of Georgia too, for
the countries lie close together, and resemble one another in many
respects. But though so near, their climate is different; for Circassia
lies beyond the mountains of Caucasus, and is therefore, exposed to the
cold winds of the north. But Georgia lies beneath the mountains, and is
sheltered from the chill blasts. Georgia is, therefore, far more fruitful
than Circassia, the people, too, are less fair, and less industrious. The
sides of the hills are clothed with vines, and houses with deep verandahs
are scattered among the vineyards, and women wrapped in long white sheets
may be seen reposing in the porticoes, enjoying the soft air, and lovely
prospect. While Circassian ladies are busy weaving and milking, the
Georgian ladies loll upon their couches, and do nothing. Which do you
think are the happier? These Georgian ladies, too, though very handsome,
are much disfigured by painted faces, and stained eyebrows. Their
countenances, too, are lifeless, and silly, as might be expected, since
they waste their time in idleness. Over their foreheads, they wear a kind
of low crown, called a tiara.

There is no country where so much wine is drank as in Georgia, even a
laborer is allowed five bottles a day. The grapes are exceedingly fine,
quite different from the little berries called grapes in Circassia. The
casks are very curious, they are the skins of buffaloes, and as the tails
and legs are not cut off, a skin filled with wine looks like a dead, or a
sleeping buffalo.

And what is the religion of Georgia? It is the Russian religion, because
the Russians have conquered the country. They cannot conquer the brave,
and active Circassians, but they have conquered the soft, and indolent
Georgians. The Georgians are called Christians, but the Greek Church,
which is the Russian religion, is a Christianity, laden with ceremonies
and false doctrines.


TIFLIS.

There is but one town in Georgia. It is beautifully situated on the steep
banks of a river, with terraces of houses, embosomed in vineyards. So
little do the people care for reading, that there is not a bookseller's
shop in the town, and it is very seldom that a bookcase is seen in a
house; for the Georgians love show, and entertainments, and idleness, but
not study.




TARTARY.


This is one of the largest countries in the world, yet it does not
contain as many people as the small land of France. How is this? You will
not be surprised that many people do not live there, when you hear what
sort of a country it is.

Fancy a country quite flat, as far as eye can see, except where a few low
sand-hills rise; a country quite bare, except where the coarse grass
grows;--a country quite dry, except where some narrow muddy streams run.
Such is Tartary. What is a country without hills, without trees, without
brooks? Can it be pleasant? This flat, bare, dry plain, is called the
steppes of Tartary. In one part of Tartary, there is a chain of
mountains, and there are a few towns, and trees, but _very few_. You may
travel a long while without seeing one.

Nothing can be so dreary as the steppes appear in winter time. The high
wind sweeping along the plain, drives the snow into high heaps, and often
hurls the poor animals into a cold grave. Sledges cannot be used,
because they cannot slide on such uneven ground. But if the _white_
ground looks dreary in winter, the _black_ ground looks hideous in
summer; for the hot sun turns the grass black, and fills the air with
black dust, and there are no shady groves, no cool hills, no refreshing
brooks. There must, indeed, be a _little_ shade among the thistles, as
they grow to twice the height of a man; but how different is such shade
from the shade of spreading oaks like ours! Instead of nice fruit, there
is bitter wormwood growing among the grass, and when the cows eat it,
their milk becomes bitter.

WILD ANIMALS.--The most common, is a pretty little creature called the
sooslik. It is very much like a squirrel.

But can it live where squirrels live,--in the hollows of trees? Where are
the trees in the steppe? The sooslik makes a house for itself by digging
a hole in the ground, just as rabbits do in England. Will it not surprise
you to hear that wolves follow the same plan, and even the wild dogs? The
houses the dogs make are very convenient, for the entrance is very
narrow, and there is plenty of room below.

There are some very odious animals on the steppe. Snakes and toads. Yes,
showers of toads sometimes fall. But neither snakes nor toads are as
great a plague as locusts. These little animals, not bigger than a
child's thumb, are more to be dreaded than a troop of wolves. And why?
Because they come in such immense numbers. The eggs lie hid in the ground
all the winter. O if it were known _where_ they were concealed, they
would soon be destroyed. But no one knows where they are till they are
hatched. In the first warm days of spring the young animals come forth,
and immediately they begin crawling on the ground in one immense flock,
eating up all the grass as they pass along; in a month they can fly, and
then they darken the air like a thick cloud; wherever any green appears,
they drop down and settle on the spot. The noise they make in eating can
be heard to a great distance, and the noise they make in flying is like
the rustling of leaves in a forest. They cannot be destroyed: but there
are two things they hate,--smoke and noise,--and by these they are
sometimes scared and induced to fly away.

PEOPLE AND CUSTOMS.--Besides the wild animals, there are tame animals,
who inhabit the steppe with men and women who take care of them. They are
all wanderers, both men and beasts. You can easily guess why they wander.
It is to find sufficient grass for the cattle.

Every six weeks the Tartars move to a new place. Yet one place is so like
another, that no place appears new;--there is always the same immense
plain--without a cottage, or an orchard, a green hill, or running brook,
to make any spot remembered. It is great labor to the Tartar women to
pack up the tents and to place them on the backs of the camels, and then
to unpack and to pitch the tents. It is a great disgrace to the men to
suffer the women to work as hard as they do: but the men are very idle,
and like to sit by their tents smoking and drinking, while their wives
are toiling and striving with all their might. The women have the care of
all the cattle: and the men attend only to the horses. Perhaps they would
not even do this, were it not that they are very fond of riding; and such
riders as the Tartars are seldom seen.

To give you an idea how they ride, I will describe one scene that took
place on the steppe.

Some travellers from Europe were on a visit to a Tartar prince: (for
there are _princes_ in the desert,) and they were taken to see a herd of
wild horses. The prince wished to have one of these wild horses caught.
It is not easy to do this. But Tartars know the way. Six men mounted a
tame horse, and rushed into the midst of the wild horses. Each of the men
had a great noose in his hand. They all looked at the prince to know
which horse he would have caught. When they saw the prince give a sign,
one of the men soon noosed a young horse. The creature seemed terrified
when it found that it was caught: his eyes started out, his nostrils
seemed to smoke. Presently a man came running up, sprang upon the back of
the wild horse, and by cutting the straps round his neck, set him at
liberty. In an instant the horse darted away with the swiftness of an
arrow; yet the man firmly kept his seat. The animal seemed greatly
alarmed at his strange burden, and tried every plan to get rid of
it;--now suddenly stopping,--now crawling on the grass like a worm,--now
rolling,--now rearing,--now dashing forward in a fast gallop through the
midst of the herd; yet all would not do; the rider clung to the horse as
closely as ever.

But how was the rider ever to get off his fiery steed? That would be
difficult indeed; but help was sent to him by the prince. Two men on
horseback rode after him, and between them they snatched away the man
from the trembling and foaming horse. The animal, surprised to find his
load suddenly gone, stood stupefied for a moment, and then darted off to
join his companions. What _this_ man did,--_many_ Tartars can do: and
even _little boys_ will mount wild horses, and keep on by clinging to
their manes: _women_, too, will gallop about on wild horses.

In Circassia the customs are very different; for though _men_ ride so
well, _women_ there never ride at all; and surely it is far better not to
ride than to be as bold as a Tartar woman.

FOOD.--What can be the food of the Tartars? Not bread, (for there is no
corn,) nor fruit, nor vegetables. The flocks and herds are the food. The
favorite meat is horse-flesh; though mutton and beef are eaten also. Then
there is plenty of milk--both cow's milk and sheep's milk. As there is
milk, there is butter and cheese. But it is very unwholesome to live on
meat and milk without bread and vegetables. The water, too, is very bad;
for it is taken from the muddy rivers, and not from clear springs. It is
a comfort for the Tartar that he can procure tea from China. Their tea is
indeed very unlike the tea brought to England; for it comes to Tartary in
hard lumps, shaped like bricks. It is boiled in a saucepan with water,
and then mixed with milk, butter, and salt. Thus you see the Tartar needs
neither tea-kettle, teapot, nor sugar basin.

It would be well if tea and milk were the only drinks in Tartary; but a
sort of spirit is distilled by the Tartars from mare's milk; and brandy
also is brought from Russia.

TENTS.--A Tartar tent is very unlike an Arab tent.

It is in the shape of a hut, for the sides are upright, and the roof only
is slanting, and there is a small hole at the top to let the smoke
escape. Neither is it made of skins, but of thick woollen stuff, called
felt, which keeps the cold out. At night the entrance is closed, and the
family sleep on mats around the fire in the midst.

APPEARANCE.--The Tartars are not handsome like the Turks and Circassians.
They are short and thick; their faces are broad and bony, their eyes very
small, and only half open; their noses flat, their lips thick, their
chins pointed, their ears large and flapping, and their skin dark and
yellow.

Their dress is warm, and well suited for riding in the desert. Different
tribes have different dresses: this is the dress of the Kalmuck Tartar.
He wears a yellow cloth cap trimmed with black lamb-skin; wide trowsers,
a tight jacket, and over all a loose tunic, fastened round the waist. His
boots are red, with high heels. The women dress like the men; but they
let their hair grow in two long tresses, while the men shave part of
their heads, and keep only _one_ lock of hair hanging on their shoulders.

[Illustration: TARTAR TENTS.]

You see that the Tartars are much like the Chinese in their persons and
dress; but they are a much stronger, bolder people, and much more
ignorant. No wonder, therefore, that many years ago the Tartars got over
the Chinese wall, and took possession of the Chinese throne. You must not
forget that the Emperor of China is a Tartar.

GOVERNMENT.--To whom does Tartary belong? Has it a king of its own? No.
Once it had many kings, called khans; but now the khans have lost their
power, and are only _called_ khan to do them honor. Now Tartary belongs
to the great empires on each side of it,--Russia and China. Part of
Tartary is called Russian Tartary, and part--Chinese Tartary. There is
only a small part that is not conquered; and it is called Independent
Tartary.

There are many different tribes, and each tribe keeps to a certain part
of the land, and never ventures to wander beyond its own bounds.

RELIGION.--The religion is the same as that which is so common in
China,--the religion of Buddha; but in some parts of Tartary there is the
religion of Mahomet. It is sad to think that far more people in the world
worship Buddha, the deceiver, than Jesus, the Son of God. The Tartars
think to please their false god by making a loud noise. It would astonish
a stranger to hear their jingling bells, shrill horns, squeaking shells,
bellowing trumpets, and deafening drums. How unlike is their senseless
noise to the sweet sound of a Christian hymn!

The Tartars think also to please their gods by glaring colors; so their
priests dress in red and yellow, and bear flags, adorned with strips of
gay silk. A band of priests looks something like a regiment of soldiers.

The chief priest is called the Lama, and he is worshipped as a god; but
his situation is not very pleasant; for he is not allowed to walk without
help. Whenever he attempts to walk, he is held up by a man on each side,
as if he were an infant; and usually he is drawn in a car, or carried in
a palanquin. From want of exercise, he becomes very weak and helpless.
When he dies, his body is burned, and the ashes are gathered up and made
into an idol. Thus he continues to be a god after he is dead. Another
Lama is chosen by one of the princes. There are many Lamas in Tartary for
the various tribes.

As the Tartars are always moving about, a tent serves for a temple; and
the idols are carried in great chests. They cannot walk, therefore they
must be carried. What use are such gods?

The Tartars have found out a way of praying without any trouble; and it
is a way that suits idols very well. They get some prayers written, and
place them in a drum, and then turn the drum round and round with a
string. This they call praying; and while they are thus praying, they can
be chattering, smoking, and even quarrelling. The princes have a still
easier way of offering up prayers. They write prayers upon a flag, and
then place it before their tents for the wind to blow it about.

This is _their_ way of praying to their gods.

And what, my dear child, is _your_ way of praying to your God?

Have missionaries visited the Tartars?

Yes; I will tell you of two German missionaries, who tried to convert a
tribe of Tartars called the Kalmucks, living near the Caspian Sea and the
river Volga. These good men were treated with great contempt by the
Tartars. The missionaries translated the Gospel of St. Matthew into the
Tartar language. One of the Tartars, instead of thanking them, observed,
"I wonder you should take so much trouble to prepare a book that we shall
never read." When the precious books were given to the Tartars, some of
them returned the books; and when it was read to them, they scornfully
said, as they turned away, "It is only the history of Jesus."

At last one Tartar, named Sodnom, believed in Jesus. He said to the
missionaries, "Now the Tartars, from my example, may turn to the Lord:
for as, when sheep are to be washed, each is afraid to enter the water
till _one_ has been in, so it may be with my countrymen."

Sodnom read every evening in the Testament to his family in the tent. At
first his wife was displeased, and said that her husband wasted the
fire-wood in making a light to read a book that was of no use. But
afterwards she listened, and made the children keep quiet. The neighbors
also listened, and _twenty-two_ turned to the Lord!

Then the prince and the priests grew angry, and said the Christians must
leave the camp. Where could the Christians go? There was a village called
Sarepta, where some Germans lived. There they determined to go, though it
was two hundred miles off. One of the missionaries led the way on
horseback; the Tartars followed on foot: then came camels bearing the
tents and the women, while a bullock-cart contained the young children.
The flocks and herds were driven by the bigger children.

The good Germans in Sarepta received the Tartars with great joy. One
gray-headed man of eighty-three came to meet them, leaning upon his
staff. He said he had been praying that he might see a _Christian_ Tartar
before he died. He heard these Tartars sing hymns to the praise of
Jesus, and he felt his prayers were answered. Two days afterwards he
died. Like old Simeon, he might have said, "Lord, now lettest thou thy
servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation."

The Christians went to live in a small island in the river Volga. When
the river was frozen, the Germans went over the ice to visit them. Sodnom
gave them tea mixed with fat in a large wooden bowl; and to please him,
the kind Germans drank some, though they did not like it. Many Tartars
assembled in Sodnom's tent, and seated on the ground smoking their pipes,
talked together about heavenly things; and before they parted, they put
away their pipes, and folding their hands, sang hymns in their own
language. The Germans, in taking leave, divided a large loaf among the
company; for bread is considered quite a dainty by the Tartars.

The change that had taken place in these Tartars filled the Germans with
joy; and more missionaries would have gone to teach the heathen Kalmucks,
had not the Emperor of Russia forbidden them.


ASTRACAN.

This city is on the Caspian Sea. It is very unpleasant, on account of the
heat and the gnats.

Not only Tartars dwell there, but many people of all nations, Russians,
Hindoos, and Armenians. The chief trade of Astracan is in the fish of the
sea, and in the salt on the shores.


BOKHARA (IN TARTARY).

This is a kingdom in the midst of Tartary. It lies at the south of the
Caspian Sea. It is not like the rest of Tartary, for it is a sweet green
spot. Travellers have said that it is the most beautiful spot in the
world, but that is not true. The reason that travellers have said so, is
that, after passing through a great desert, they have been charmed at
seeing again running streams, and shady groves.

But though Bokhara is a beautiful place, it is a wicked place.

The king is one of the greatest tyrants in the world. He is called the
Amir.

The city where he dwells is called Bokhara (which is also the name of the
whole country). His palace is on a high mound, in the midst of splendid
mosques, and mansions. Amongst these grand buildings is the prison, a
place of horrible cruelty. There the prisoners lie in the dark, and the
damp. One use of the prison is to keep water cool for the king in summer;
it feels therefore just like a cellar.

But the worst dungeon, is filled with stinging insects, called "ticks,"
reared on purpose to torment prisoners. In order to keep the ticks alive
when no prisoners are there, raw meat is thrown into the place. There is
also a deep pit into which men are let down with ropes; as once the holy
Jeremiah was in Jerusalem.

Once a fortnight the prisoners are judged by the Amir. Even when the
ground is covered with snow they stand with bare feet, waiting for hours
till the Amir appears.

Can so cruel a monarch be happy? No. He lives in constant fear of his
life.

He is afraid of drinking water, lest it should be poisoned. All that he
drinks is brought from the river in skins, and sealed, and guarded by two
officers; it is then taken to the chief counsellor, called the Vizier,
and tasted by him, and his servants; it is then sealed again, and sent to
his majesty.

The Amir's dinner when it is ready, is not placed on the royal table, but
locked up in a box, and taken to the Vizier to be tasted, before it is
served up in the palace.

But it is not the Amir only who is afraid of poison. No one will accept
fruit from another, unless that other tastes it first. It must be very
terrible to live in the midst of such murderers as the people of Bokhara
seem to be.

The Amir is so much afraid of people making plans to destroy him, that he
chooses to see all the letters that are written by his subjects; if a
husband write to his wife, the letter must first be shown to the Amir.
There are boys, too, going about the city listening to all that is said,
that they may let the Amir know, if any one speak against him.

But while the Amir is watching his people, _they_ are watching _him_; for
his chief officers hire men to listen to the Amir's conversation, that
they may know if he intends to kill them. Yet every person _appears_ to
approve all the Amir does, saying on every occasion, "It is the act of a
king; it must be good." They are such people as Jeremiah describes in the
Bible. "Their tongue is as an arrow shot out, it speaketh deceit; one
_speaketh_ peaceably to his neighbor, but in his _heart_ he lieth his
wait."--(Jer. ix. 8.)

APPEARANCE.--The people in Bokhara are much handsomer than other
Tartars; their complexions are fairer, and their hair is of a lighter
color. They wear large white turbans, and several dark pelisses with
high-heeled boots. These high heels prevent their walking well, and most
people, both men and women, ride; but the ladies always hide their faces
with a veil of black hair cloth.

The large court of the palace is filled from morning to night with a
crowd of noisy people, most of them mounted on horses and donkeys.

In the midst of the court is the fruit market. It is wonderful to behold
the quantity, and beauty of the fruits. The same fruits grow in Bokhara
as in England, only they are much finer. _Such_ grapes, plums, and
apricots, mulberries, and melons, are never seen in Europe, and they are
made more refreshing by being mixed with chopped ice. Large piles of ice
stand all the summer long in the market-place, and even beggars drink
iced water. But hot tea is preferred before any other drink. In every
corner of the market there are large urns of hot tea, and small bowls of
rich milk, surrounded all day by a thirsty crowd. How much better is this
sight than the gin palaces of London!

But there is one great inconvenience in Bokhara, for which all its fruits
can scarcely make amends. There is bad water. For Bokhara is not built
on the banks of a river, or among running brooks: all the water is
brought by canals, from a small stream near the town, and when the canals
are dried up by the heat, there is no water, except in the tanks where it
is kept. This stagnant water produces a disease called the Guinea worm.
In this complaint the skin is covered with painful swellings, and when
they burst, a little flat worm is discovered in each, which must be drawn
out before the poor sufferer can recover.

RELIGION.--It is the Mahomedan. The Amir is a strict observer of his
religion. Every Friday he may be seen going to prayers in his great
mosque. The Koran is carried before him, and four men with golden staves
accompany him, crying out, "Pray to God that the Commander of the
Faithful may act justly." As he passes by, his people stroke their beards
to show their respect. Bokhara is reckoned by Mahomedans a very religious
city; for in every street there is a mosque; every evening people may be
seen crowding to prayers; and if boys are caught asleep during service,
they are tied together, and driven round the market by an officer, who
beats them all the way with a thick thong.

There is a school, too, in almost every street of Bokhara, and there the
poor boys sit from sunrise, till an hour before sunset, bawling out
their foolish lessons from the Koran; and during all that time they are
never allowed to go home, except once for some bread. They have no time
for play, except in the evening, and no holiday, except on Friday. Seven
years they spend in this manner, learning to read and write. When they
leave school, if they wish to be counted very wise, they go to one of the
colleges; for there are many in Bokhara. Some spend all their lives in
these colleges, living in small cells, and meeting in a large hall to
hear lectures about the Mahomedan religion. It is a happy thing, however,
that in summer the students go out to work in the fields; for how much
better is it to work with the hands, than to fill the head with the
wicked inventions of Mahomed.

The Mahomedans, however, are very proud of their religion, because they
_say_, they do not worship idols; (yet they do worship at Mecca, a black
stone, and other like things in other places). They imagine that _all_
Christians are idolaters, for they know that the Russians bow down to
pictures.

Once the Vizier of Bokhara conversed a long while with two Englishmen
about their religion.

He asked them, "Do you worship idols?"

The Englishmen replied, "No."

The Vizier would not believe them, but said, "I am sure you have images
and crosses hung round your necks."

Upon which, they opened their vests to show there was nothing hidden.

Then the Vizier smiled, and said to his servants, "They are not bad
people."

As the servants were preparing tea, the Vizier took a cup, and said to
the travellers, "You must drink with us, for you are people of the Book,"
meaning the Bible.

Yet you must not suppose because the Vizier seemed to approve these
Christians, that he, and the Amir, would allow missionaries to settle in
the kingdom.

It is dangerous for Englishmen to visit Bokhara. When they do come, they
must be very careful not to give offence, or they will lose their lives.
Englishmen are more dreaded than any other people, because it is known in
Bokhara, that they have conquered Hindostan, and therefore the Amir fears
lest they should conquer his kingdom also. As soon as an Englishman
enters Bokhara, he is forbidden to write a letter, for fear he should
contrive some plan to bring enemies there. Neither is he allowed to ride
in the streets; none but Mahomedans are allowed to ride in them, though
any one may ride _outside_ the city.

Some years ago two Englishmen came to Bokhara, named Colonel Stoddart,
and Captain Conolly. They acted foolishly in writing letters, and trying
to send them secretly to their friends. They were found out, and shut up.

Colonel Stoddart behaved very wickedly in one respect; he pretended to be
a Mahomedan! Was not this wicked? Soon he grew sorry, and declared
himself a Christian. At last both Stoddart and Conolly were sentenced to
die. They were led with their hands tied behind them to a place near the
palace, to be executed. Conolly as he went along, cried out, "Woe, woe to
me, for I have fallen into the hands of a tyrant." At the place of
execution the two Englishmen kissed each other.

Stoddart said to the king's minister, (for the Amir was not present,)
"Tell the Amir that I die a disbeliever in Mahomed, but a believer in
Jesus. I am a Christian, and a Christian I die."

Then Conolly said to his friend, "We shall see each other in paradise
near Jesus."

These were their last words. Immediately afterwards their heads were cut
off with a knife.

Some time after this cruel murder, a clergyman, named Joseph Wolff,
arrived at Bukhara. He had travelled all the way from England, and all
alone, on purpose to inquire after Conolly, who had been his dear friend.
The Amir was surprised at his coming, and said, "I have taken thousands
of _Persians_ and made them slaves, and no one came from Persia to
inquire what was become of them; but as soon as I take two ENGLISHMEN
prisoners, behold a man comes all this long way to inquire after _them!_"

The Amir did not know how precious are the lives of Englishmen in the
eyes of their countrymen.

Joseph Wolff found it hard to get away from Bokhara. He was kept a long
while in prison, and he feared he should be slain; for when he asked the
Amir to give him the bones of Stoddart and Conolly to take to England,
this was the Amir's answer: "I shall send YOUR bones!" Yet, after all, he
was permitted to leave Bokhara, the Lord graciously inclining the tyrant
to let him go.

How can Missionaries be sent to such a country!

       *       *       *       *       *

Bokhara is the only large town in the kingdom.

The sea of Aral lies to the north of the kingdom: it is an immense lake,
but not nearly so large as the Caspian Sea.

The river Oxus flows into the Caspian. It is famous for its golden sands.

The great trade of Bokhara is in black woolly lamb-skins, to make caps
for the Persians: the younger the lamb the more delicate the wool. Thus
many a pretty lambkin dies to adorn a Persian noble.

The best raisins in the world come from Bokhara.[8]


THE TOORKMAN TARTARS.

You have heard a great deal of the Tartars, and you have been told that
they are a quiet and peaceable nation. But not _all_; there is a tribe of
Tartars called the Toorkmans, of a very different character. They wander
about in the country between Bokhara and Persia, and their chief
employment is to steal men from Persia, and to sell them in Bokhara as
slaves. A whole troop, mounted on horses, rush sword in hand upon a
Persian city, and return to the camp with hundreds of beasts and human
creatures as their captives.

Some English travellers once met five men chained together, walking with
sad steps in the deep sands of the desert. They were Persians just caught
by the Toorkmans, and on their way to Bokhara. When the Englishmen saw
these poor captives, they uttered a sorrowful cry, and the Persians began
to weep. One of the travellers stopped his camel to listen to their sad
tale; and he heard that a few weeks before, while working in the fields,
they had been seized and carried off. They were hungry and thirsty; for
the Toorkmans cruelly starve their slaves, in order that they may be too
weak to run away. The traveller gave them all he had, which was a melon,
to quench their thirst.

But the worst part of the Toorkmans' conduct remains yet to be told. When
they have taken many captives, they usually _kill_ the old people,
because they would not get much money for them in Bokhara; and they
choose _one_ of their captives to offer up as a thank-offering to their
god!! Who is their god? The god of Mahomed. But though they are
Mahomedans, they have no mosques, and are too ignorant to be able to read
the Koran.

Robbery is their whole business. For this purpose they learn to ride and
to fight. They understand well how to manage a horse, so as to make him
strong and swift. They do not let him eat when he pleases, but they give
him three meals a day of hay and barley, and then rein him up that he may
not nibble the grass, and grow fat; and sometimes they give him no food
at all, and yet make him gallop many miles. By this management the horses
are very thin, but very _strong_, and able to bear their masters eighty
miles in a day when required; and they are so swift that they can outrun
their pursuers.

It is not surprising that the Toorkmans do not eat these thin horses,
though other Tartars are so fond of horse-flesh. They prefer mutton. When
they invite a stranger to dinner, they boil a whole sheep in a large
boiling-pot; then tear up the flesh,--mix it with crumbled bread, and
serve it up in wooden bowls. Two persons eat from one bowl, dipping their
hands into it, and licking up their food like dogs. The meal is finished
by eating melons.

These coarse manners suit such fierce and wild creatures as the
Toorkmans. It is their boast that they rest neither under the shadow of a
TREE nor of a KING: meaning that they have neither trees nor kings to
protect them in the desert.

The men wear high caps of black sheep-skin, while the Women wear high
white turbans. The tents are adorned with beautiful carpets, not only the
floors, but the sides, and it is the chief employment of the women to
weave them. As for the men, they spend most of their time in sauntering
about among the tents; for the fierce dogs guard the flocks. But when
their hands are idle, their thoughts are still busy in planning new
robberies and murders.

It was by such men that the earth was inhabited when God sent the flood
to destroy it. It is written, "The earth was filled with VIOLENCE."

Is there any man brave enough to go to these men to warn them of the
judgment to come, and to tell them of pardon for the penitent, through
the blood of Jesus?[9]

    [8] Taken from Sir Alexander Burnes, and from Kanikoff, the
        Russian, and from Rev. Joseph Wolff.

    [9] Extracted from Sir Alexander Burnes' "Bokhara."




CHINESE TARTARY.


Very little is known in Europe of this part of Tartary; and why? Because
the Emperor of China, who reigns over it, does not like travellers to go
there.

It is divided by high and snowy mountains from the rest of Tartary. When
a traveller has passed over these mountains, he finds on the other side
Chinese officers, who inquire what business he has come upon. If he have
come only to wander about the country, he is desired to go home again;
because the Chinese are afraid lest strangers should send spies, and then
ARMIES--to conquer their empire.

One traveller, because he stayed too long in Tartary, was imprisoned for
three months; and before he was let go, a picture of him was taken. What
was done with this picture? It was copied, and the copies were sent to
various towns on the borders of Chinese Tartary, with this command, "If
the man, who is like this picture, enter the country, his head is the
Emperor's, and his property is _yours_." Happily the traveller heard of
this command, and was never seen again in the country. You see how
cunning it was of the Chinese to allow any one who killed the traveller
to have his property; for thus they made it the interest of all to kill
him.

There is one city in Chinese Tartary where many strangers come to trade
with the people. It is called Yarkund. There caravans arrive from Pekin,
laden with tea, after a journey of five months over the wilds of Tartary.
Then merchants come from Bokhara to buy the tea, and to carry it home,
where it is so much liked.




AFFGHANISTAN.


This land is not a desert. Yet there are but few trees, and because there
is so little shade, the rivulets are soon dried up. Yet it might be a
fruitful land, if the inhabitants would plant and sow. But they prefer
wandering about in tents, and living upon plunder, to settling in one
place and living by their labor. The Tartar has good reason for roaming
over his plains, because the land is bad; but the Affghan has no reason,
but the _love_ of roaming.

The plains of Affghanistan are sultry, but the mountains are cool; for
their tops are covered with snow. The shepherds feed their flocks on the
plains during the winter; but in the spring they lead them to the
mountains to pass the summer there. Then the air is filled with the sweet
scent of clover and violets. The sheep often stop to browse upon the
fresh pasture; but they are not suffered to linger long. The children
have the charge of the lambs; an old goat or sheep goes before to
encourage the lambs to proceed, and the children follow with switches of
green grass. Many a little child who can only just run alone, enjoys the
sport of driving the young lambs. The tents are borne on the backs of
camels. The men are terrible-looking creatures, tall, large, dark, and
grim, with shaggy hair and long black beards. They wear great turbans of
blue check and handsome jackets, and cloaks of sheep-skin; they carry in
their girdles knives as large as a butcher's; and on their shoulders a
shield and a gun.

Besides these wild wanderers, there are some Affghans who live in houses.

Cabool, the capital, is a fine city, and the king dwells in a fine
citadel. The bazaar is the finest in all Asia. It is like a street with
many arches across it; and these people sell all kinds of goods.

But what is a fine _bazaar_ compared to a beautiful _garden?_ Cabool is
surrounded by gardens: the most beautiful is the king's. In the midst is
an octagon summer-house, where eight walks meet, and all the walks are
shaded by fruit-trees. Here grow, as in Bokhara, the best fruits to be
found in an English garden, only much larger and sweeter. The same kind
of birds, too, which sing in England sing among its branches, even the
melodious nightingale. It is the chief delight of the people of Cabool to
wander in the gardens: they come there every evening, after having spent
the day in sauntering about the bazaar; for they are an idle people,
talking much and working little.

The noise in the city is so great that it is difficult to make a friend
hear what you say: it is not the noise of rumbling wheels as in London,
for there are no wheeled carriages, but the noise of chattering tongues.

The Affghans are a temperate people; they live chiefly upon fruit with a
little bread; and as they are Mahomedans, they avoid wine, and drink
instead iced sherbets, made of the juice of fruits. In winter excellent
_dried_ fruits supply the place of fresh.

But the Affghan, though living on fruits, is far from being a harmless
and amiable character; on the contrary, he is cruel, covetous, and
treacherous. Much British blood has been shed in the valleys of
Affghanistan.

We cannot blame the Affghans for defending their own country. It was
natural for them to ask, "What right has Britain to interfere with us?"

A British army was once sent to Affghanistan to force the people to have
a king they did not like, instead of one they did like.

I will tell you of a youth who accompanied his father to the wars. This
boy looked forward with delight to going as a soldier to a foreign land,
and his heart beat high when the trumpet sounded to summon the troops to
embark. Joyfully he quitted Bombay, crossed the Indian Ocean, and landed
near the mouth of the Indus. When the army began its march towards
Affghanistan, he rode on a pony by his father's side.

At first it seemed pleasant to pitch the tent in a new spot every day, to
rest during the heat, and to travel in the dead of the night, till the
sun was high in the sky. But soon this way of life was found fatiguing,
for the heat was great, and the water scarce. The air, too, was clouded
by the dust the troops raised in marching; and green grass was seldom
seen, or a shady tree under which to rest. The food, too, was dry and
stale, and no fresh food could be procured, for the Affghans, before they
fled, destroyed the corn and fruit growing in the fields, that their
enemies might not eat them. The camels, too, which bore the baggage of
the British army, grew ill from heat and thirst; for it is not true that
camels can live _long_ without water; in three or four days they die.
Besides this, the hard rocks in the hilly country hurt their feet, and
hastened their death. Many a camel died as it was seeking to quench its
thirst at a narrow stream in the valley, and its dead body falling into
the water, polluted it. Yet this water the soldiers drank, for they had
no other, and from drinking it they fell ill. The father of the youthful
soldier was one of these, and he was compelled to stop on the way for
several weeks; and because the heat of a tent was too great, he took
shelter in a ruined building. Here his son nursed him with a heavy heart.
Where was the delight the youth had expected to find in a soldier's life?

At last the British army reached a strong fort built on the top of a
hill; Guznee was its name. Its walls and gates were so strong that it
seemed impossible to get into the city; yet the British knew that if they
did _not_, they must die either by the Affghan sword, or by hunger and
thirst among the rocks. For some time they were much perplexed and
distressed. At last a thought came into the mind of a British captain,
"Let us blow up the gates with gunpowder." The plan was good; but how to
perform it,--there was the difficulty. Soon all was arranged. In the
night some sacks of gunpowder were laid very softly against the gates;
but as no one could set fire to the sacks when _close_ to them, a long
pipe of cloth was filled with gunpowder, and stretched like a serpent
upon the ground; one end of the pipe touched the sack, and the other end
was to be set on fire. But before the match was applied, a British
officer peeped through a chink in the gates to see what the Affghans were
doing within. Behold! they were quietly smoking, and eating their supper,
not suspecting any danger! The match was applied--the gunpowder exploded,
and the strong gates were shattered into a thousand pieces; the army
rushed in sword in hand, and the Affghans fled in wild confusion.

Where was our young soldier? He was running into the fort between two
friendly soldiers, who kindly helped him on; each of them was holding one
of his arms, and assisting him to keep up with the troops, as they rushed
through the gates. As he ran, he heard horrible cries, but the darkness
hindered him from seeing the dying Affghans rolling in the dust, only he
felt their soft bodies as he hastily passed over them. He heard his
fellow-soldiers shouting and firing on every side. Some fell close beside
him, and others were wounded, and carried off on the shoulders of their
comrades, screaming with agony.

Half an hour after the gates were fired, the city was taken. The news of
the victory spread among the Affghans on the mountains, and the plains,
and the whole country submitted to the British.

The army soon marched to Cabool, that proud city. No one opposed their
entrance, and the bazaar, and the king's garden, and the royal citadel
were visited by our soldiers.

After spending two months in beautiful Cabool, resting their weary limbs
and feasting on fine fruits, the army was ordered to return home. They
began to march again towards the coast, a distance of fifteen hundred
miles, over cragged rocks, and scorching plains.

In the course of this terrible journey, the father of the young soldier
again fell ill, and was forced to stop by the way. His affectionate son
nursed him night and day; closed his eyes in death, and saw him laid in a
lowly grave in the desert. With a bleeding heart the youth embarked to
return to Bombay.

During the voyage, a furious storm arose, and all on board despaired of
life. _Then_ it was the youth remembered the prayers he had offered up by
his dying father's bed; _then_ it was he felt he had not turned to God
with all his heart, and _then_ it was he vowed, that if the Lord would
spare him this _once_, he would seek his face in truth. God heard and
spared.

And did the youth remember his prayers and vows? He did, though not at
_first_,--yet after a little while he _did_. He read the word of God, he
prayed for the Spirit of God, and at length he enjoyed the peace of God;
and now he neither fears storm nor sword, because Christ is his shelter
and his shield.




BELOOCHISTAN.


Just underneath Affghanistan, lies Beloochistan, by the sea coast. It is
separated from India by the river Indus. You may know a Beloochee from an
Affghan by his stiff red cotton cap, in the shape of a hat without a
brim; whereas, an Affghan wears a turban. Yet the religion of the
Beloochee is the same as that of the Affghan, namely, the Mahomedan, and
the character is alike, only the Beloochee is the fiercer of the two: the
country also is alike, being wild and rocky.

Beloochistan has not been conquered by the British: it has a king of its
own; yet the British have fought against Beloochistan. On one occasion a
British army was sent to punish the king of Beloochistan for not having
sent corn to us, as he had promised.

The army consisted of three thousand men, and amongst them was the young
soldier, of whom you have heard so much already. His father was ill at
the time, and could not fight; but the youth came upon his pony, with a
camel to carry his tent, and all his baggage.

The troops as usual marched in the night. In the morning, about eight
o'clock, they first caught sight of Kelat, the capital of Beloochistan.
It was a grand sight, for the city is built on a high hill, with a
citadel at the top. The dark Beloochees were seen thronging about the
walls and the towers, gazing at the British army, but not daring to
approach them.

Our soldiers, when they first arrived, were too much tired to begin the
attack, and therefore they rested on the grass for two hours. At ten
o'clock the word of command was given, and the attack was made. The
British planted their six cannons opposite the gates, and began to fire.

Where was the young soldier? He was commanded to run with his company
close up to the wall, and there to remain. As he ran, he was exposed to
the full fire of the enemy. The youth heard bullets whizzing by as he
passed, and he expected every moment that some ball would lay him low;
but through the mercy of God he reached the wall in safety. _Close_
underneath the wall was not a dangerous post, for the bullets passed over
the heads of those standing there.

About noon, the British cannons had destroyed the gates. Then the British
soldiers rushed into the town. Amongst the first to enter was the young
soldier; because when the gates fell he was standing close by. As he
passed along the streets, he saw no one but the dead and the dying; for
the Beloochees had fled for refuge to their citadel on the top of the
hill. The king himself was there.

The citadel was a place very difficult for an enemy to enter; for the
entrance was through a narrow dark passage underground. Into this passage
the British soldiers poured, but soon they came to a door, which they
could not get through, for Beloochee soldiers stood there, sword in hand,
ready to cut down any one who approached. "Look at my back," said one
soldier to his fellow. The other looked, and beheld the most frightful
gashes gaping wide and bleeding freely. Such were the wounds that each
soldier, who ventured near that door, was sure to receive.

At this moment a cry was heard, saying, "Another passage is found." When
the Beloochees heard this cry, they gave up all hopes of keeping the
enemy out of the citadel; so they left off fighting, and cried "Peace."

But their king was already dead; he had fallen on the threshold of the
passage last found. The _first_ man who tried to get in by that way the
_king_ had killed; but the _second_ had killed the king. The British, as
they rushed in by this new way, trampled on the body of the fallen
monarch. He was a splendid object even in death; his long dark ringlets
were flowing over his glittering garments, and his sharp sword, with its
golden hilt, was in his hand. The British hurried by, and climbed the
steep and narrow stairs leading to the top of the citadel, and the enemy
no longer durst oppose their course.

On the terrace at the top of the citadel, in the open air, stood the
nobles of Beloochistan. There were princes too from the countries all
around. It was a magnificent assembly. These men were the finest of a
fine race. Some were clad in shining armor, and others in flowing
garments of green and gold. Thus they stood for a _moment_, and the
_next_--they were rolling on the ground!!

How was this? Had not peace been agreed upon on both sides? Yes, but a
British soldier had attempted to take away the sword of one of the
princes. The prince had resisted, and with his sword, had wounded the
soldier; and instantly every British gun on that spot had been pointed at
the nobles of Beloochistan.

This was why the nobles were lying in the agonies of death.

Our young soldier was not one of those who slew the nobles. He was
standing on another part of the terrace, when, hearing a tremendous
volley of guns, he exclaimed to a friend, "What can that be?" Going
forward, he beheld heaps of bleeding bodies, turbans, and garments--in
one confused mass. The dying were calling for water, and the very
soldiers who had shot them, were holding cups to their quivering lips,
though themselves parched with thirst. But water could not save the lives
of the fallen nobles: one by one they ceased to cry out, and soon--all
were silent--and all were still. The VICTORY was WON! But how awful had
been the last scene! How cruelly, how unjustly, had the lives of that
princely assembly been cut short!

The conquerors returned that evening to their camp. On their way, they
passed through the desolate streets of the city; the mud cottages on each
side were empty, and blood flowed between. The young officer, as he
marched at the head of his company, was struck by seeing a row of his own
fellow-soldiers lying dead upon the ground. They had been placed there
ready for burial on the morrow. Their ghastly faces, and gaping wounds
were terrible to behold. The youth remembered them full of life and
spirits in the morning, unmindful of their dismal end; _then_ he felt how
merciful God had been in sparing his life; and when he crept into his
little tent that night, he returned him thanks upon his knees; though he
did not love him _then_ as his Saviour from eternal death. Wearied, he
soon fell asleep, but his sleep was broken by dreadful dreams of blood
and death.

The next day he walked through the conquered town, and saw the British
soldiers dragging the dead bodies of their enemies by ropes fastened to
their feet. They were dragging them to their grave, which was a deep
trench, and there they cast them in and covered them up with earth.

Such is the history of the conquest of Kelat.[10] How many souls were
suddenly hurled into eternity! How many unprepared to meet their Judge,
because their sins were unpardoned, and their souls unwashed! But in war,
who thinks of souls and sins! O horrible war! How hateful to the Prince
of Peace!

   [10] September 13, 1839.




BURMAH.


Of all the kings in Asia, the king of Burmah is the greatest, next to the
emperor of China. He has not indeed nearly as large a kingdom, or as many
subjects as that emperor; but like him, he is worshipped by his people.
He is called "Lord of life and death," and the "Owner of the sword," for
instead of holding a _sceptre_ in his hand, he holds a golden sheathed
_sword_. A sword indeed suits him well, for he is very cruel to his
subjects. Nowhere are such severe punishments inflicted. For drinking
brandy the punishment is, pouring molten lead down the throat; and for
running away from the army, the punishment is, cutting off both legs, and
leaving the poor creature to bleed to death. A man for choosing to be a
Christian was beaten all over the body with a wooden mallet, till he was
one mass of bruises; but before he was dead, he was let go.

Every one is much afraid of offending this cruel king. The people tremble
at the sound of his name; and when they see him, they fall down with
their heads in the dust. The king makes any one a lord whom he pleases,
yet he treats even his lords very rudely. When displeased with them, he
will hunt them out of the room with his drawn sword. Once he made forty
of his lords lie upon their faces for several hours, beneath the broiling
sun, with a great beam over them to keep them still. It was well for them
that the king did not send for the men with spotted faces. Who are those
men? The executioners. Their faces are always covered with round marks
tattooed in the skin. The sight of these spotted faces fills all the
people with terror. Every one runs away at the sight of a spotted face,
and no one will allow a man with a spotted face to sit down in his house.
In what terror the poor Burmese must live, not knowing when the order for
death will arrive. Yet the king is so much revered, that when he dies,
instead of saying, "He is dead," the people say, "He is gone to amuse
himself in the heavenly regions"

The king has a great many governors under him, and they are as cruel as
himself. A missionary once saw a poor creature hanging on a cross. He
inquired what the man had done, and finding that he was not a murderer,
he went to the governor to entreat him to pardon the man. For a long
while the governor refused to hear him: but at last he gave him a note,
desiring the crucified man to be taken down from the cross. Would you
believe it?--the Burmese officers were so cruel that they would not toke
out the nails, till the missionary had promised them a _piece of cloth_
as a reward! When the man was released, he was nearly dead, having been
seven hours bleeding on the cross; but he was tenderly nursed by the
missionary, and at last he recovered. Yet all the agonies of a cross had
not changed the man's heart, and he returned to his old way of life as a
thief. Had he believed in that Saviour who was nailed to a cross for his
sins, he would, like the dying thief, have repented. Though the Burmese
are so unfeeling to each other, they think it wrong to kill animals, and
never eat any meat, except the flesh of animals who have died of
themselves. Even the fishermen think they shall be punished hereafter for
catching fish; but they say, "We must do it, or we shall be starved." You
may be sure that such a people must have some false and foolish religion;
and so they have, as you will see.

[Illustration: IDOL CAR AND PAGODA.]

RELIGION.--It is the religion of Buddha. This Buddha was a man who was
born at Benares, in India, more than two thousand years ago; and people
say, that for his great goodness was made a boodh, or a god. Yet the
Burmese do not think he is alive now; they say he is resting as a reward
for his goodness. Why then do they pray to him, if he cannot hear them?
They pray because they think it is very good to pray, and that they shall
be rewarded for it some day. What reward do they expect? It is this--to
_rest_ as Buddha does--to sleep forever and ever. This is the reward they
look for. Every one in Burmah thinks he has been born a great many times
into the world,--now as an insect,--now as a bird,--now as a beast, and
he thinks that because he was very good,--as a reward he was made a
_man_. Then he thinks that if he is very good as a _poor_ man, he shall
be born next time to be a _rich_ man; and at last, that he will be
allowed to rest like Buddha himself. What is it to be good? The Burmese
say that the greatest goodness is making an idol, and next to that,
making a pagoda. You know what an idol is, but do you know what a pagoda
is? It is a house, with an idol _hidden_ inside, and it has no door, nor
window, therefore no one can get into a pagoda. Some pagodas are very
large, and others very small. As it is thought so very good to make idols
and pagodas, the whole land is filled with them; the roads in some places
are lined with them; the mountains are crowned with them.

Next to making idols, and building pagodas, it is considered good to make
offerings. You may see the father climbing a steep hill to reach a
pagoda, his little one by his side, and plucking green twigs as he goes.
He reaches the pagoda, and strikes the great bell, then enters the
idol-house near the pagoda, and teaches his young child how to fold its
little hands, and to raise them to its forehead, while it repeats a
senseless prayer; then leaving the green twigs at the idol's feet, the
father descends with his child in his arms. How many little ones, such
as Jesus once took in his arms, are taught every day to serve Satan.

The people who are thought the best in Burmah, are the priests. Any one
that pleases may be a priest. The priests pretend to be poor, and go out
begging every morning with their empty dishes in their hands; but they
get them well filled, and then return to the handsome house, all shining
with gold, in which they live together in plenty and in pride. They are
expected to dress in rags, to show that they are poor; but not liking
rags, they cut up cloth in little pieces, and sew the pieces together to
make their yellow robes; and this they call wearing rags. They pretend to
be so modest, that they do not like to show their faces, and so hide them
with a fan, even when they preach; for they do preach in their way, that
is, they tell foolish stories about Buddha. The name they give him is
Guadama, while the Chinese call him Fo. They have five hundred and fifty
stories written in their books about him; for they say he was once a
bird, a fly, an elephant, and all manner of creatures, and was so good
whatever he was, that at last he was born the son of a king.

CHARACTER.--The Burmese are a blunt and rough people. They are not like
the Chinese and the Hindoos, ready to pay compliments to strangers. When
a Burmese has finished a visit, he says, "I am going," and his friend
replies, "Go." This is very blunt behavior. But all blunt people are not
sincere. The Burmese are very deceitful, and tell lies on every occasion;
indeed, they are not ashamed of their falsehoods. They are also very
proud, because they fancy they were so good before they were born into
this world. All the kind actions they do are in the hope of getting more
merit, and this bad motive spoils all they do. They are kind to
travellers. In every village there is a pretty house, called a Zayat,
where travellers may rest. As soon as a guest arrives, the villagers
hasten to wait upon him;--one brings a clean mat, another a jug of water,
and a third a basket of fruit. But why is all this attention shown? In
the hope of getting merit. The Burmese resemble the Chinese in their
respect to their parents. They are better than the Chinese in their
treatment of their children, for they are kind to the _girls_ is well as
to the boys; neither do they destroy any of their infants. They are
temperate also, not drinking wine,--having only two meals in the day, and
then not eating too much. In these points they are to be approved. They
are, however, very violent in their tempers; it is true they are not very
easily provoked, but when they are angry, they use very abusive language.
Thus you see they are by no means an amiable people.

APPEARANCE.--In their persons they are far less pleasing than the
Hindoos; for instead of _slender_ faces and figures, they have broad
faces and thick figures. But they have not such dark complexions as the
Hindoos.

They disfigure themselves in various ways. To make their skins yellow,
they sprinkle over them a yellow powder. They also make their teeth
black, because they say they do not wish to have white teeth like dogs
and monkeys. They bore their ears, and put bars of gold, or silver, or
marble through the holes.

The women wear a petticoat and a jacket. The men wear a turban, a loose
robe, and a jacket; they tie up their hair in a knot behind, and tattoo
their legs, by pricking their skin, and then putting in black oil. They
have the disagreeable custom of smoking, and of chewing a stuff called
"coon," which they carry in a box.

Every one (except the priests) carries an umbrella to guard him from the
sun; the king alone has a white one; his nobles have gilded umbrellas;
the next class have red umbrellas; and the lowest have green.

FOOD.--Burmah is a pleasanter country than Hindostan, for it is not so
hot, and yet it is as fruitful. The people live chiefly upon rice; but
when they cannot get enough, they find abundance of leaves and roots to
satisfy their hunger.

ANIMALS.--There are many tigers, but no lions. The Burmese are fond of
adorning their houses with statues of lions, but never having seen any,
they make very strange and laughable figures. The pride of Burmah is her
elephants; but they all belong to the king, and none may ride upon one
but himself, and his chief favorite. Carriages are drawn by bullocks, or
buffaloes; and there are horses for riding, so the Burmese can do very
well without the elephants. The king thinks a great deal too much of
these noble animals. There was a white elephant that he delighted in so
much, that he adorned it with gold, and jewels, and counted it next to
himself in rank, even above the queen.

HOUSES.--The Burmese build their houses on posts, so that there is an
empty place under the floors. Dogs and crows may often be seen walking
under the houses, eating whatever has fallen through the cracks of the
floor.

The king allows none but the nobles to build houses of brick and stone;
the rest build them of bamboos. This law is unpleasant; but there is
another law which is a great comfort to the poor. It is _this_;--any one
may have land who wishes for it. A man has only to cultivate a piece of
spare land, and it is counted his, _as long_ as he continues to cultivate
it; therefore all industrious people have gardens of their own.


THE KARENS.

Among the mountains of Burmah, there are a wild people called the Karens,
very poor and very ignorant; yet some have attended to the voice of the
missionaries. They are not so proud as the Burmese; for they have no gods
at all, and no books at all: they have not filled their heads with five
hundred and fifty stories about Gaudama; therefore they are more ready to
listen to the history of Jesus.

The Karens live in houses raised from the ground, and so large is the
place underneath, that they keep poultry and pigs there. Every year they
move to a new place, and build new houses, clear a new piece of ground,
by burning the weeds, dig it up, and sow rice. Thus they wander about,
and they number their years by the number of houses they have lived in.

Of all the Eastern nations, they sing and play the most sweetly, and when
they become Christians, they sing hymns, very sweetly indeed.

There is one Christian village among the mountains, called Mata, which
means love; and every morning the people meet together in the Zayat, or
travellers' house, to sing and pray. Before they were Christians, the
Karens were in constant fear of the Nats; (not _insects_, but evil
spirits), and sometimes in order to please their Nats, they were so cruel
as to beat a pig to death. The Christian Karens have left off such
barbarous practices, and have become kind and compassionate. When the
missionaries told them that they ought to love one another, some of them
went secretly the next day to wait upon a poor leper, and upon a woman
covered with sores. Another day, without being asked, they collected some
money and brought it to the missionaries, saying, they wished to set free
a poor Burman who had been imprisoned for Christ's sake. It is cheering
to the missionaries to see them turning from their sins.[11]

AVA.

This city was once the capital of Burmah, and then it was called the
"golden city." But now the king lives in another city, and the glory of
Ava has passed away.

MAULMAIN.

This city, though in Burmah, may be called a British city, because the
British built it; for they have conquered great part of Burmah. There are
missionaries there. One there is, named Judson, who has turned more than
a hundred Burmese to the Lord. But he has known great troubles. His wife
and his little girl shared in these troubles.

I will now relate the history of the short life of little Maria Judson.

THE MISSIONARY'S BABE.

The missionary's babe, little Maria, was born in a cottage by the side of
a river, and very near the walls of the great city of Ava, where the king
dwelt.

It was a wooden cottage, thatched with straw, and screened by a verandah
from the burning sun. It was not like an English cottage, for it was
built on high posts, that the cool air might play beneath. It contained
three small rooms all on one floor. The country around was lovely; for
the green banks of the river were adorned with various colored flowers
and with trees laden with fine fruits.

In this pretty cottage, the infant Maria was lulled in her mother's arms
to sleep, and often the tears rolling down the mother's cheeks, fell upon
the baby's fair face. Why did the mother weep? It was for her husband she
wept. He was not dead, but he was in prison. He was a missionary, and the
king of Ava had imprisoned him in the midst of the great city. Was his
wife left all alone with her babe in her cottage? No, there were two
little Burmese girls there. They were the children of heathen parents,
and they had been received by the kind lady into her cottage, and now
they were learning to worship God. Their new names were, Mary, and Abby.
There were also two men servants, of dark complexion, dressed in white
cotton, and wearing turbans. It was a sorrowful little household, because
the master of the family was absent, because he was in distress, and his
life was in danger. Every day his fond wife visited him in his prison.
She left her babe under the care of Mary, and set out with a little
basket in her hand. After walking two miles through the streets of Ava,
she came to some high walls--she knocked at the gate--a stern-looking
man opened it. The lady, passing through the gates, entered a court. In
one corner of the court, there was a little shed made of bamboos, and
near it, upon a mat, eat a pale, and sorrowful man. His countenance
brightens when he perceives the lady enter. She refreshes him with the
nice food she has brought in her basket, and comforts him with sweet and
heavenly words:--then hastens to return to her babe. As soon as she
enters her cottage, she sinks back, half fainting, in her rocking-chair,
while she folds again her little darling in her arms. Happy babe! thy
parents are suffering for Jesus--and they are blessed of the Lord, and
their baby with them.

Greater sorrows still, soon befell the little family. One day, a
messenger came to the cottage, with the sad tidings that the bamboo hut
had been torn down, the mat, and pillow taken away, and the prisoner,
laden with chains, thrust into the inner prison. The loving wife hastened
to the governor of the city to ask for mercy; but she could obtain none,
only she was permitted to see her husband. And _what_ a sight! He was
shut up in a room with a hundred men, and without a _window!!_ Though the
weather was hot no breath of air reached the poor prisoners, but through
the cracks in the boards. No wonder that the missionary soon fell ill of
a fever. His wife, fearing he would die, determined to act like the widow
in the parable, and to weary the unjust judge by her entreaties. She left
her quiet cottage, and built a hut of bamboos at the governor's gate,
and there she lived with her babe, and the little Burmese girls. The
prison was just opposite the governor's gate, so that the anxious wife
had now the comfort of being near her suffering husband. The governor was
wearied by her importunity, and at last permitted her to build again a
bamboo hovel for the prisoner in the court of the prison. The sick man
was brought out of the noisome dungeon, and was laid upon his mat in the
fresh air. He was supplied with food and medicine by his faithful wife,
and he began to recover.

But in three days, a change occurred. Suddenly the poor wife heard that
her beloved had been dragged from his prison, and taken, she knew not
where. She inquired of everybody she saw, "Where is he gone?" but no
answer could she obtain. At last the governor told her, that his prisoner
was taken to a great city, named A-ma-ra-poora. This city was seven miles
from Ava. The wife decided in a moment what to do. She determined to
follow her husband. Taking her babe in her arms, and accompanied by the
Burmese children, and one servant, she set out. She went to the city up
the river in a covered boat, and thus she was sheltered from the
scorching sun of an Indian May. But when she arrived at Amarapoora, she
heard that her husband had been taken to a village six miles off. To this
village she travelled in a clumsy cart drawn by oxen. Overcome with
fatigue, she arrived at the prison, and saw her poor husband sitting in
the court chained to another prisoner, and looking very ill. He had
neither hat, nor coat, nor shoes, and his feet were covered with wounds
he had received, as he had been driven over the burning gravel on the way
to the prison: but his wounds had been bound up by a kind heathen
servant, who had torn up his own turban to make bandages.

When the missionary saw his wife approaching with her infant, he felt
grieved on her account, and exclaimed, "Why have you come? You cannot
live here?" But she cared not where she lived, so that she could be near
her suffering husband. She wished to build a bamboo hut at the prison
gate: but the jailor would not allow her. However, he let her live in a
room of his own house. It was a wretched room, with no furniture but a
mat. Here the mother and the children slept that night, while the
servant, wrapped in his cloth, lay at the door. They had no supper that
night. Next day, they bought food in the village, with some silver that
the lady kept carefully concealed in her clothes.

A new trouble soon came upon them. Mary was seized with a small-pox of a
dreadful sort. Who now was to help the weak mother to nurse the little
Maria? Abby was too young. The babe was four months old, and a heavy
burden for feeble arms; yet all day long the mother carried it, as she
went to and fro from the sick child to the poor prisoner. Sometimes, when
it was asleep, she laid it down by the side of her husband. He was able
to watch a _sleeping_ babe, but not to nurse a babe _awake_, owing to his
great weakness, and to his mangled feet. Soon the babe herself was
attacked by the small-pox, and continued very ill for three months. This
last trial was too much for the poor mother. Her strength failed her, and
for many weeks she lay upon her mat unable to rise. She must have
perished, if it had not been for the faithful servant. He was a native
of Bengal, and a heathen. Yet he was so much concerned for his sick
mistress and imprisoned master, that he would sometimes go without food
all day, while he was attending to their wants; and he did all without
expecting any wages.

The poor little infant was in a sad case now its mother was lying on the
mat. It cried so much for milk, that once its father got leave to carry
it round the village to ask the mothers who had babes, to give some milk
to his. By this plan, the little creature was quieted in the day, but at
night its cries were most distressing.

The time at length arrived, when these trials were to end. The king sent
for the missionary, not to put him to death, as he had once intended, but
to ask for his help. What help could he render to the king? The reason
why the missionary had been imprisoned so long was, that a British army
had attacked Burmah. The king had feared, lest the missionary should take
part with the enemy, and therefore he had shut him up. Now there were
hopes of peace, and an interpreter was wanted to help the Burmese to
speak with the British. The missionary knew both the English language and
the Burmese, and he could explain to the king what the English general
would say.

For this purpose he was brought to Ava. He was not driven along the road
like a beast, but relieved from his chains, and treated with less cruelty
than formerly. Yet he was still a prisoner.

The mother was now well enough to make a journey, though still very weak.
She returned to her cottage by the river-side, and soon she had the
delight of seeing her husband enter it. It was seventeen months since he
had been torn from it by the king's officers, and ever since, he had been
groaning in irons. But he was not now come to remain in his cottage, but
only to obtain a little food and clothing to take with him to the Burmese
camp. His wife felt cheered on his account, hoping that as an interpreter
he would be well treated.

No sooner was he gone, than she was seized with that deadly disease,
called spotted fever. What now would become of little Maria? Through the
tender mercy of God, on the very day the mother fell ill, a Burmese woman
offered to nurse the babe. Every day the mother grew worse, till at last
the neighbors came in to see her die. As they stood around, they
exclaimed, in their Burmese tongue, "She is dead, and if the king of
angels should come in, he could not recover her." _Their_ king of angels
could _not_, but _her_ KING of ANGELS could, for he can raise the dead.
But this dear lady was _not_ dead, though nearly dead.

The Lord of life showed her mercy. A friend entered the sick chamber. It
was Dr. Price, a missionary and a prisoner, but who had obtained leave
from the king to visit the sick lady. He understood her case, and he
ordered her head to be shaved, and blisters to be applied to her feet.
From that time, she began to recover, and in a month, she had strength to
stand up. The governor, who had once been so slow to hear her complaints,
now sent for her to his house. He received her in the kindest manner.
What was her joy, when she foiled her husband there, not as a prisoner,
but as a guest. Many prayers had she offered up, during her long illness,
and they were now answered. The promise she had trusted in was fulfilled.
This was _that_ promise: "Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I WILL
DELIVER THEE, and thou shalt glorify me."

But still brighter days were at hand. The King of Burmah had peace with
the British, and had agreed to deliver the missionaries into their hands.
Glad, indeed, were they to escape from the power of the cruel monarch.
Little Maria and her parents, as well as Mary and Abby, were conveyed in
a boat down the river to the place where the English army had encamped.
The English general received them with fatherly kindness, and gave them a
tent to dwell in near his own. What a fortnight they spent in that tent.
It was a morning of joy, after a night of weeping. Little Maria was now,
for the first time, dwelling with _both_ her parents.

Soon afterwards she was taken to a new home in a town in Burmah, built by
the English. It was called Amherst[12]. Here the missionary might teach
the Burmese to know their Saviour, without being under the power of the
cruel Burmese king.

It seemed as if the little family, so long afflicted, were now to dwell
in safety, and to labor in comfort. But there is a rest for the people of
God, and to this rest one of this family was soon removed.

The missionary determined to go to Ava, to plead with the king for
permission to teach his subjects. He parted from his beloved wife,
little thinking he should never see her again.

During her husband's absence, she watched with deep anxiety over her
little Maria. The child was pale, and puny, yet very affectionate and
intelligent. Whenever her mamma said, "Where is dear papa gone?" the
little creature started up, and pointed to the sea. She could not speak
plainly, for she was only twenty months old.

Not long did she enjoy her mother's tender care. The poor mother, worn
with her past watching, and weeping, was attacked by fever. As she lay
upon the bed, she was heard to say, "The teacher is long in coming, I
must die alone, and leave my little one; but as it is the will of God, I
am content."

She grew so ill, that she took no notice of anything that passed around
her; but even then she called for her child, and charged the nurse to be
kind to it, and to indulge it in everything till its father returned.
This charge she gave, because she knew the babe wan sick, and needed the
tenderest care. At last the mother lay without moving, her eyes closed,
and her head resting on her arm. Thus she continued for two days, and
then she uttered one cry, and ceased to breathe. Her illness had lasted
eighteen days. Then she rested from her labors, and slept in Jesus.

What now became of little Maria? The wife of an English officer receded
her in her house for a few weeks, and then a missionary and his wife came
to Maria's home, and took charge of the child. Maria was pleased to come
back to her own home, and she fancied that kind Mrs. Wade was her own
mother.

What a day it was when the poor father returned home! No wife to meet
him, with love and joy; only a sickly babe, who had forgotten him, and
turned from him with alarm. Where could he go, but to the grave to weep
there? then he returned to the house to look at the very spot where he
had knelt with his wife in prayer, and parted from her in hope of a happy
return.

Little Maria was nursed with a mother's care, though not in a mother's
arms; but her delicate frame had been shaken by her infant troubles, and
care and comforts came TOO LATE. After drooping day by day, she died at
the age of two years and three months, exactly six months after her
mother. Her father was near to close her faded eyes, and fold her little
hands on her cold breast, and then to lay her in a little grave, close
beside her mother's, under the Hope Tree.

The words of the poet would suit well the case of this much tried
infant:--

    "Short pain, short grief, dear babe, were thine,
    _Now_, joys eternal and divine."

Like Maria's are the sufferings of many a missionary's babe, and many lie
in an early tomb. But they are dear to the Saviour, for their parents'
sakes, and their deaths are precious in his sight, and their spirits and
their dust are safe in his hands.

   [11] Taken from "Travels in Eastern Asia," by Rev. Howard Malcolm.

   [12] Amherst is only thirty miles from Maulmain.




SIAM.


Cross a river, and you pass from Burmah to Siam. These two countries,
like most countries close together, have quarrelled a great deal, and
now Britain has got in between them, and has parted them; as a nurse
might come and part two quarrelsome children. Britain has conquered that
part of Burmah which lies close to Siam, and has called it British
Burmah; so Siam is now at peace.

But though these two countries have been such enemies, they are as like
each other as two sisters. Siam is the little sister. Siam is a long
narrow slip of a country, having the sea on one side, and mountains on
the other.

The religion of Siam is the same as that of Burmah, the worship of
Buddha. But in Siam he is not called Buddha: the name given him there is
"Codom." You see how many names this Buddha has; in China he is Fo; in
Burmah he is Gaudama; in Siam, he is Codom. Neither is he honored in Siam
in exactly the same way as in Burmah. Instead of building magnificent
pagodas, the Siamese build magnificent image houses or temples.

The Siamese resemble the Burmese in appearance, but they are much worse
looking. Their faces are very broad, and flat; and so large are the jaws
under the ears, that they appear as if they were swollen. Their manner of
dressing their hair does not improve their looks; for they cut their hair
quite close, except just on the top of their heads, where they make it
stand up like bristles; nor do they wear any covering on their heads,
except when it is very hot, and then they put on a hat in the shape of a
milk pan, made of leaves. They do not disfigure themselves, as the
Burmese do, with nose-rings, and ear-bars; but they, love ornaments quite
as much, and load themselves with necklaces and bracelets. Their dress
consists of a printed cotton garment, wound round the body. This is the
dress of the women as well as of the men; only sometimes the women wear a
handkerchief over their necks.

In disposition the Siamese are deceitful, and cowardly. It has been said
of them, that as _friends_ they are not to be _trusted_, and as _enemies_
not to be _feared:_ they cannot be trusted because they are deceitful:
they need not be feared because they are cowardly. This is indeed a
dreadful character; for many wicked people are faithful to their friends,
and brave in resisting their enemies.

No doubt the manner in which they are governed makes them cowardly; for
they are taught to behave as if they were worms. Whoever enters the
presence of the king, must creep about on hands and knees. The great
lords require their servants to show them the same respect. Servants
always crawl into a room, pushing in their trays before them; and when
waiting, they walk about on their knees. How shocking to see men made
like worms to gratify the pride of their fellow-men! The rule is never to
let your head be higher than the head of a person more honorable than
yourself; if he stand, you must sit; if he sit, you must crouch.

The Siamese are like the Burmese in cruelty. When an enemy falls into
their hands, no mercy is shown.

A king of a small country called Laos, was taken captive by the Siamese.
This king, with his family, were shut up in a large iron cage, and
exhibited as a sight. There he was, surrounded by his sons and grandsons,
and all of them were heavily laden with chains on their necks and legs.
Two of them were little boys, and they played and laughed in their
cage!--so thoughtless are children! But the elder sons looked very
miserable; they hung down their heads, and fixed their eyes on the
ground; and well they might; for within their sight were various horrible
instruments of torture;--spears with which to pierce them;--an iron
boiler, in which to heat oil to scald them;--a gallows on which to hang
their bodies, and--a pestle and mortar in which to pound the children to
powder. You see how Satan fills the heart of the heathen with his own
cruel devices. The people who came to see this miserable family, rejoiced
at the sight of their misery: but they lost the delight they expected in
tormenting the old king, for he died of a broken heart; and all they
could do _then_, was to insult his body; they beheaded it, and then hung
it upon a gibbet, where every one might see it, and the beasts and birds
devour it.

What became of his unhappy family is not known.

But though so barbarous to their _enemies_, the Siamese in some respects
are better than most other heathen nations, for they treat their
_relations_ more kindly. They do not kill their infants, nor shut up
their wives, nor cast out their parents. Yet they show their cruelty in
this:--they often sell one another for slaves. They also purchase slaves
in great numbers; and there are wild men in the mountains who watch
Burmans and Karens to sell them to the great chiefs of Siam. It is the
pride of their chiefs to have thousands of slaves crawling around them.

BANKOK.

This city is built on an island in a broad river, and part of it on the
banks of the river. It ought therefore to be a pleasant city, but it is
_not_, owing to its extreme untidiness. The streets are full of mud, and
overgrown with bushes, amongst which all the refuse is thrown; there are
also many ditches with planks thrown across. There is only one pleasant
part of the town, and that is, where the Wats are built. The Wats are the
idol-houses. Near them are shady walks and fragrant flowers, and elegant
dwellings for the priests. The people think they get great merit by
making Wats, and therefore they take so much trouble: for the Siamese are
very idle. So idle are they that there would be very little trade in
Bankok, if it were not for the Chinese, who come over here in crowds, and
make sugar, and buy and sell, and get money to take back to China. You
may tell in a moment a Chinaman's garden from a Siamese garden; one is
so neat and full of flowers;--the other is overgrown with weeds and
strewn with litter.

The most curious sight in Bankok, is the row of floating houses. These
houses are placed upon posts in the river, and do not move about as boats
do; yet if you _wish_ to move your house, you can do so; you have only to
take up the posts, and float to another place.

Besides the floating houses, there are numerous boats in the river, and
some so small that a child can row them. There are so many that they
often come against each other, and are overset. A traveller once passed
by a boat where a little girl of seven was rowing, and by accident his
boat overset hers. The child fell out of her boat, and her paddle out of
her hand; yet she was not the least frightened, only surprised; and after
looking about for a moment, she burst out a laughing, and was soon seen
swimming behind her boat (still upside down), with her paddle in her
hand. These little laughing rowers are too giddy to like learning, and
they are not at all willing to come to the missionaries' schools; but
some poor children, redeemed from slavery, are glad to be there, and have
been taught about Christ in these schools.




MALACCA.


This is a peninsula, or almost an island, for there is water almost all
round it. In shape it is something like a _dog's_ leg, even as Italy is
like a _man's_ leg.

The weather in Malacca is much pleasanter than in most parts of India,
because the sea-breezes make the air fresh. There is no rainy season, as
in most hot countries, but a shower cools the air almost every day. The
country, too, is beautiful, for there are mountains, and forests, and
streams.

Yet it is a dangerous country to live in, for the people are very
treacherous. There are many pirates among them. What are pirates? Robbers
by sea. If they see a small vessel, in a moment the pirates in their
ships try to overtake it, seize it, take the crew prisoners, and sell
them for slaves. The governors of the land do not punish the pirates; far
from punishing them, they share in the gains. That is a wicked land
indeed, where the governors encourage the people in their sins.

Malacca has no king of her own; the land belongs to Siam, except a very
small part. The inhabitants are called Malays. They are not like the
Siamese in character; for instead of being cowardly, they are fierce.
Neither have they the same religion, for instead of being Buddhists, they
are Mahomedans. Yet they know very little about the Koran, or its laws.
One command, however, they have learned, which is--to hate infidels. They
count all who do not believe in Mahomet to be infidels, and they say that
it is right to hunt them. They are proud of taking Christian vessels, and
of selling Christians as slaves.

There are some valuable plants in Malacca. There is one which has a seed
called "pepper." There is a tree which has in the stem a pith called
sago. Who collects the pepper and the sago? There are mines of tin. Who
digs up the tin? The idle Malays will not take so much trouble, so the
industrious Chinese labor instead. The Chinese come over by thousands to
get rich in Malacca. As there is not room for them in their own country,
they are glad to settle in other countries. But though the Chinese set an
example of _industry_, they do not set an example of _goodness_; for they
gamble, and so lose their _money_, they smoke opium, and so lose their
_health_, and they commit many kinds of wickedness by which they lose
their _souls_.

As for the Malays, they are so very idle, that when trees fall over the
river, and block up the way, they will not be at the trouble of cutting a
way through for their boats,--but will sooner creep _under_ or climb
_over_ the fallen trees.

The capital of Malacca is Malacca, and this city belongs to the English;
but it is of little use to them, because the harbor is not good.


SINGAPORE.

This city also belongs to the English, and it is of great use to them,
because the harbor is one of the best in the world. Many ships come there
to buy, and to sell, and amongst the rest, the Chinese junks. The city is
built on a small island, very near the coast. There are many beautiful
country houses perched on the hills, where English families live, and
there are long flights of stone steps leading from their houses to the
sea.

But many of the Malays have no home but a boat, hardly large enough to
lie down in. There they gain a living by catching fish, and collecting
shells, and coral, to exchange for sago, which is their food. These men
are called "Ourang-lout," which means "Man of the water." Does not this
name remind you of the apes called "Ourang-outang," which means "Man of
the woods?" There are Ourang-outangs in the forests of Malacca, and they
are more like men, and are more easily tamed than any other ape. Yet
still how different is the _tamest_ ape from the _wildest_ man; for the
one has an immortal soul, and the other has none.

The Malay language is said to be the easiest in the world, even as the
Chinese is the most difficult. The Malay language has no cases or
genders, or conjugations, which puzzle little boys so much in their Latin
Grammars. It is easy for missionaries to learn the Malay language. When
they know it, they can talk to the Chinese in Malacca in this language.

I will tell you of a school that an English lady has opened at Singapore
for poor Chinese girls.


THE CHRISTIAN SCHOOL-GIRLS.

The two elder girls were sisters, and were called Chun and Han. Both of
them, when they heard about Jesus, believed in him, and loved him. Yet
their characters were very different, Chun being of a joyful
disposition, and Han of a mournful and timid temper. They had no father,
and their mother was employed in the school to take care of the little
children, and to teach them needle-work; but she was a heathen.

When Chun and Han had been three years in the school, their mother wanted
them to leave, and to come with her to her home. The girls were grieved
at the thought of leaving their Christian teacher, and of living in a
heathen home; yet they felt it was their duty to do as their mother
wished. But they were anxious to be baptized before they went, if they
could obtain their mother's consent. Their kind teacher, Miss Grant,
thought it would be of no use to ask leave _long_ before the time, lest
the mother should carry her girls away, and lock them up. So she waited
till the very evening fixed for the baptism. Miss Grant had been praying
all day for help from God, and the two sisters had been praying together;
and now the bell began to ring for evening service. Now the time was come
when the mother must be asked.

"Do you know," said Miss Grant to the mother, "that the children are
going to church with me?" "Yes," replied the mother, "wherever Missie
pleases to take them." Then the lady told her of the baptism, and
entreated her consent. At last the heathen mother replied, "If you wish
it, I will not oppose you." Miss Grant, afraid lest the mother should
change her mind, hastened into her palanquin, and the sisters hastened
into theirs. Looking back, the lady perceived the mother was standing
watching the palanquins. Seeing this, she stopped, saying, "Nomis, why
should not you come, and see what is done?" To the lady's surprise, the
mother immediately consented to come; and so this heathen mother was
present at the baptism of her daughters. Their teacher, (who was their
_mother in Christ_,) rejoiced with exceeding joy to see her dear girls
give themselves to the Lord, and to hear them answer in their broken
English, "All _dis_ I do steadfastly believe."

Soon after their baptism, the girls went to live in their mother's house.
To comfort them, Miss Grant promised to fetch them every Sunday, to spend
the day with her. She came for them at five o'clock in the morning,
before it was light, and took them back at nine, when it was quite dark.
If she had not fetched them herself, they would not have been allowed to
go.

After awhile, they were _not_ allowed to go. The reason was, that the
heathen mother wanted Chun to marry a heathen Chinaman. Chun refused to
commit such a sin. Then her mother was angry, mocked her, and prevented
her going to see Miss Grant. Still Chun refused. She saw her mother
embroidering her wedding-dresses, but she still persisted that she would
not marry a heathen, especially as she would have to bow down before an
idol at her marriage. Chun grew very unhappy, and looked very pale, she
wrote many letters to her kind friend, and offered up many prayers to her
merciful God. And did the Lord hear her, and did He deliver her? He did.
A Christian Chinaman, who had been brought up by a missionary, heard of
Chun, and asked permission to marry her. He had never seen her, for it is
not the custom in China for girls to be seen.

Miss Grant was delighted at the thought of her darling Chun marrying a
Christian, and she helped to prepare for the wedding. There was no bowing
down before an idol at that wedding, but an English clergymen read the
service. Chun's face, according to the custom, was covered with a thick
veil, and even her hands and feet were hidden. A few days after the
wedding, Miss Grant, according to the custom, called on the newly
married. She found the room beautifully ornamented, like all Chinese
rooms at such times, but there were two ornaments seldom seen in
China--two Bibles lying open on the table.

Chun long rejoiced that she had so firmly refused to marry a heathen. One
day, Miss Grant said to her, playfully, "Has your husband beaten you
yet?" (for she knew that Chinamen think nothing of beating their wives.)
Chun replied, with a sweet look, "O no! he often tells me, that _first_
he thanks God, and then _you_, Miss, for having given me to him as his
wife."

There was another girl at Miss Grant's school, named Been. Sometimes she
was called Beneo, which means Miss Been, just as Chuneo means Miss Chun.
Miss Grant hoped that Been loved the Saviour, and hated idols, but she
soon lost her, for her parents took her to their heathen home.

After Been had been home a short time her mother died. The neighbors were
astonished to find that Been refused to worship her mother's spirit, and
to burn gold paper, to supply her with money in the other world. While
her relations were busily occupied in their heathen ceremonies, Been sat
silent and alone. Soon afterwards, her father, who cared not for her,
sold her to a Chinaman to be his wife, for forty dollars.

Miss Grant heard her sad fate, and often longed to see her, but did not
know where to find her. One evening, as she was paying visits in her
palanquin, she saw a pair of bright black eyes looking through a hedge,
and she felt sure that they were her own Been's. She stopped, and
calling the girl, saluted her affectionately. She was glad she had found
out where Been lived, as she would now be able to pay her a visit.

Soon she called upon her, in her own dwelling;--a poor little hut in the
midst of a sugar plantation. She brought as a present, a New Testament in
English, and in large print. Been appeared delighted.

"Do you remember how to read it?" inquired Miss Grant.

"Yes, how could I forget?" Been sweetly replied.

"Well then, read," said Miss Grant.

Been read, "I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep."

"Do you understand?" inquired the lady.

"Yes," said Been, and she translated the words into Malay.

As Miss Grant was rising to depart, she observed a hen gathering her
brood under her wings.

"Of what does that remind you, Been?"

"I know," said the poor girl; "I remember what I learnt at school;" and
then in her broken English, she repeated the words: "As a hen _gaderet_
her chickens under her wings, so would I have _gaderd de_, but _dou_
wouldest not."

At this moment, Been's husband came in. The girl was glad, for she wanted
Miss Grant to ask him as a great favor, to allow her to spend next Sunday
at the school. The husband consented. There was a joyful meeting indeed,
on that Sunday, between Been, and Chun, and Han; nor was their
affectionate teacher the least joyful of the company.




SIBERIA.


This is a name which makes people _shiver_, because it reminds them of
the cold. It is a name which makes the Russians _tremble_, because it
reminds them of banishment, for the emperor often sends those who offend
him to live in Siberia.

Yet Siberia is not an ugly country, such as Tartary. It is not one dead
flat, but it contains mountains, and forests, and rivers. Neither is
Siberia a country in which nothing will grow; in some parts there is
wheat, and where _wheat_ will not grow _barley_ will, and where _barley_
will not grow _turnips_ will. Yet there are not many cornfields in
Siberia, for very few people live there. In the woods you will find
blackberries, and wild roses, like those in England; and _red_ berries,
as well as _black_ berries, and _lilies_ as well as _roses_.

Still it must be owned that Siberia is a very cold country; for the snow
is not melted till June, and it begins to fall again in September; so
there are only two whole months without snow; they are July and August.

INHABITANTS.--The Russians are the masters of Siberia, and they have
built several large towns there. But these towns are very far apart, and
there are many wild tribes wandering about the country.

One of these tribes is the Ostyaks. Their houses are in the shape of
boxes, for they are square with flat roofs. There is a door, but you must
stoop low to get in at it, unless you are a very little child; and there
is a window with fish-skin instead of light. There is a chimney, too, and
a blazing fire of logs in a hole in the ground. There is a trough, too,
instead of a dining-table, and out of it the whole family eat, and even
the dogs sometimes. The house is not divided into rooms, but into stalls,
like those of a stable; and deer-skins are spread in the stalls, and they
are the beds; each person sits and sleeps in his own stall, on his own
deer-skin, except when the family gather round the fire, and sitting on
low stools, warm themselves, and talk together.

In one of these snug corners, an old woman was seen, quite blind, yet
sewing all day, and threading her needle by the help of her tongue. She
wore a veil of thick cloth over her head, as all the Ostyak women do, and
as she did not need light, she hid her head completely under it.

But though the Ostyaks are poor, they possess a great treasure in their
dogs, for these creatures are as useful as horses, and much more
sensible. They need no whip to make them go, and no bridle to turn them
the right way; it is enough to _tell_ them when to set out, and to stop,
or to turn, to move faster, or more slowly. These dogs are white, spotted
with black; the hair on their bodies is short, but long on their handsome
curling tails. They draw their masters in sledges, and are yoked in
pairs. There are some large sledges, in which a man can lie down in
comfort: to draw such a sledge twelve dogs are necessary; but there are
small sledges in which a poor Ostyak can just manage to crouch, and two
dogs can draw it. When the dogs are to be harnessed, they are not caught,
as horses are, but only called. Yet they do not like work better than
horses like it, and when they first set out they howl, but grow quiet
after a little while.

The driver is sometimes cruel to these poor dogs, and corrects them for
the smallest fault, by throwing a stone at them, or the great club he
holds in his hand, or at least a snow-ball: if a hungry dog but stoop
down to pick up a morsel of food on the road, he is punished in this
manner. Yet it must be owned, that the dogs have their faults; they are
greedy, and inclined to thieving. To keep food out of their way, the
Ostyaks build store-houses, on the tops of very high poles. The dogs are
always on the watch to slip into their master's houses. If the door be
left open ever so little, a dog will squeeze in, if he can; but he does
not stay _long_ within, for he is soon thrust out with blows and kicks;
the women scream at the sight of a dog in the hut, for they fear lest he
will find the fish-trough. Yet after long journeys, the dogs are brought
into the hut, and permitted to lie down by the fire, and to eat out of
the family trough. At other times they sleep in the snow, and eat
whatever is thrown to them. When they travel, bags of dried fish are
brought in their sledges, to feed them by the way. The puppies are
tenderly treated, and petted by the fire; yet many are killed for the
sake of their fleecy hair, which is considered a fine ornament for
pelisses.

The Ostyaks have another, and a greater treasure than dogs; they have
reindeer. Those who live by fishing have dogs only, but those who dwell
among the hills, have deer as well as dogs. Reindeer are like dogs in one
respect, they can be driven without either a whip or a bit, which are so
necessary for horses. But though they do not need the lashing of a whip;
they require to be gently poked with a long pole; and though they do not
need a bit, they require to be guided by a rein, fastened to their
heads; because they are not like dogs, so sensible as to be managed by
speaking.

But deer are very gentle, and are much more easily driven than horses. To
drive horses four-in-hand is very difficult, but to drive four reindeer
is not. The four deer are harnessed to the sledge all in a row, and a
rein is fastened to the head of one; when _he_ turns all the rest turn
with him. Usually they trot, but they _can_ gallop very fast, even down
hill. When they are out of breath the driver lets them stop, and then the
pretty creatures lie down, and cool their mouths with the snow lying on
the ground.

Men ride upon reindeer; not upon their _backs_, but on their _necks_; for
their backs are weak, while their necks are strong. Riders do not mount
reindeer as they do horses,--by resting on their backs, and then making a
spring, for that would hurt the poor animals; they lean on a long staff,
and by its help, spring on the deer's neck. But it is not easy, when
seated, to keep on; _you_ would certainly fall off, for all strangers do,
when they try to ride for the _first_ time. The Ostyak knows how to keep
his balance, by waving his long staff in the air, while the deer trots
briskly along. But these reindeer have some curious fancies; they will
not eat any food but such as they pluck themselves from the ground. It
would be of no use at the end of a long journey, to put them in a
stable;--they would not eat; they must be let loose to find their own
nourishment, which is a kind of moss that grows wild among the hills.

The reindeer, after he is dead, is of as much use to the Ostyak, as when
he was alive; for his skin is his master's clothing. Both men and women
dress alike, in a suit that covers them from head to foot; the seams are
well joined with thread, made of reindeer sinews, and the cold is kept
well out. The Ostyak lets no part of his body be uncovered but just his
face, and that would freeze, if he were not to rub it often with his
hands, covered over with hairy reindeer gloves. The women cover their
faces with thick veils. The Ostyak wears a great-coat made of the skin of
a white deer; this gives him the appearance of a great white bear. He
carries in his hand a bow taller than himself. His arrows are very long,
and made of wood, pointed with iron. With these he shoots the wild
animals. He is very glad when he can shoot a sable; because the Russian
emperor requires every Ostyak to give him yearly, as a tax, the skins of
two sables. The fur of the sable is very valuable, and is made into muffs
and tippets, and pelisses for the Russian nobles.

But without his snow-shoes, the Ostyak would not be able to pursue the
wild animals, for he would sink in the snow. These shoes are made of long
boards, turned up at the end like a boat, and fastened to the feet. What
a wild creature an Ostyak must look, when he is hunting his prey, wrapped
in his shaggy white coat,--his long dark hair floating in the wind,--his
enormous bow in his hand, and his enormous shoes on his feet!

What is the character of this wild man? Ask what is his religion, and
that will show you how foolish and fierce a creature he must be. The
Ostyak says, that he believes in ONE God who cannot be seen, but he does
not worship him _alone_; he worships other gods. And such gods! Dead men!
When a man dies, his relations make a wooden image of him, and worship it
for three years, and then bury it. But when a _priest_ dies, his wooden
image is worshipped _more_ than three years; sometimes it is _never_
buried; for the priests who are alive, encourage the people to go on
worshipping dead priests' images, that they may get the offerings which
are made to them.

But what do you think of men worshipping DEAD BEASTS? Yet this is what
the Ostyaks do. When they have killed a wolf or a bear, they stuff its
skin with hay, and gather round to mock it, to kick it, to spit upon it,
and then--they stick it up on its hind legs in a corner of the hut, and
WORSHIP it! Alas! how has Satan blinded their mind!

And in what manner do they worship the beasts? With screaming,--with
dancing,--with swinging their swords,--by making offerings of fur, of
silver and gold, and of reindeer. These reindeer they kill very cruelly,
by stabbing them in various parts of their bodies, to please the cruel
gods, or rather cruel devils whom they worship.

Has no one tried to convert the Ostyaks to God? The emperor of Russia
will not allow protestant missionaries to teach in Siberia. He wishes the
Ostyaks to belong to the Greek church, and he has tried to bribe them
with presents of cloth to be baptized; and a good many have been
baptized. But what good can such baptisms do to the soul?

The Russians do much harm to their subjects, by tempting them to buy
brandy. There is nothing which the Ostyaks are so eager to obtain, as
this dangerous drink. On one occasion, a traveller was surrounded by a
troop of Ostyaks, all begging for brandy, and when they could get none,
they brought a large heap of frozen fish, and laid it at the travellers
feet, saying, "Noble sir, we present you with this." They did get some
brandy in return. Then, hoping for more, they brought a great salmon, and
a sturgeon, as long as a man. They seemed ready to part with all they
had, for the sake of brandy.

Thus you see how much harm the Ostyaks have learned from their
acquaintance with the Russians. The chief good they have got, has been
learning to build houses; for once they lived only in tents.


THE SAMOYEDES.

This tribe lives so far to the north, that they see very little of the
Russians, though they belong to the emperor of Russia. They live close by
the Northern Sea. Imagine how very cold it must be. The Samoyedes inhabit
tents made of reindeer skins, such as the Ostyaks used to live in. They
are a much wilder people than the Ostyaks. The women dress in a strange
fantastic manner; not contented with a reindeer dress, as the Ostyaks
are, they join furs and skins of various sorts together; and instead of
veiling their faces, they wear a gay fur hat, with lappets; and at the
back of their necks a glutton's tail hangs down, as well as long tails of
their own hair, with brass rings jingling together at the end.

But if their taste in _dress_ is laughable, their taste in _food_ is
horrible, as you will see. A traveller went with a Samoyede family for a
little while. They were drawn by reindeer, in sledges, and other reindeer
followed of their own accord. When they stopped for the night, they
pitched the tent, covering the long poles with their reindeer skins,
sewed together. The snow covered the ground inside the tent, but no one
thought of sweeping it away. It was easy to get water to fill the kettle,
as a few lumps of snow soon melted. Some of the men slept by the blazing
fire, while others went out, armed with long poles, to defend the deer
from the wolves. There was in the party a child of two years old, with
its mother. The child was allowed to help himself to porridge out of the
great kettle. The traveller offered him white sugar; but at first he
called it snow, and threw it away; soon, however, he learned to like it,
and asked for some whenever he saw the stranger at tea. At night, the
child was laid in a long basket, and was closely covered with furs; in
the same basket also, he travelled in the sledge.

One day the traveller saw a Samoyede feast. A reindeer was brought, and
killed before the tent door; and its bleeding body was taken into the
tent, and devoured, all raw as it was, with the heartiest appetite. It
was dreadful to see the Samoyedes gnawing the flesh off the bones; their
faces all stained with blood, and even the child had his share of the raw
meat. Truly they looked more like wolves than men.

I might go on to tell you of many other tribes; but I must be content
just to mention a few.

There is a tribe who live in the eastern part of Siberia, called the
Yakuts, and instead of deer, and dogs, they keep horses, and oxen, and
strange to say, they _ride_ upon the oxen; and _eat_ the horses. A
horse's head is counted by them a most dainty dish. The cows live in one
room, and the family live in the next, with the calves, which are tied to
posts by the fire, and enjoy the full blaze. You may suppose that the
calves need the warmth of the fire, when I tell you that the windows of
the house are made of ice, but that the cold is so great, that the ice
does not melt.

There is a large tribe called the Buraets. They dwell in tents. They are
Buddhists. At one time the Russians allowed missionaries to go to them.
There was an old man named Andang, who used to attend the services very
regularly. His wife accompanied him. One Sunday the preacher spoke much
of heaven and its glories. The old woman, on returning to her tent, said
to her husband, "Old man, I am going home to-night." Her husband did not
understand her meaning: then she said, "I love Jesus Christ, and I think
I shall be with him to-night." She lay down in her tent that night, but
rose no more. In the morning, the old man found her stiff and cold. He
saddled his horse, and set off to tell the missionary. "O sir," said he,
with tears, "my wife is gone home." When the missionary heard the account
of her death, he felt cheered by the hope that the old woman, though born
a heathen, had died a Christian, and had left her tent to dwell in a
glorious mansion above; for how was it that she felt no fear of death,
and how was it that she felt heaven was her home? Was it not because
Jesus loved her, and because she loved Jesus?


THE BANISHED RUSSIANS.

Siberia is the land to which the emperor sends many of his people, when
they displease him. In passing through Siberia, you would often see
wagons full of women, children, and old men, followed by a troop of young
men, and guarded by a band of soldiers on horseback. You might know them
to be the banished Russians. What is to become of them? Some are to work
in the mines, and some are to work in the factories. Some are to have a
less heavy punishment; they are to be set free, in the midst of Siberia,
to support themselves in any way they can. Gentlemen and ladies have a
small sum of money allowed them by the emperor, and they live in the
towns.

These people are called in Siberia, "the unfortunates." Some of them have
not deserved to be banished; but some have been guilty of crimes.

CITIES.

There are a few cities in Siberia, but only a few, and they have been
built by the Russians.

The three chief cities are,--

    Tobolsk, on the west, on the river Oby.
    Irkutsk, in the midst, on the lake Baikal.
    Yarkutsk, on the east, on the river Lena.

OF THESE CITIES,

    Tobolsk is the handsomest.
    Irkutsk is the pleasantest.
    Yarkutsk is the coldest.

It is not surprising that Tobolsk should be the handsomest, for there the
governor of Siberia resides.

A great many Chinese come to Irkutsk to trade, and they bring quantities
of tea.

Yarkutsk is the coldest town in the world; there may be others nearer the
north, but none lie exposed to such cold winds. The inhabitants scarcely
dare admit the light, for fear of increasing the cold; and they make only
one or two very small windows in their houses. Yet in summer vegetables
grow freely in the gardens.

    The Ostyaks live near the Oby.
    The Buraets live near lake Baikal.
    The Yakuts live near the Lena.


THE URAL MOUNTAINS.

They are full of treasures; gold, silver, iron, copper, and precious
stones. They are dug up by the banished Russians, and sent in great
wagons to Russia, to increase the riches of the emperor.




KAMKATKA.


It is impossible to look at Siberia, without being struck with the shape
of Kamkatka, which juts out like a short arm. It is a peninsula. A
beautiful country it is; full of mountains, and rivers, and woods, and
waterfalls, and not as cold as might be expected. But there are not many
people dwelling in it; for though it is larger than Great Britain, all
the inhabitants might be contained in one of our small towns. And why
are there so few in so fine a country? Because the people love brandy
better than labor. They have been corrupted by the Russian soldiers, and
traders, and convicts, and they are sickening and dying away.

A traveller once said to a Kamkatdale, "How should you like to see a ship
arrive here from China, laden with tea and sugar?" "I should like it
well," replied the man, "but there is one thing I should like better--to
see a ship arrive full of _men_; it is men we want, for our men are sick;
of the twelve here, six are too weak to hunt or fish."

But the ship that would do the most good to Kamkatka, is a missionary
ship. The Greek church is the religion; but _no_ religion is much thought
of in Kamkatka; hunting and fishing only are cared for. Yet I fear if
missionaries were to go to Kamkatka, the emperor of Russia would send
them away.

Where there are few men, there are generally many beasts and birds; this
is the case in Kamkatka.

One of the most curious animals in Siberia, is the Argalis, or mountain
sheep. It is remarkable for its enormous horns, curled in a very curious
manner. Think not it is like one of our quiet, foolish sheep; there is no
animal at once so strong and so active. It is such a climber, that no
wolf or bear can follow it to the high places, hanging over awful
precipices, where it walks as firmly as you do upon the pavement.
Sometimes a hunter finds it among the mountains, and just as he is going
to shoot it, the creature disappears:--it has thrown itself down a
precipice! Is it dashed to pieces? No, it fell unhurt, and has escaped
without a bruise; for its bones are very strong, and its skin very thick.

The bears of Kamkatka live chiefly upon fish and berries, and seldom
attack men. Yet men hunt them for their skins, and for their fat. The
skins make cloaks, and the fat is used for lamps; but their flesh is
thrown to the dogs. Many of the bears are very thin. It is only _fat_
bears that can sleep all the winter in their dens without food; _thin_
bears cannot sleep long, and even in winter they prowl about for food.
Dogs are very much afraid of them. A large party of travellers, who were
riding in sledges, drawn by dogs, observed the dogs suddenly begin to
snuff the air, and lo! immediately afterwards, a bear at full speed
crossed the road, and ran towards a forest. Great confusion took place
among the dogs; they set off with all their might; some broke their
harness, others got entangled among the trees, and overturned their
sledges. But the bear did not escape; for the travellers shot him through
the leg, and afterwards through the body; and the dogs feasted on _his_
flesh, instead of the bear feasting on _theirs_.

Hunting seals is one of the occupations of the Kamkatdales. Three men in
sledges, each sledge drawn by five dogs, once got upon a large piece of
ice, near the shore. They had killed two seals upon the ice, when they
suddenly perceived that the ice was moving, and carrying them out to sea.
They were already too far from land, to be able to get back. They knew
not what would become of them, and much they feared they should perish
from cold and hunger. The ice was so slippery that they were in great
danger of sliding into the sea. To prevent this, they stuck their long
poles deep into the ice, and tied themselves to the poles. They were
driven about for many days; but one morning,--to their great joy, they
found they were close to the shore. They did not forget to praise God for
so mercifully saving their lives; though they were so weak from want of
food, as scarcely to be able to creep ashore.

CHARACTER.--The Kamkatdales are generous and grateful. A poor family will
sometimes receive another family into the house for six weeks; and when
the food is nearly gone, the generous host, not liking to tell his
visitors of it, serves up a dish of different sorts of meat and
vegetables, mixed together; the visitors know this is a sign that the
food is almost exhausted, and they take their leave.

Did I say the Kamkatdales are grateful? I will give you an instance of
their gratitude. A traveller met a poor boy. He remembered his face, and
said, "I think I have seen you before." "You have," said the boy; "I
rowed you down the river last summer, and you were so kind as to give me
a skin, and some flints; and now I have brought the skin of a sable as a
present for you." The traveller, perceiving the boy had no shirt, and
that his skin dress was tattered, refused the present; but seeing the boy
was going away in tears, he called him back, and accepted it. A Chinese
servant, who was standing by, pitied so much the ragged condition of the
boy, that he gave him one of his own thin nankin shirts.




THIBET.


I cannot tell you much about Thibet; and the reason is, that so few
travellers have been there. And why have so few been there? Is it because
the mountains are so steep and high, the paths so narrow and dangerous?
All this is true; but it is not mountains that keep travellers out of
Thibet; it is the Chinese government; for Thibet belongs to China, and
you know how carefully the emperor of China keeps strangers out of his
empire.

How did the Chinese get possession of Thibet? A long while ago, a Hindoo
army invaded the land, and the people in their fright sent to China for
help. The Chinese came, drove away the Hindoos, and stayed themselves.
They are not hard masters, they govern very mildly; only they require a
sum of money to be sent every year to Pekin, as tribute.

But though Thibet belongs to China, the Chinese language is not spoken
there.

The people are like the Tartars in appearance; they have the same bony
face, sharp black eye, and straight black hair; but a much fresher
complexion, owing to the fresh mountain air they breathe.

The Himalaya mountains, the highest in Asia, lie between Thibet and
Hindostan. Their peaks are always covered with snow, and rapid streams
pour down the rugged sides. The snow on the mountain-tops makes Thibet
very cold; but there are warm valleys where grapes, and even rice
flourish.

The people build their houses in the warmest spots they can find; they
try to find a place sheltered from the north wind, by a high rock, and
lying open to the south sun. Their dwellings are only made of stones,
heaped together, and the roofs are flat. Their riches consist in flocks
of sheep and goats. They have, another animal, which is not known in
England, and yet a very useful creature, because, like a cow, it yields
rich milk, and like a horse, it carries burdens. This animal is called
the Yak, and resembles both a horse and a cow. Its chief beauty is its
tail, which is much finer than a horse's tail, and is black, and glossy,
soft and flowing. Many of these tails are sent to India, where they are
used as fly-flappers.

The sheep and goats of Thibet are more useful than ours; for they are
taught to carry burdens over the mountains. They may be seen following
each other in long trains, with large packs fastened on their little
backs, and climbing up very narrow and steep paths.

And what is in these packs? Wool: not sheep's wool, but goat's wool: for
the goats of Thibet have very fine wool under their hair. No such wool is
found on any other goats. But though the people of Thibet can weave
common cloth, they cannot weave this beautiful wool, as it deserves to be
woven. Therefore they send it to a country the other side of the Himalaya
mountains, called Cashmere; and there it is woven into the most beautiful
shawls in all the world.

But wool is not the only riches of Thibet. There is gold to be found
there; some in large pieces, and some in small dust. There are also large
mines of copper. And what use is made of these riches? The worst in the
world. With the gold and copper many IDOLS are made; for Thibet is a land
of idols. The religion is the same there as in China,--the Buddhist;--and
that is a religion of idols.

But there is an idol in Thibet, which there is not in China. It is a
LIVING IDOL. He is called the Grand Lama. There are Lamas in Tartary, but
the GRAND Lama is in Thibet. He is looked up to as the greatest being in
the world, by all the Lamas in Tartary, and by all the people of the
Buddhist religion. There are more people,--a _great many_ more,--who
honor _him_, than who honor our GREAT GOD.

But this man leads a miserable life. When one Lama dies, another is
chosen;--some little baby,--and he is placed in a very grand palace, and
worshipped as a god all his life long. I have heard of one of these baby
Lamas, who, when only eighteen months old, sat up with great majesty on
his pile of cushions. When strangers entered, he looked at them kindly,
and when they made a speech to him, he bowed his little head very
graciously. What a sad fate for this poor infant! To be set up as a god,
and taught to think himself a god--while all the time he is a helpless,
foolish, sinful, dying creature!


LASSA.

This is the chief city of Thibet. Here is the palace of the Grand Lama.
If is of enormous size. What do you think of TEN THOUSAND rooms? Did you
ever hear of so _large_ a house? Neither did you ever hear of so _high_ a
house. It is almost as high as the pinnacle of St. Paul's church. There
are seven stories, and on the highest story are the state apartments of
the Grand Lama. It is no matter to him how many flights of stairs there
may be to reach his rooms; for he is never allowed to walk; but it is
fatiguing for his worshippers to ascend so high. I suppose the priests
make their Grand Lama live so high up, that he may be like our God who
dwells in the highest heavens. Who occupy the ten thousand rooms of the
palace? Chiefly idols of gold and silver. The house outside is richly
adorned, and its roof glitters with gold.

There are many magnificent houses in Thibet, where priests live. No one
could live with them, who could not bear a great noise: for three times a
day the priests meet to worship, and each time they hollo with all their
might, to do honor to Buddha. The noise is stunning, but they do not
think it loud enough; so on feast days, they use copper instruments, such
as drums and trumpets, of the most enormous size, and with them they send
forth an overwhelming sound.

This unmeaning noise may well remind us of a sound--louder far--that
shall one day be heard; so loud that _all the world_ will hear it. It is
the sound of the LAST TRUMPET! It will wake the dead. Stout hearts will
quail; devils will tremble; but all those who love the Lord, will rejoice
and say, "Lo, this is our God; we have waited for Him, and He will save
us."--(Is. xxv. 9.)




CEYLON.


This is one of the most beautiful islands in the world. Part of it indeed
is flat--that part near Hindustan; but in the midst--there are mountains;
and streams running down their sides, and swelling into lovely rivers,
winding along the fruitful valleys. Such scenes might remind you of
Switzerland, the most beautiful country in Europe.

The chief beauty of Ceylon is her TREES.

I will mention a few of the beautiful, curious, and useful trees of this
delightful island. The tree for which Ceylon is celebrated, is the
CINNAMON tree. For sixty miles along the shore, there are cinnamon
groves, and the sweet scent may be perceived far off upon the seas. If
you were to see a cinnamon-tree, you might mistake it for a laurel;--a
tree so often found in English gardens. The cinnamon-trees are never
allowed to grow tall, because it is only the upper branches which are
much prized for their bark. The little children of Ceylon may often be
seen sitting in the shade, peeling off the bark with their knives; and
this bark is afterwards sent to England to flavor puddings, and to mix
with medicine.

There are also groves of cocoa-nut trees on the shores of Ceylon. A few
of these trees are a little fortune to a poor man; for he can eat the
_fruit_, build his house with the _wood_, roof it with the _leaves_, make
cups of the _shell_, and use the oil of the _kernel_ instead of candles.

The JACK-TREE bears a larger fruit than any other in the world;--as large
as a horse's head,--and so heavy that a woman can only carry one upon her
head to market.. This large fruit does not hang on the tree by a stalk,
but grows out of the trunk, or the great branches. This is well arranged,
for so large a fruit would be too heavy for a stalk, and might fall off,
and hurt the heads of those sitting beneath its shade. The outside of
this fruit is like a horse-chestnut, green, and prickly; the inside is
yellow, and is full of kernels, like beans. The wood is like
mahogany,--hard and handsome.

But there is a tree in Ceylon, still more curious than the jack-tree. It
is the TALPOT-TREE. This is a very tall tree, and its top is covered by a
cluster of round leaves, each leaf so large, that it would do for a
carpet, for a common-sized room; and one single LEAF, cut it in
three-cornered pieces, will make a TENT! When cut up, the leaves are used
for fans and books. But this tree bears no fruit till just before it
dies,--that is till it is _fifty_ years old: THEN--an enormous bud is
seen, rearing its huge head in the midst of the crown of leaves;--the bud
bursts with a loud noise, and a yellow flower appears,--a flower so
large, that it would fill a room! The flower turns into fruit. THAT SAME
YEAR THE TREE DIES!

PEOPLE.--And who are the people who live in this beautiful land?

In the flat part of the island, towards the north, the people resemble
the Hindoos, and speak and think like them; and they are called Tamuls.

But among the mountains of the south a different kind of people live,
called the Cingalese. They do not speak the Tamul language, nor do they
follow the Hindoo religion. They follow the Buddhist religion. You know
this is the religion of the greater part of the nations. Ceylon is full
of the temples of Buddha. In each temple there is an inner dark room,
very large, where Buddha's image is kept,--a great image that almost
fills the room.

[Illustration: DEVIL PRIESTS.]

The priests in their yellow cloaks, with their shaven heads and bare
feet, may be seen every morning begging from door to door; but _proud_
beggars they are,--not condescending to _speak_,--but only standing with
their baskets ready to receive rice and fruit; and the only thanks they
give--are their blessings.

There is another worship in Ceylon, and it is more followed than the
worship of Buddha, yet it is the most horrible that you can imagine. It
is the worship of the DEVIL! Buddha taught, when he was alive, that there
was no God, but that there were many devils: yet he forbid people to
worship these devils; but no one minds what he said on that point.

There are many _devil priests_. When any one is sick, it is supposed that
the devil has caused the sickness, and a devil priest is sent for. And
what can the priest do? He dances,--he sings,--with his face
painted,--small bells upon his legs,--and a flaming torch in each hand;
while another man beats a loud drum. He dances, he sings--all night
long,--sometimes changing his white jacket for a black, or his black for
a white,--sometimes falling down, and sometimes jumping up,--sometimes
reeling, and sometimes running,--and all this he does to please the
devil, and to coax him to come out of the sick person. This is what he
_pretends_;--but in _reality_, he seeks to get money by his tricks. The
people are very fond of these devil-dancers; it _tires_ them to listen to
the Buddhist priests, mumbling out of their books, the five hundred and
fifty histories of Buddha; but it _delights_ them to watch all night the
antics of a devil priest.

What is the character of these deceived people? They are polite, and
obliging, but as deceitful as their own priests. They are not even
_sincere_ in their wrong religion, but are ready to _pretend_ to be of
any religion which is most convenient. The Portuguese once were masters
of Ceylon, and they tried to make the people Roman Catholics. Then the
Dutch came, who tried to force them to be Protestants. Many infants were
baptized, who grew up to be heathen priests. Now the English are masters
of Ceylon; they do not _oblige_ the people to be Christians, yet many
pretend to be Christians who are not.

A man was once asked, "Are you a Buddhist?"

"No," he replied.

"Are you a Mahomedan?"

"No."

"Are you a Roman Catholic?"

"No."

"What is your religion?"

"Government religion."

Such was his answer. This man had no religion at all,--he only wished to
obtain the favor of the governor. But will he obtain the favor of the
Governor of the world, the King of kings?

We have said nothing yet about the appearance of the Cingalese. Both men
and women wear a piece of cloth wound round their waists, called a
comboy; but they do not, like the Hindoos, twist it over their shoulders;
they wear a jacket instead. Neither do the men wear turbans, as in India,
but they fasten their hair with a comb, while the women fasten theirs
with long pins. The Cingalese ladies and gentlemen imitate the English
dress, especially when they come to a party at the English Governor's
house. Then they wear shoes and stockings instead of sandals; the
gentlemen contrive to place a hat over their long hair, by first taking
out the combs; yet they still wind a comboy over their English clothes.
The Hindoos do not thus imitate the English, for they are too proud of
their own customs. Hindoo ladies never go into company; but Cingalese
ladies may be seen at parties, arrayed in colored satin jackets, and
adorned with golden hair-pins, and diamond necklaces.

You have heard of the foolish ideas the Hindoos entertain about castes.
It is the Brahmin priests who teach _them_ these opinions. The Buddhist
priests say nothing about castes; yet the Cingalese have castes of their
_own_; but not the _same_ castes as the Hindoos. There are twenty-one
castes in all; the highest caste consists of the husbandmen, and the
lowest of the mat-weavers.

Below the lowest caste, are the OUTCASTS! The poor outcasts live in
villages by themselves, hated by all. When they meet any one, who are not
outcasts, they go as near to the hedge as they can, with their hands on
the top of their heads, to show their respect. These poor creatures are
accustomed to be treated as if they were dogs. What pride there is in
man's heart! How is it one poor worm can lift himself up so high above
his fellow-worm, though both are made of the same dust, and shall lie
down in the same dust together!


KANDY.

This town is built among the high mountains. It was built there for the
same reason that the eagle builds her nest on the top of a tall rock,--to
get out of the reach of enemies. But the proud king, who once dwelt
there, has been conquered, and now England's Queen rules over Ceylon. No
wonder that the proud king had enemies, for he was a monster of cruelty.
His palace is still to be seen. See that high tower, and that open
gallery at the top! There the _last king_ used to stand to enjoy the
sight of his subjects' agonies. Those who had offended him were killed in
the Court below,--killed not in a common manner, but in all kinds of
barbarous ways,--such as by being cut in pieces, or by swallowing melted
lead. At length the Cingalese invited the English to come and deliver
them from their tyrant; the English came and shut him up in prison till
he died, and now an English governor rules over Ceylon.

The greatest curiosity to be seen at Kandy is a TOOTH! a tooth that the
people say was taken out of the mouth of their Buddha. It is kept in a
splendid temple on a golden table, in a golden box of great size. There
are seven boxes one inside the other, and in the innermost box, wrapped
up in gold, there is a piece of ivory, the size of a man's thumb,--that
is the tooth of Buddha! Every day it is worshipped, and offerings of
fruit and flowers are presented.


COLOMBO.

This is the chief _English_ town of Ceylon, as Kandy is the chief
_Cingalese_ town. The English governor lives here, but he has a house at
Kandy too, where he may enjoy the cool mountain air. There is a fine road
from Colombo to Kandy, broader and harder than, English roads; yet it is
out through steep mountains, and winds by dangerous precipices. But there
are laborers in Ceylon stronger than any in England. I mean the
ELEPHANTS. It is curious to see this huge animal meekly walking along
with a plank across its tusks, or dragging wagons full of large stones.
Among the mountains there are herds of _wild_ elephants, sometimes a
hundred may be seen in one herd. There are no elephants in the world as
courageous as those of Ceylon, yet they are very obedient when tamed. If
you wished to visit the mountains, you might safely ride upon the back of
the sure-footed elephant, and all your brothers and sisters, however
many, might ride with you.

MISSIONARIES.--There are some in Ceylon, and some of the heathens have
obeyed their voice.

There was once a devil priest. Having been detected in some crime, he was
imprisoned at Kandy, and while in prison he read a Christian tract, and
was converted. Thus (like Onesimus, of whom we read in the Bible,) he
escaped from _Satan's_ prison, while shut up in _man's_ prison. When he
was set free, he was baptized by the missionary at Kandy, and he chose to
be called Abraham. What name did he choose for his son, a boy of
fourteen? Isaac. He buried his conjuring books, though he might have sold
them for eight pounds. His cottage was in a village fifteen miles from
Kandy. He had left it--a _wicked_ man; lib returned to it a _good_ man.

After some time, a missionary went to visit Abraham in his cottage. A
good Cingalese was his guide. The walk there was beautiful, along narrow
paths, amidst fields of rice, through dark thickets, and long grass. No
one in Abraham's village had ever seen the fair face of an Englishman;
and the sight of the missionary alarmed the inhabitants. Abraham's family
was the only Christian family in that place. How glad Abraham felt at the
sight of the missionary,--almost as glad as the _first_ Abraham felt at
the sight of the three angels. When the missionary entered, Abraham was
teaching his wife, for she was soon to be baptized. By what name? By the
name of Sarah. There were seven children in the family. How hard it must
be for Abraham to bring them up as Christians, in the midst of his
heathen neighbors. Even his brothers hate him, wound his cattle, and
break down his fences. Once they pointed a gun at him, but it did not go
off. Abraham's comfort is to walk over to Kandy every Saturday, to
worship God there on Sunday with the Christians; and he does not find
fifteen miles too far for his willing feet. May the Lord preserve
Abraham, faithful in the midst of the wicked.




BORNEO.


This is the largest island in the world, except one. Borneo is of a
different shape from our Britain, but if you could join Britain and
Ireland in one, both together would not be as large as Borneo. Yet how
unlike is Borneo to Britain! Britain is a Christian island. Borneo is a
heathen island. Yet Borneo is not an island of _idols_, as Ceylon is.
_All_ heathens do not worship idols. I will tell you who live in Borneo,
and you will see why there are so few idols there.

Many people have come from Malacca, and settled in Borneo; so the island
is full of Malays. These people have a cunning and cruel look, and no
wonder;--for many of them are PIRATES! It is a common custom in Borneo to
go out in a large boat,--to watch for smaller boats,--to seize them--to
bind the men in chains, and to bring them home as slaves. There are no
seas in the world so dangerous to sail in, as the seas near Borneo, not
only on account of the rocks, but on account of the great number of
pirates. What is the religion of Borneo? It is Mahomedanism. But the
Malays do not follow the laws of Mahomet as the Turks do. They do not
mind the hours of prayer, nor do they attend regularly at the mosque.
This is not surprising, for they do not understand the Koran. Mahomet
wrote in Arabic, and the Malays do not understand Arabic. Why do they not
get the Koran translated? Mahomet did not wish the book to be translated.
Why then do not the Malays learn Arabic? I wonder they do not, but I
suppose they are too idle, and too careless. The boys go to school and
learn to read and write their own easy language--the Malay; and they
learn also to repeat whole chapters of the Koran, but without
understanding a word. Still they think it a great advantage to know these
chapters, because they imagine that by repeating them, they can drive
away evil spirits.

The Malays observe Mahomet's law against eating pork; but many of them
drink wine, though Mahomet forbids it. However, they follow Mahomet in
not having dancing at their feasts; indeed, their behavior at feasts is
sober and orderly, for they amuse themselves chiefly by singing, and
repeating poems. They have only two meals a day, and they live chiefly
upon rice, which they eat, sitting cross-legged on the floor. They get
tea from China, and drink many cups during the day, in the same way as
the Chinese.

The ladies are treated like the ladies of Turkey, and shut up in their
houses, to spend their time in folly and idleness.

The men scarcely work at all, but employ the slaves they have stolen at
sea, to labor in their fields. Their houses are not better than barns,
and not nearly as strong; for the sides and roof are generally made only
of large leaves. They are built upon posts, as in Siam. It is well to be
out of the reach of the leeches, crawling on the ground.

The Malays dress in loose clothes, trowsers, and jacket, and broad sash;
the women are wrapped in a loose garment, and wear their glossy black
hair flowing over their shoulders. The rich men dress magnificently, and
quite cover their jackets with gold, while the ladies delight to sparkle
with jewels.


BRUNI.

This is the capital. It is often called Borneo, and it is written down in
the maps by this name. It is one of the most curious cities in the world;
for most of the houses are built in the river, and most of the streets
are only water. Every morning a great market is held on the water. The
people come in boats from all the country round, bringing fruit and
vegetables to sell, and they paddle up and down the city till they have
sold their goods.

The Sultan's palace is built upon the bank, close to the water; and the
front of his palace is open; so that it is easy to come in a boat, and to
gaze upon him, as he sits cross-legged on his throne, arrayed in purple
satin, glittering with gold.

There is a mosque in Bruni; but it is built only of brick, and has
nothing in it but a wooden pulpit; and hardly anybody goes there, though
a man stands outside making a loud noise on a great drum, to invite
people to come in.


THE DYAKS.

These are a savage people who inhabit Borneo. They lived there before the
Malays came, and they have been obliged to submit to them. They are
savages indeed. They are darker than the Malays; yet they are not black;
their skin is only the color of copper. Their hair is cut short in front,
but streams down their backs; their large mouths show a quantity of black
teeth, made black by chewing the betel-nut. They wear very little
clothing, but they adorn their ears, and arms, and legs, with numbers of
brass rings. Their looks are wild and fierce, but not cunning like the
looks of the Malays. They are not Mahomedans; they have hardly any
religion at all. They believe there are some gods, but they know hardly
anything about them, and they do not want to know. They neither make
images to the gods, nor say prayers to them. They live like the beasts,
thinking only of this life; yet they are more unhappy than beasts, for
they imagine there are evil spirits among the woods and hills, watching
to do them harm. It is often hard to persuade them to go to the top of a
mountain, where they say evil spirits dwell. Such a people would be more
ready to listen to a missionary than those who have idols, and temples,
and priests, and sacred books.

Their wickedness is very great. It is their chief delight to get the
heads of their enemies. There are a great many different tribes of Dyaks,
and each tribe tries to cut off the heads of other tribes. The Dyaks who
live by the sea are the most cruel; they go out in the boats to rob, and
to bring home, not _slaves_, but HEADS! And how do they treat a head when
they get it? They take out the brains, and then they dry it in the smoke,
with the flesh and hair still on; then they put a string through it, and
fasten it to their waists. The evening that they have got some new heads,
the warriors dance with delight,--their heads dangling by their
sides;--and they turn round in the dance, and gaze upon their heads,--and
shout,--and yell with triumph! At night they still keep the heads near
them; and in the day, they play with them, as children with their dolls,
talking to them, putting food in their mouths, and the betel-nut between
their ghastly lips. After wearing the heads many days, they hang them up
to the ceilings of their rooms.

No English lord thinks so much of his pictures, as the Dyaks do of their
heads. They think these heads are the finest ornaments of their houses.
The man who has _most_ heads, is considered the _greatest_ man. A man who
has NO HEADS is despised! If he wishes to be respected, he must get a
head as soon as he can. Sometimes a man, in order to get a head, will go
out to look for a poor fisherman, who has done him no harm, and will come
back with his head.

When the Dyaks fight against their enemies, they try to get, not only the
heads of _men_, but also the heads of _women_ and CHILDREN. How dreadful
it must be to see a poor BABY'S HEAD hanging from the ceiling! There was
a Dyak who lost all his property by fire, but he cared not for losing
anything, so much as for losing his PRECIOUS HEADS; nothing could console
him for THIS loss; some of them he had cut off himself, and others had
been cut off by his father, and left to him!

People who are so bent on killing, as these Dyaks are, must have many
enemies. The Dyaks are always in fear of being attacked by their enemies.
They are afraid of living in lonely cottages; they think it a better plan
for a great many to live together, that they may be able to defend
themselves, if surprised in the night. Four hundred Dyaks will live
together in one house. The house is very large. To make it more safe, it
is built upon _very high posts_, and there are ladders to get up by. The
posts are sometimes forty feet high; so that when you are in the house,
you find yourself as high as the tall trees. There is one very large
room, where all the men and women sit, and talk, and do their work in the
day. The women pound the rice, and weave the mats, while the men make
weapons of war, and the little children play about. There is always much
noise and confusion in this room. There are a great many doors along one
side of the long room; and each of these doors leads into a small room
where a family lives; the parents, the babies, and the girls sleep there,
while the boys of the family sleep in the large room, that has just been
described.

You know already what are the ornaments on which each family prides
itself,--the HEADS hanging up in their rooms! It is the SEA Dyaks who
live in these very large houses.

The HILL Dyaks do not live in houses quite so large. Yet several families
inhabit the same house. In the midst of their villages, there is always
one house where the boys sleep. In this house all the HEADS of the
village are kept. The house is round, and built on posts, and the
entrance is underneath through the floor. As this is the best house in
the village, travellers are always brought to this house to sleep. Think
how dreadful it must be, when you wake in the night to see thirty or
forty horrible heads, dangling from the ceiling! The wind, too, which
comes in through little doors in the roof, blows the heads about; so that
they knock against each other, and seem almost as if they were still
alive. This is the HEAD-HOUSE.

These Hill Dyaks do not often get a new head; but when they do, they come
to the Head-House at night, and sing to the new head, while they beat
upon their loud gongs. What do they say to the new head?

"Your head, and your spirit, are now ours. Persuade your countrymen to be
slain by us. Let them wander in the fields, that we may bring the heads
of your brethren, and hang them up with your heads."

How much Satan must delight in these prayers. They are prayers just
suited to that great MURDERER and DESTROYER!

The Malays are enemies to all the Dyaks; and they have burnt many of
their houses, cut down their fruit trees, and taken their children
captives. The Dyaks complain bitterly of their sufferings. Some of them
say, "We do not live like men, but like monkeys; we are hunted from place
to place; we have no houses; and when we light a fire, we fear lest the
smoke should make our enemies know where we are."

They say they live like monkeys. But why do they behave like tigers?

An English gentleman, named Sir James Brooke, has settled in Borneo, and
has become a chief of a large tract of land. His house is near the river
Sarawak. He has persuaded the Sultan of Borneo, to give the English a
VERY LITTLE island called the Isle of Labuan. It is a desert island. Of
what use can this small island be to England? English soldiers may live
there, and try to prevent pirates infesting the seas. If it were not for
the pirates, Borneo would be able to send many treasures to foreign
countries. It is but a little way from Borneo to Singapore, and there are
many English merchants at Singapore, ready to buy the precious things of
Borneo. Gold is found in Borneo, mixed with the earth. But I don't know
who would dig it up, if it were not for the industrious Chinese, who come
over in great numbers to get money in this island. Diamonds are found
there, and a valuable metal called antimony.

The sago-tree, the pepper plant, and the sugar-cane, and the cocoa-nut
tree are abundant.

The greatest curiosity that Borneo possesses are the eatable nests. These
white and transparent nests are found in the caves by the sea-shore, and
they are the work of a little swallow. The Chinese give a high price for
these nests, that they may make soup for their feasts.

ANIMALS.--Borneo has very few large animals. There are, indeed, enormous
alligators in the rivers, but there are no lions or tigers; and even the
bears are small, and content to climb the trees for fruit and honey. The
majestic animal which is the pride of Ceylon, is not found in Borneo: I
mean the elephant.

Yet the woods are filled with living creatures. Squirrels and monkeys
sport among the trees. The leaps of the monkeys are amazing; hundreds
will jump one after the other, from a tree as high as a house, and not
one will miss his footing; yet now and then a monkey has a fall. The
most curious kind of monkey is found in Borneo--the Ourang-outang; but it
is one of the least active; it climbs carefully from branch to branch,
always holding by its hands before it makes a spring. These
Ourang-outangs are not as large as a man, yet they are much stronger. All
the monkeys sleep in the trees; in a minute a monkey makes its bed by
twisting a few branches together.

Beneath the trees--two sorts of animals, very unlike each other, roam
about,--the clumsy hog, and the graceful deer. As the _largest_ sort of
_monkeys_ is found in Borneo, so is the _smallest_ sort of _deer_. There
is a deer that has legs only eight inches long. There is no more elegant
creature in the world than this bright-eyed, swift-footed little deer.




JAPAN.


This is the name of a great empire. There are three principal islands.
One of these is very long, and very narrow; it is about a thousand miles
long,--much longer than Great Britain, but not nearly as broad. Yet the
three islands _together_ are larger than our island. There is a fourth
island near the Japan islands, called Jesso, and it is filled with
Japanese people.

You know it is difficult to get into China; but it is far more difficult
to get into Japan. The emperor has boats always watching round the coast,
to prevent strangers coming into his country. These boats are so made,
that they cannot go far from the shore. No Japanese ship is ever seen
floating in a foreign harbor. If it be difficult to get _into_ Japan, it
is also difficult to get _out_ of her. There is a law condemning to
_death_ any Japanese who leaves his country. The Chinese also are
forbidden to leave their land; but _they_ do not mind their laws as well
as the Japanese mind _theirs_.

I shall not be able to tell you much about Japan; as strangers may not go
there, nor natives come from it. English ships very seldom go to Japan,
because they are so closely watched. The guard-boats surround them night
and day. When it is dark, lanterns are lighted, in order the better to
observe the strangers. One English captain entreated permission to land,
that he might observe the stars with his instruments, in order afterwards
to make maps; but he could only get leave to land on a little island
where there were a few fishermen's huts; and all the time he was there,
the Japanese officers kept their eye upon him. He was told that he must
not measure the land. It seems that the Japanese were afraid that his
_measuring_ the land would be the beginning of his taking it away.
However, he had no such intention, and was content with measuring the
SEA.

He asked the Japanese to sell him a supply of fruit and vegetables for
his crew, and a supply was brought; but the Japanese would take no money
in return. He wanted to buy bullocks, that his crew might have beef, but
the Japanese replied, "You cannot have _them_; for they work hard, and
are tired, they draw the plough; they do their duty, and they ought not
to be eaten; but the _hogs_ are lazy; they do no work, you may have them
to eat, if you wish it." The Japanese will not even milk their cows, but
they allow the calves to have all the milk.

If you wish to know _why_ the Japanese will not allow strangers to land,
I must relate some events which happened three hundred years ago.

Some Roman Catholic priests from Spain and Portugal settled in the land,
and taught the people about Christ, but they taught them also to worship
the cross, and the Virgin Mary. Thousands of the Japanese were baptized,
and were called Christians. After some years had passed away, the emperor
began to fear that the kings of Spain and Portugal would come, and take
away his country from him, as they had taken away other countries; so the
emperor began to persecute the priests, and all who followed their words.
One emperor after another persecuted the Christians. There is a burning
mountain in Japan, and down its terrible yawning mouth many Christians
were thrown. One emperor commanded his people instead of _worshipping_
the cross, to _trample_ upon it. To do either--is wicked; to do either is
to insult Christ.

All Christians are now hated in Japan. The Dutch tried to persuade the
emperors to trust _them_; but they could only get leave to buy and sell
at one place, but not to settle in the land.

There are many beautiful things in Japan, especially boxes, and screens,
and cabinets, varnished and ornamented in a curious manner, and these are
much admired by great people in Europe. There is silk, too, and tea, and
porcelain in Japan; but they are not nearly as fine as China. There is
gold also.

There are as many people in Japan, as there are in Britain; for the
Japanese are very industrious, and cultivate abundance of rice, and
wheat. Oh! how sad to think that so many millions should be living and
dying in darkness; for the chief religion is the false, and foolish
religion of Buddha, or, as he is called in Japan, "Budso." How many names
are given to that deceiver! Buddha in Ceylon; Fo, in China; Gaudama, in
Burmah; Codom, in Siam--and Budso in Japan!

What sort of people are the Japanese?

They are a very polite people--much politer than the Chinese, but very
proud. They are a learned nation, for they can read and write, and they
understand geography, arithmetic, and astronomy. There is a college where
many languages are taught, even English. The dress of the gentlemen is
elegant;--the loose tunic and trowsers, the sash, and jacket, are made of
a kind of fine linen, adorned with various patterns; the stockings are of
white jean; sandals are worn upon the feet, but no covering upon the
head, although most of the hair is shaven, and the little that remains
behind, is tied tightly together; an umbrella or a fan is all that is
used to keep off the sun;--except on journeys, and then a large cap of
oiled paper, or of plaited grass is worn. The great mark by which a
gentleman is known, is wearing two swords.

The Japanese houses are very pretty. In the windows--flower-pots are
placed; and when real flowers cannot be had, artificial flowers are used.
In great houses, the ladies are shut up in one part; while in the other,
company is received. The house is divided into rooms by large screens,
and as these can be moved, the rooms can be made larger, or smaller, as
the master pleases. There are no chairs, for the Japanese, though so much
like the Chinese, do not sit like them on chairs, but on mats beautifully
woven. The emperor's palace is called, "The Hall of the Thousand Mats."
Every part of a Japanese house is covered with paper, and adorned with
paintings, and gold, and silver flowers; even the doors, and the
ceilings, are ornamented in this manner. Beautiful boxes, and porcelain
jars, add to the beauty of the rooms.

The climate is pleasant, for the winter is short, and the sun is not as
hot as in China; so that the ladies, and gentlemen, are almost as fair as
Europeans, though the laborers are very dark.

[Illustration: JAPANESE GENTLEMAN.]

But Japan is exposed to many dangers, from wind, from water, and from
fire--three terrible enemies! The waves dash with violence upon the rocky
shores; the wind often blows in fearful hurricanes; while earthquakes and
hot streams from the burning mountains, fill the people with terror.

But more terrible than any of these--is wickedness; and very wicked
customs are observed in Japan. It is very wicked for a man to kill
himself, yet in Japan it is the custom for all courtiers who have
offended the emperor, to cut open their own bodies with a sword. The
little boys of five years old, begin to learn the dreadful art. They do
not really cut themselves, but they are shown _how_ to do it, that when
they are men, they may be able to kill themselves in an elegant manner.
How dreadful! Every great man has a white dress, which he never wears,
but keeps by him, that he may put it on when he is going to kill himself:
and he carries it about with him wherever he goes, for he cannot tell how
suddenly he may want it. When a courtier receives a letter sentencing him
to die, he invites his friends to a feast; and at the end of it, his
sentence is read aloud by the emperor's officer; then he takes his sword,
and makes a great gash across his own body; at the same moment, a servant
who stands behind him, cuts off his head.

This way of dying is thought very fine, and as a reward, the emperor
allows the son of the dead man to occupy his father's place in the court.
But _what_ a place to have, when at last there may be such a fearful
scene! Missionaries cannot come into Japan to teach the people a better
way of dying, and to tell them of a happy place after death.




AUSTRALIA.


This is the largest island in the world. It is as large as Europe (which
is not an _island_, but a _continent_). But how different is Australia
from Europe! Instead of containing, as Europe does, a number of grand
kingdoms, it has not one single king. Instead of being filled with
people, the greater part of Australia is a desert, or a forest, where a
few half naked savages are wandering.

A hundred years ago, there was not a town in the whole island; but now
there are a few large towns near the sea-coast, but only a very few. It
is the English who built these large towns, and who live in them.

Australia is not so fine a land as Europe, because it has not so many
fine rivers; and it is fine _rivers_ that make a fine _land_. Most of the
rivers in Australia do not deserve the name of rivers; they are more like
a number of water-holes, and are often dried up in the summer; but there
is one very fine, broad, long, deep river, called the Murray. It flows
for twelve hundred miles. Were there several such rivers us the Murray,
then Australia would be a fine land indeed.

Why is there so little water? Because there is so little rain. Sometimes
for two years together, there are no heavy showers, and the grass
withers, and the trees turn brown, and the air is filled with dust. I
believe the reason of the want of rain is--that the mountains are not
high; for high mountains draw the clouds together. There are no mountains
as high as the Alps of Europe; the highest are only half as high.[13]

THE NATIVES.--The savages of Australia have neither god, nor king. Some
heathen countries are full of idols, but there are no idols in the wilds
of Australia. No,--like the beasts which perish, these savages live from
day to day without prayer, or praise, delighting only in eating and
drinking, hunting and dancing.

Most men build some kind of houses; but these savages are satisfied with
putting a few boughs together, as a shelter from the storm. There is just
room in one of these shelters for a man to creep into it, and lie down to
sleep. They do not wish to learn to build better huts, for as they are
always running about from place to place, they do not think it worth
while to build better.

A native was once sitting in the corner of a white man's hut, and looking
as if he enjoyed the warmth. The white men began to laugh at him, for not
building a good hut for himself. For some time the black man said
nothing, at last he muttered, "Ay, ay, white fellow think it best
that-a-way. Black fellow think it best that-a-way." A white man rudely
answered, "Then black fellow is a fool." Upon hearing this, the black
fellow, quite affronted, got up, and folding his blanket round him,
walked out of the hut. How much pride there is in the heart of man! Even
a savage thinks a great deal of his own wisdom, and cannot bear to be
called a fool.

Sometimes the natives build a house _strong_ enough to last during the
whole winter, and _large_ enough to hold seven or eight people. They make
it in the shape of a bee-hive.

Their reason for moving about continually, is that they may get food.
They look for it, wherever they go, digging up roots, and grubbing up
grubs, and searching the hollows of the trees for _opossums_. (Of these
strange animals more shall soon be mentioned.)

The women are the most ill-treated creatures in the world. The men beat
them on their heads whenever they please, and cover them with bruises. A
gentleman once saw a poor black woman crying bitterly. When he asked her
what was the matter, she told him that her husband was going to beat her
for having broken his pipe. The gentleman went to the husband, and
entreated him to forgive his "gin" (for that is the name for a _wife_ or
_woman_). But the man declared he would not forgive her, unless a new
pipe was given to him. The gentleman could not promise one to the black
man, as there were no pipes to be had in that place. The next morning the
poor gin appeared with a broken arm, her cruel husband having beaten her
with a thick stick.

The miserable gins are not _beaten_ only; they are _half starved_; for
their husbands will give them no food, and _they_--poor things--cannot
fish or hunt, or shoot; they have nothing but the roots they dig up, and
the grubs, and lizards, and snakes they find on the ground. Their looks
show how wretchedly they fare; for while the men are often strong and
tall, the women are generally thin, and bent, and haggard.

Yet the _woman_, weak as she is, carries all the baggage, not only the
babe slung upon her back, but the bag of food, and even her husband's gun
and pipe; while the _man_ stalks along in his pride, with nothing but
his spear in his hand, or at most a light basket upon his arm; for he
considers his wife as his beast of burden. At night the woman has to
build her own shelter, for the man thinks it quite enough to build one
for himself.

Such is the hard lot of a native woman, while she _lives_; and when she
_dies_, her body is perched in a tree, as not worth the trouble of
burying.

I have already told you, that the natives have no GOD; yet they have a
DEVIL, whom they call Yakoo, or debbil-debbil. Of him they are always
afraid, for they fancy he goes about devouring children. When any one
dies, they say, "Yakoo took him." How different from those happy
Christians who can say of their dead, "God took them!"

People who know not God, but only the devil, must be very wicked. These
savages show themselves to be children of debbil-debbil by their actions.
They kill many of their babes, that they may not have the trouble of
nursing them. Old people also they kill, and laugh at the idea of making
them "tumble down." One of the most horrible things they do, is making
the skulls of their friends into drinking-cups, and they think that by
doing so, they show their AFFECTION! They allow the nearest relation to
have the skull of the dead person. They will even EAT a little piece of
the dead body, just as a mark of love. But generally speaking, it is
only their _enemies_ they eat, and they _do_ eat them whenever they can
kill them. There are a great many tribes of natives, and they look upon
one another as enemies. If a man of one tribe dare to come, and hunt in
the lands of another tribe, he is immediately killed, and his body is
eaten.

The bodies of dear friends--are treated with great honor, placed for some
weeks on a high platform, and then buried. Mothers prize highly the dead
bodies of their children. A traveller met a poor old woman wandering in
search of roots, with a stick for digging in her hand, and with no other
covering than a little grass mat. On her back she bore a heavy load. What
was it? The dead body of her child,--a boy of ten years old; this burden
she had borne for three weeks, and she thought she showed her love, by
keeping it near her for so long a time. Alas! she knew nothing of the
immortal spirit, and how, when washed in Jesus' blood, it is borne by
angels into the presence of God.

But though these savages are so wicked, and so wild, they have their
amusements. Dancing is the chief amusement. At every full moon, there is
a grand dance, called the Corrobory. It is the men who dance, while the
women sit by and beat time. Nothing can be more horrible to see than a
Corrobory. It is held in the night by the light of blazing fires. The men
are made to look more frightful than usual, by great patches, and stripes
of red and white clay all over their bodies; and they play all manner of
strange antics, and utter all kinds of strange yells; so that you might
think it was a dance in HELL, rather than on earth.

It may surprise you to hear these wild creatures have a turn both for
music and drawing. There are figures carved upon the rocks, which show
their turn for drawing. The figures represent beasts, fishes, and men,
and are much better done than could have been supposed. There are few
savages who can sing as well as these natives; but the _words_ of their
songs are very foolish. These are the words of one song,

    "Eat great deal, eat, eat, eat;
    Eat again, plenty to eat;
    Eat more yet, eat, eat, eat."

If a pig could sing, surely this song would just suit its fancy. How sad
to think a man who is made to praise God forever and ever, should have no
higher joy than eating!

And what is the appearance of these people?

They are ugly, with flat noses, and wide mouths, but their teeth are
white, and their hair is long, glossy, and curly. They adorn their
tresses with teeth, and feathers, and dogs' tails; and they rub over
their whole body with fish oil and fat. You may imagine, therefore, how
unpleasant it must be to come near them.


THE COLONISTS OR SETTLERS.

_Once_ there were only black people in Australia, and no white; _now_
there are more white than black; and it is probable, that soon, there
will be no black people, but only white. Ever since the white people
began to settle there, the black people have been dying away very fast;
for the white people have taken away the lands where the blacks used to
hunt, and have filled them with their sheep and cattle.

There are two sorts of white people who have come to Australia. They are
called "Convicts," and "Colonists."

Convicts are some of the worst of the white people;--thieves, who instead
of being kept in prison, were sent to Australia to work hard for many
years. It is a sad thing for Australia, that so many thieves have been
sent there, because after their punishment was over, and they were set at
liberty, some remained in the land, and did a great deal of harm.

Colonists are people who come of their own accord to earn their living as
best they can.

It is a common sight when travelling in Australia, to meet a dray drawn
by bullocks, laden with furniture, and white people. It is a family going
to their new farm. In the dray there are pigs, and you may hear them
grunting; there are fowls, too, shut up in a basket; and besides, there
are plants and tools. When the family arrive at the place where they mean
to settle, they find no house, nor garden, nor fields, only a wild
forest. Immediately they pitch a tent for the mother and her daughters to
sleep in, while the father, his sons, and his laborers, sleep by the fire
in the open air. The next morning, the men begin to fell trees to make a
hut, and they finish it in a week;--not a very grand dwelling, it is
true, but good enough for the fine weather; the floor is made of the hard
clay from the enormous ant hills; the walls--of great slabs of wood; the
roof--of wooden tiles, and the windows--of calico. When the hut is
finished, a hen-house, and a pig-sty are built, and a dairy also
underground. A garden is soon planted, and there the vines, and the
peach-trees bear beautiful fruit. The daughters attend to the rearing of
the fowls, and the milking of the cows, and soon have a plentiful supply
of eggs and butter. The men clear the ground of trees, in order to sow
wheat and potatoes. Thus the family soon have all their wants supplied;
and they find time by degrees to build a stone house, with eight large
rooms; and when it is completed, they give up their wooden hut to one of
the laborers. This is the way of life in the "Bush;" for such is the name
given to the wild parts of Australia.

Some settlers keep large flocks of sheep, and gain money by selling the
wool and the fat, to make cloth and tallow. A shepherd in Australia leads
a very lonely life among the hills, and he is obliged to keep ever upon
the watch against the wild dogs. These voracious animals prowl about in
troops, and cruelly bite numbers of the sheep, and then devour as many as
they can. Happily there are no _large_ wild beasts, such as wolves, and
bears, lions, and tigers; for these would devour the shepherd as well as
the sheep.

But there are _men_, called "bush-rangers," as fierce as wild beasts.
These are convicts who have escaped from punishment. They often come to
the settlers' houses, and murder the inhabitants.

The natives are not nearly as dangerous as these wicked _white_ men;
indeed _they_ are generally very harmless, unless provoked by
ill-treatment. They are willing to make themselves useful, by reaping
corn, and washing sheep; and a little reward satisfies them, such as a
blanket, or an old coat. When some of the flock have strayed, the blacks
will take great pains to look for them, and seem as much pleased when
they have found them, as if they were their own sheep. The black women
can help in the wash-house, and in the farm-yard; but they are too much
besmeared with grease to be fit for the kitchen. It is wise never to give
a good dinner to a black, till his work is done; because he always eats
so much, that he can work no more that day.

Some of these poor blacks are very faithful and affectionate. There was
one who lived near a settler's hut, and he used to come there every
morning before the master was up; he would enter very gently for fear of
waking him,--light the fire by rubbing two pieces of wood together, and
set the kettle on to boil; then he would approach the bed, and putting
his hand affectionately on the hand of the sleeper would whisper in his
ear, till he saw him open his eyes, when he would greet him with a kind
and smiling look. These attentions were the mark of his attachment to the
white man.

This black was as faithful, as he was affectionate. Once he was sent by a
farmer on a message. It was this, "Take this letter to my brother, and
he will give you sixpence, and then spend the sixpence in pipes for me."
The black man took the letter, and went towards the place where the
brother lived. He met him on horseback. The brother after reading the
letter, rode away without giving the sixpence to the bearer. What was the
poor black man to do? "Shall I go back," thought he, "without the pipes?
No. I will try to get some money." He went to a house that he knew of,
and offered to chop some wood for sixpence, and with _that sixpence_ he
bought the pipes. Was not this being a good servant? This was not
eye-service; it was the service of the heart. But there are not many
natives like this man. They are generally soon tired of working. For
instance, a boy called Jackey, left a good master who would have provided
for him, to live again wild in the woods, and went away with the blanket
off his bed.

ANIMALS.--There are few of _our_ animals in Australia, or of _their_
animals in England. There is no hare, no rabbit, no nightingale, no
thrush, in Australia. _Once_ there were no horses, nor cows, nor sheep,
nor pigs; but _now_ there are a great many. Much terrified were the
natives at the sight of the first horse which came from England; for they
had never seen such a large animal before.

The largest beast in Australia is the Kangaroo, remarkable for its short
fore-legs, and its great strong hind-legs, and for the pocket in which it
shelters its little one. It is a gentle creature, and can be easily
tamed. A pet kangaroo may often be seen walking about a settler's garden,
cropping the grass upon the lawn. But though easily _tamed_, a wild
kangaroo is not easily _caught_; for it makes immense springs in the air,
far higher than a horse could leap, though it is not as big as a sheep.
When hunted by dogs, it gets, when it can, into the water, and turning
round, and standing still, dips the dogs, one by one, till it drowns
them.

There is another beast, called the opossum, not much bigger than a large
cat, and it also has a pocket for its young ones. But instead of cropping
the grass, it eats the leaves of trees. It has a gentle face like a deer,
and a long tail like a monkey. It hides itself, as the squirrel does, in
the hollows of trees. Like the owl, it is never seen in the day, but at
night it comes out to feed. The blacks are very cunning in finding out
the holes where the opossums are hidden, and they know how to drag them
out by their long tails, without getting bitten by their sharp teeth.
With the skin of the opossum the natives make a cloak.

The wild dogs, or dingoes, are odious animals. They may be heard yelling
at night to the terror of the shepherd, and the farmer. They are bold
enough to rush into a yard, and to carry off a calf, or a pig; and when
they have dragged it into the woods, they cruelly eat the legs first, and
do not kill it for a long while.

These three--the kangaroo, the opossum, and the dingo,--are the principal
beasts of Australia.

Among the birds, the emu is the most remarkable. It is nearly as tall as
an ostrich, and has beautiful soft feathers, though not as beautiful as
the ostrich's. But the most curious point in the emu is,--it has no
tongue. You may suppose, therefore, that it is neither a singing bird,
nor a talking bird; it only makes a little noise in its throat. But if
_it_ is silent, there are numbers of parrots, and cockatoos, to fill the
air with their screams. In England, these birds are thought a great deal
of, but in Australia, they are killed to make into pies, or into soup.
Parrot-pie and cockatoo-soup, are common dishes there. However, many of
the parrots and cockatoos, are caught by the blacks, and sold to the
English, who send them to England in the ships.

There are not such singing birds in Australia, as there are here. Though
there is a robin red-breast there, he does not sing as sweetly as he does
here. But there are _laughing_ birds in Australia. There is a bird called
the "laughing jackass." He laughs very loud three times a day. He begins
in the morning;--suddenly a hoarse loud laugh is heard,--then another,
then another,--till a whole troop of birds seem laughing all together,
and go on laughing for a few minutes;--and then they are all quiet again.
Such a noise must awaken many a sleeper on his bed. At noon the laugh is
heard again. At evening there is another general fit of laughter. These
birds are not like children, who laugh at no particular hour, but often
twenty times a day. The laughing jackass is almost as useful as a clock,
and it is called, "the bushman's clock."


BOTANY BAY.

This is a famous place, for here the English first settled, and here it
was thieves were sent from England as a punishment. Some were sent there
for fourteen years, and some for twenty-one years, and some for life. How
did the place get the beautiful name of Botany? which means "the
knowledge of flowers." Because there were so many beautiful flowers seen
there, when Captain Cook first beheld it. Yet the name Botany Bay, does
not seem beautiful to us; for it reminds us not of roses, but of rogues;
not of violets, but of violent men; not of lilies, but of villains.


SYDNEY.

This town is close to Botany Bay. It is the largest town in Australia.
It is a very wicked city, because so many convicts have been sent there.
Many of the people are the children of convicts, and have been brought up
very ill by their parents. Of course there are many robberies in such a
city, far more than there are in London. Who would like to live there!
yet it is a fine city, and by the sea-side, with a harbor, where hundreds
of ships might ride,--safe from the storm. It is plain, too, that Sydney
is full of rich people, for the streets are thronged with carriages,
driving rapidly along. The convicts often become rich, after their time
of punishment is over, by keeping public-houses, and when rich they keep
carriages.

If you were in Sydney, you would hardly think you were in a savage
island; for you would see no savages in the streets. What is become of
those who once lived in these parts? They are all dead, or gone to other
parts of the island. The last black near Sydney, used to talk of the old
times, and say, "When I was a pick-a-ninny, plenty of black fellow then.
Only one left now, mitter."


ADELAIDE.

It is much better to live here than in Sydney, because convicts have
never been sent here. Numbers of honest poor people are leaving England
and Ireland, every year, to go to Adelaide. When they arrive at the
coast, they get into cars, and are driven seven miles, passing by many
pretty cottages, and gardens, till they arrive at Adelaide. There they
find themselves in the midst of gardens; for the houses are not crowded
together, as in our English towns, but are placed in the midst of trees,
and flowers, and grass; because there is plenty of room in Australia.

But there is one great evil both in Sydney and in Adelaide, which is the
dust blown from the desert, and which almost chokes the inhabitants. If
there were more rain in Australia, there would be less dust.

Australia is divided into three parts:--

    I. New South Wales. Capital, Sydney.
    II. Western Australia. Capital, Perth.
    III. South Australia. Capital, Adelaide.

   [13] The Australian mountains are about seven thousand feet high.




VAN DIEMAN'S LAND.


This island is as cool as Great Britain; yet it is not a pleasant land to
live in; for it is filled with convicts. There are no natives there now;
they died away gradually, except a few, who were taken by the English to
a small island near, called "Flinder's Island." They were taken there
that they might be safe; yet they never ceased to sigh, and to cry after
their native land.


THE YOUNG SAVAGES.

Many travellers have tried to see the land in the midst of Australia, but
hitherto they have not succeeded. After going a little way, they have
been obliged to return, and why? Because they have found no water.

I will give you an account of the journey of Mr. Eyre. This traveller
wished to go into the midst of the land, but finding he could not, he
travelled along the coast, at that part called the Great Bight (or the
Great Bay).

He set out from Adelaide with a large party, but various accidents
occurred by the way, and at last he found himself with only one
Englishman, and three native boys. The eldest was almost a man. His name
was Wylie, and he was a good-tempered, lively youth. The second was named
Neramberein. I shall have nothing good to relate of him, but a great deal
of evil; for he was indeed a very wicked boy. The youngest was called
Cootachah--a boy who was easily induced to follow bad examples.

Mr. Eyre was the chief person in the party, and his English companion was
Mr. Baxter. Ten horses carried the packages, and six sheep were made to
follow, that they might be killed one by one for food.

All these poor animals suffered terribly from want of water. Sometimes
they went a hundred miles without a refreshing draught. The horses became
so weak, that the travellers were unwilling to mount their backs; and as
for the sheep, they could scarcely crawl along.

Many ways of getting water were tried. One way was digging up the roots
of trees. A little,--a very little,--water may often be squeezed out of
the end of a root; because the root is the mouth of the tree, and sucks
up water from the ground. Another way of getting water was by gathering
up the dew in a sponge. Enough dew to make a cup of tea might sometimes
be obtained; but not enough for the poor beasts to have any. When the
travellers, by digging, could make a well, then they were glad indeed;
for then the beasts could be refreshed as well as themselves.

The whole party were become so weak from fatigue and thirst, that they
could not get on fast, and they found it necessary to save their food as
much as possible, that it might last to the end of the long journey. They
took a little flour every day out of their bag, and made it into a paste.
Sometimes they caught a fish, or shot a bird or beast, and then they had
a hearty meal. When they killed one of their sheep, then they had plenty
of mutton. At last, all the sheep were killed but one.

It happened at this time, that one of the horses was so sick that he
could not move. It was plain he would soon die; therefore the travellers
determined to kill him, and eat his flesh. Mr. Eyre was grieved at the
thought of killing his horse, neither could he bear the idea of eating
horse flesh; but then he feared, that if the horse were not killed, the
whole party would be starved.

The native boys were delighted when they knew the horse was to be eaten;
for they had long been fretting for more food. They would like to have
devoured it _all_ on the spot; but they were not allowed to do so; the
greater part of the flesh was cut off in thin slices, dipped in salt
water, and then hung up in the sun to dry, to serve as provision for many
days to come. The boys were permitted to devour the rest of the carcase.

With what haste they prepared the feast! They made a fire close to the
carcase, and then cut off lumps of flesh, which they roasted quickly, and
then ate. They spent the whole afternoon in this manner, looking more
like ravenous wolves than human creatures. When night came, they were not
willing to leave their meat, but took as much as ever they could carry
into their beds, that they might eat whenever they awoke. Next day, they
returned to the roasting and eating, and the next night again they took
meat with them to bed.

Mr. Eyre wondered at their gluttony and he thought it necessary to give
them an allowance of food, instead of letting them eat as much as they
liked. He gave five pounds of meat to each boy every day. Five pounds is
as much as a shoulder of mutton--and ten English boys would think it
quite enough for dinner; but the Australian boys were not satisfied!

Mr. Eyre began to suspect that in the night they stole some of the meat
hanging up to dry on the trees. Therefore one night he weighed the meat,
and in the morning weighed it again. He found that four pounds were gone.
He thought it was very ungrateful of boys, to whom he gave so much, to
steal from his small stock. As a punishment he gave them less meat next
day than usual.

He entreated the boys to tell him who was the thief. The eldest and
youngest declared that they had not stolen any meat; but Neramberein
would not answer at all, and looked sulky and angry, and muttered
something about going away, and taking Wylie with him. Mr. Eyre replied,
that he might go if he pleased, while at the same time he warned him of
the dangers of the way.

The next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, the three boys all rose
up and walked away. Mr. Eyre called back the youngest, as he felt he was
misled by his elders, but he let the others go. They had stayed with him
till the horse was all eaten up, except the dried pieces--but now they
hoped to get more food, when travelling alone, than with Mr. Eyre.

As soon as the boys were gone, Mr. Eyre determined to stop some time
longer where he was, that he might not overtake them. There was one sheep
still remaining, and which seemed very restless all by itself. This
sheep was killed for food, and in that place there was plenty of water;
so that the little company fared well that day and the next; especially
as Mr. Baxter had the good fortune to kill an eagle, which made an
excellent stew.

Just as the travellers had finished their evening meal, they were
astonished to see the two runaway boys approaching. Wylie came running
up, declaring that both he and his companions were sorry for their bad
behavior, and were anxious to be received again, not being able to get
enough to eat. But though Wylie acted in this frank manner, his companion
was very sulky. He said nothing, but seated himself by the fire, pouting
and frowning, and evidently much vexed at being obliged to come back. Mr.
Eyre thought it well to give the boys a lecture on their bad conduct,
especially upon their thefts; for they now owned that they had stolen
meat from the trees, though they had before denied it. But though Mr.
Eyre reproved the boys, he treated them very kindly, for he gave them
some tea, and bread and meat for supper.

The next day the whole party continued their journey. They were obliged
to be very sparing of their food, lest when it was gone they should get
no more. But their greatest trial was the want of water.

After travelling during four days, they stopped one evening in a rocky
place at the top of high cliffs, hoping that if any rain should fall,
some might be caught in the hollow places among the rocks. That evening
they ate no supper; for having had dinner, they might do without supper.

Before they lay down to sleep, they made themselves places to sleep in,
by setting up boughs, as shelters from the wind. They also piled up their
goods in a great heap, and covered it with oil skin, to keep out the
damp. Mr. Eyre did not sleep when the rest did, for he undertook to watch
the horses till eleven at night, and then he agreed to change places with
Mr. Baxter.

The hour was almost come, and Mr. Eyre was beginning to lead the horses
towards the sleeping place, when he was startled by hearing a gun go off.
He called out,--but receiving no answer, he grew alarmed, and leaving the
horses, ran towards the spot, whence the noise had come.

Presently he met Wylie, running very fast, and crying out, "Oh! Massa,
Oh! Massa, come here."

"What is the matter?" inquired Mr. Eyre.

Wylie made no answer.

With hurried steps, Mr. Eyre accompanied him towards the camp. What a
sight struck his eyes! His friend Baxter, lying on the ground, weltering
in his blood, and in the agonies of DEATH.

The two younger boys were not there, and the goods which had been covered
by the oil-skin, lay scattered in confusion on the ground. It was too
clear that one of the boys had KILLED poor Baxter. No doubt it was
Neramberein who had done it!

It seems that the boys had attempted to steal some of the goods, and that
while they were gathering them together, Baxter had awaked, and had come
forth from his sleeping place, and that _then_ one of the boys had shot
him.

Mr. Eyre raised the dying man from the ground where he was lying
prostrate, and he then found that a ball had entered his left breast, and
that his life was fast departing. In a few minutes he expired!

What were the feelings of the lonely traveller! Here he was in the midst
of a desert, with no companion but one young savage, and that young
savage was not one whom he could trust; for he knew not what part Wylie
had taken in the deeds of the night. He suspected that he had intended to
go away with the other boys, but that when Baxter was murdered, he had
grown alarmed. Wylie indeed denied that he had known anything of the
robbery, but then he was not a boy whose word could be believed.

The remainder of that dreadful night was passed by Mr. Eyre, in watching
the horses. Anxiously he waited for the first streak of daylight. He then
drove the horses to the camp, and once more beheld the body of his
fellow-traveller. How suddenly had his soul been hurried into eternity,
and into the presence of his God!

It was Wylie's business to light the fire, and prepare the breakfast.
Meanwhile, Mr. Eyre examined the baggage to see how much had been stolen.
These were the chief articles he missed. All the bread, consisting of
five loaves, some mutton, tea and sugar, tobacco and pipes, a small keg
of water, and two guns. And what was left for the traveller? A large
quantity of flour, a large keg of water, some tea and sugar, a gun, and
pistols. But would these have been left, had the ungrateful boys been
strong enough to carry them away?

Mr. Eyre desired before leaving the fatal spot to bury the body of his
friend; but the rocks around were so hard, that it was impossible to dig
a grave. All he was able to do, was to wrap the corpse in a blanket
before he abandoned it forever.

Slowly and silently he left the sorrowful spot, leading one horse,
while Wylie drove the others after it. During the heat of the day, they
stopped to rest. It was four in the afternoon, and they were soon going
to set out again, when they perceived at a distance--TWO WHITE FIGURES!
two white figures! and soon knew them to be the two guilty boys, wrapped
in their blankets.

Mr. Eyre had some fear lest the young murderer should shoot him also; yet
he thought it wise to advance boldly towards him, with his gun in his
hand. He perceived that each of the wicked youths held a gun, and seemed
ready to shoot. But as he approached, they drew back. He wished to speak
to them in order to persuade them not to follow him on his journey, but
to go another way; however he could not get near them; but he heard them
cry out, "O Massa, we don't want you; we want Wylie." The boys repeated
the name of Wylie over and over again; yet Wylie answered not, but
remained quietly with the horses. At length Mr. Eyre turned away, and
continued his journey. The boys followed at some distance, calling out
for Wylie till the darkness came on.

Mr. Eyre was so anxious to get beyond the reach of these wicked youths,
that he walked eighteen miles that evening. And he never saw them again!
I do not know whether he had ever told them of the true God, of that EYE
which never SLEEPS, of that EYE which beholds ROBBERS and MURDERERS in
the night;--but whether he had told them or not of this great God, they
must have KNOWN that they were acting wickedly when they robbed their
benefactor, and murdered his friend; and they must have felt very
MISERABLE after they had done those deeds.

Alone with Wylie, Mr. Eyre pursued his journey along the high clefts of
the Great Bight, or Bay.

For five days they were without water for the horses; at last they dug
some wells in the sand. But by this time one of the horses was grown so
weak, that he could scarcely crawl along. This horse, Mr. Eyre determined
to kill for food. Wylie, delighted with the idea, exclaimed, "Massa, I
shall sit up, and eat the whole night." And he kept his word. While his
master was skinning the poor beast, he made a fire close by, and soon
began tearing off bits of flesh, roasting, and eating them, as fast as he
could. Mr. Eyre, after cutting off the best parts of the flesh to dry,
allowed Wylie to eat the rest. See the young glutton, with the head, the
feet, and the inside, permitted to devour it as best he could! He
hastened to make an oven, in which to bake about twenty pounds to feast
upon during the night. It is not wonderful, if during that night he was
heard to make a dismal groaning, and to complain that he was very ill.
He _said_, indeed, that it was _working_ too _hard_, had made him ill,
but his master thought it was _eating_ too _much_, for whenever he woke,
he found the boy gnawing a bone.

Next day, Wylie was not able to spend his whole time over the carcase,
for he had to go, and look for a lost foal; but the day after, it was
hard to get him away from the bones.

For some time the travellers lived upon dried horse flesh, with a
kangaroo, or a fish, as a little change. Wylie continued to eat
immoderately, though often rolling upon the ground, and crying out,
"Mendyat," or ill.

One night he appeared to be in a very ill-humor, and Mr. Eyre tried to
find out the reason. At last Wylie said in an angry tone, "The dogs have
eaten the skin." It seems he had hung the skin of a kangaroo upon a bush,
intending to eat it by-and-bye, and the wild dogs had stolen the dainty
morsel. Wylie was restored to his usual good-humor by the sight of some
fine fishes his master had caught. Next time the boy shot a kangaroo, he
took good care of the skin, folding it up, and hiding it.

One day he was so happy as to catch two opossums in a tree. His master
determined to see how Wylie would behave, if left entirely to himself.
He sat silently by the fire, while Wylie was cooking one opossum. The
boy, having got it ready for his supper, took the other to his sleeping
place. His master inquired what he intended to do with it. Wylie replied,
"I shall be hungry in the morning, and I am keeping it for my breakfast."
Then Mr. Eyre perceived that the greedy boy intended to offer him neither
supper nor breakfast. Accordingly he took out his bag of flour, and said
to Wylie, "Very well, we will each eat our own food; you eat the opossums
you shot, and I eat the flour I have; and I will give you no more." In
this manner, Mr. Eyre hoped to show the boy the folly of his selfishness.
Wylie was frightened at the idea of getting no more flour, and
immediately offered the smaller opossum to his master, and promised to
cook it himself. What a selfish, and ungrateful boy! Wylie had a wicked
heart by nature, and so have _we_. Only _he_ had not been taught what was
right, as _we_ have been. This is a prayer which would suit well every
child, and every man in the world, "Create in me a clean heart, O God,
and renew a right spirit within me."

Mr. Eyre continued to be kind to Wylie, though he saw the boy did not
really love him.

But the troubles of the journey were nearly at an end. At last the
travellers saw a ship a few miles from the shore. Oh I how anxious they
were that the sailors should see them! What could they do? They kindled a
fire on a rock, and they made a great deal of smoke come out of the fire.
Soon a boat was seen approaching the shore. How great was the joy of the
weary travellers. The sailors in the boat were Frenchmen, but they were
not the less kind on that account. They invited Mr. Eyre and Wylie to
accompany them to their ship.

When the young savage found himself on board, he was almost wild with
delight, for he had now as much to eat as he could desire, and he began
eating biscuits so fast, that the sailors began to be afraid lest he
should eat them all; and they were glad to give him fishes instead, as
they could catch plenty of them.

For twelve days Wylie and his master lived in the ship, and then left it,
laden with provisions, and dressed in warm clothes.

They had still many miles to go along the shore, but they suffered no
more from want of food and water.

Great was their rapture when they first caught sight of the hills of St.
George's Sound; for then they knew their journey would soon end. But they
had rivers to cross on the way, and in trying to get the horses over,
they nearly lost the poor beasts, and their own lives too. For three days
their clothes were dripping with wet, and the last night was one of the
worst; but then they knew it was the LAST, and that thought enabled them
to bear all. So does the Christian feel when near the end of his journey.
He is in the midst of storms, and wading through deep waters, even the
deep waters of DEATH; but he knows that he is near HOME.

It was in the midst of a furious storm, that these travellers arrived at
their journey's end. Though they were now close to the town of Albany,
neither man nor beast were to be seen; for neither would venture out. At
last, a native appeared, and he knew Wylie, and greeted him joyfully,
telling him at the same time that his friends had given him up for dead a
long while ago. This native, by a loud shrill cry, let his countrymen
know that Wylie was found; and presently a multitude of men, women, and
children, came rushing rapidly from the town, and up the hill to meet
him. His parents and brethren folded him in their arms, while all around
welcomed him with shouts of joy. His master was kindly received at the
house of a friend; but he did not meet with so warm a welcome as Wylie,
for he was not like him in the midst of his family.

The kind master overlooked all Wylie's faults during the journey, and
remembered only his kindness in keeping with him to the end. He even
spoke in his favor to the government, requesting that Wylie might have a
daily allowance of food as a reward for his good conduct. What great
reason had this young savage to rejoice that he had not listened to the
enticements of his wicked comrades, when they called him so often by his
name, and tried to induce him to forsake his kind master!


LITTLE MICKEY.

Mickey was born in the wilds of Australia; yet he was a highly favored
boy; for he became servant to a missionary. This was far better than
being, like Wylie, the companion of a traveller.

Mickey was a merry and active little fellow, and was a great favorite
with his master's children. The older ones taught him to read, and the
little ones played with him. During the day, Mickey took care of the
cattle, and at night he slept in a shed close by his master's house. He
might have been a happy boy, but he soon fell into sin and sorrow.

One evening he was in the cooking-house, eating his supper with another
native boy, his fellow-servant. The oven was hot, and the bread was
baking. Mickey opened the door of the oven, and looked in. That was
wrong; it was the first step towards evil. Mickey had eaten a good
supper, and ought to have been satisfied; but, like his countrymen, he
had an enormous appetite, and was always ready to eat too much when he
could. He took some of the hot bread, and gave some to his
fellow-servant. How like was his conduct to that of Eve, when she took
the fruit, and gave some to Adam!

That night Mickey was nowhere to be found, nor his little fellow-servant
either. Where could they be? Their master sent people to search for them;
but no one had seen them. It seemed strange indeed, that a boy who had
been so kindly treated, and who had seemed as happy as Mickey, should run
away. The good missionary and his children were in great grief, fearing
that some accident had befallen the lads.

But when the time came to take the bread out of the oven, they began to
suspect why Mickey had gone away. They saw some one had stolen large
pieces of bread. They said, "Perhaps it was Mickey who stole the bread,
and perhaps he is ashamed, and so he has run away." What a pity it was
that Mickey did not come, and confess his fault; he would have been
pardoned and restored to favor. Even a good boy may fall into a great
sin; but then he will own it, and ask forgiveness, both of God and man.
Still Mickey was not like those hardened boys who robbed Mr. Eyre, for he
was ashamed.

Month after month passed away, but no Mickey appeared. The missionary
feared that the boy would never return, but live and die amongst his
heathen countrymen.

One day, however, he was told that a man was at the door, who wanted to
speak to him.

"Who is he?" inquired the missionary.

"A schoolmaster, sir," replied the servant.

"And what does he want?"

"He has brought with him some native boys, and he wants you to come out
and see them, and speak a few words to them about their Saviour."

The missionary gladly consented to go out to behold so pleasing a sight,
as a school of native boys. As soon as he appeared, several young voices
called out, "Mickey no come."

The missionary was surprised, and inquired of the boys, "What do you
mean? where is Mickey?"

"Mickey no come," repeated the boys. "He too much frightened."

"Why is he afraid?" asked the missionary.

"Because he steal de bread," replied the boys.

The missionary now began to look around, and soon espied Mickey, trying
to hide himself behind a fence. He called him; but Mickey, instead of
coming, went further off. Two or three boys then ran towards him, and
attempted to bring him back, but Mickey resisted.

The missionary then went into the house hoping that the trembling
culprit, seeing he was gone, would come out of his hiding-place.

Very soon he was told, that Mickey was standing with the other
boys at the door. Then the good missionary appeared again. Looking kindly
at Mickey, he said, "Why did you run away?"

"Because me steal de bread; me very sorry."

The missionary held out his hand to the sorrowful offender, saying, "I
forgive you, Mickey." The boy eagerly seized the kind hand, and holding
it fast, and looking earnestly up in the missionary's face, he said,
"When me steal again, you must whip me--and whip me--and whip
me--very--very much." Again the missionary assured the boy he had
entirely forgiven him--and then Mickey began to jump about for joy.

How glad Mickey would have been to return to the service of his old
master! But that could not be; for that master was just going to set sail
for England, to visit his home and friends, and he could not take Mickey
with him. Just before he went, he provided a feast for many of the native
children, and gave them a parting address. Mickey was there--no longer
afraid--but glad to look up in the face of his beloved friend; for now he
knew he was forgiven.

When the moment came to say "Farewell," the children ran forward, eager
to grasp the missionary's hand--but none pressed that hand so warmly and
so sorrowfully, as the little runaway.

I know not whether that generous master, and that penitent servant ever
again met upon earth; but I have much hope they will meet in heaven; for
Mickey seems to have been sorry for his sin; and we know the promise: "If
we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins."
And why? Because the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin. There are
many sinners who were once as much afraid of God, as Mickey was of his
master; but who have been pardoned, and who will be present at his
HEAVENLY FEAST.


THE END.

[Illustration: A CEDAR TREE.]




ATTRACTIVE AND INTERESTING

JUVENILE BOOKS,

PUBLISHED BY

ROBERT CARTER & BROTHERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blossoms of Childhood.
  By the author of the "Broken Bud." 16mo. 75 cents.

Bunbury.
  Glory, Glory, Glory, and other Narratives. 25 cents.

Cameron.
  The Farmer's Daughter. Illustrated. 30 cents.

Commandment with Promise.
  By the author of "The Week," &c. Illustrated. 75 cents.

Duncan, Henry.
  Tales of the Scottish Peasantry. 18mo. 50 cents.
  The Cottage Fireside. 40 cents.

Duncan, Mary Lundie.
  Rhymes for my Children. 25 cents.

Far Off in Asia and Australia.
  Described by the author of the "Peep of Day," &c. Illustrated. 16mo.

Fry, Caroline.
  The Listener. Illustrated. $1 00.

Frank Netherton.
  Or, the Talisman. Illustrated. 16mo.

Infant's Progress.
  By the author of "Little Henry and his Bearer." Illustrated. 75 cts.

Jamie Gordon.
  Or, the Orphan. Illustrated. 75 cents.

Kennedy, Grace.
  Jessy Allan. 18mo. 25 cents.
  Decision, or Religion must be all or nothing. 25 cents.
  Anna Ross. Illustrated. 30 cents.

Michael Kemp.
  The Happy Farmer's Lad. Illustrated. 40 cents.

My School Boy Days.
  Illustrated. 18mo. 30 cents.

My Youthful Companions.
  A Sequel to the above. Illustrated. 30 cents.

My Grandfather Gregory.
  Illustrated. 25 cents.

My Grandmama Gilbert.
  By the same author. 25 cents.

New Cobwebs
  To Catch Young Flies. Illustrated. Square. 50 cents.

Opie, Amelia.
  Tales and Illustrations of Lying. 18mo. 40 cents.

Old Humphrey's
  Addresses--Observations--Thoughts--Walks in London--Homely
  Hints--Country Strolls--Sea Captain--Grandparents--Isle of
  Wight--Pithy Papers--Pleasant Tales--North American Indians.
  12 volumes. Each 40 cents.

Osborne, Mrs. David.
  The World of Waters. Illustrated. 75 cents.

Pastor's Daughter.
  By Mrs. L.P. Hopkins. Illustrated. 40 cents.

Peep of Day,
  and "Line upon Line," and "Precept on Precept." 3 volumes.
  Each 30 cents.

Pollok, Robert.
  Tales of the Scottish Covenanters. 16mo. 75 cents.
  Helen of the Glen. 18mo. 25 cents.
  The Persecuted Family. 18mo. 25 cents.
  Ralph Gemmell. 18mo. 25 cents.

Stories on the Lord's Prayer.
  By the author of "Edward and Miriam."

Sigourney, Mrs. L.H.
  Water Drops. 16mo. 75 cents.
  Letters to my Pupils. Portrait. 75 cents.
  Olive Leaves. Illustrated. 75 cents.
  Boys' Book. 40 cents.
  Girls' Book. 40 cents.
  Child's Book. 35 cents.

Sinclair, Catherine.
  Charlie Seymour. 18mo. 30 cts.

Taylor, Jane.
  Hymns for Infant Minds. 40 cents.
  Limed Twigs. Colored plates. 50 cents.
  Contributions of Q.Q. Illustrated. $1.
  Original Poems. Illustrated. 40 cents.

Tucker, S.
  The Rainbow in the North. Illustrated. 75 cents.

Week, The.
  By the author of the "Commandment with Promise." 75 cents.

Wilson, Professor.
  Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life. 75 cents.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 13011 ***
ehmaidhcdaIeART OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10381 ***

THE HISTORY OF A CRIME

THE TESTIMONY OF AN EYE-WITNESS


By VICTOR HUGO


Translated by T.H. JOYCE and ARTHUR LOCKER.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

       THE FIRST DAY--THE AMBUSH.

    I. "Security"
   II. Paris sleeps--the Bell rings
  III. What had happened during the Night
   IV. Other Doings of the Night
    V. The Darkness of the Crime
   VI. "Placards"
  VII. No. 70, Rue Blanche
 VIII. "Violation of the Chamber"
   IX. An End worse than Death
    X. The Black Door
   XI. The High Court of Justice
  XII. The Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement
 XIII. Louis Bonaparte's Side-face
  XIV. The D'Orsay Barracks
   XV. Mazas
  XVI. The Episode of the Boulevard St. Martin
 XVII. The Rebound of the 24th June, 1848, on the 2d December 1851
XVIII. The Representatives hunted down
  XIX. One Foot in the Tomb
   XX. The Burial of a Great Anniversary

       THE SECOND DAY--THE STRUGGLE.

    I. They come to Arrest me
   II. From the Bastille to the Rue de Cotte
  III. The St. Antoine Barricade
   IV. The Workmen's Societies ask us for the Order to fight
    V. Baudin's Corpse
   VI. The Decrees of the Representatives who remained Free
  VII. The Archbishop
 VIII. Mount Valérien
   IX. The Lightning begins to flash among the People
    X. What Fleury went to do at Mazas
   XI. The End of the Second Day

       THE THIRD DAY--THE MASSACRE.

    I. Those who sleep and He who does not sleep
   II. The Proceedings of the Committee
  III. Inside the Elysée
   IV. Bonaparte's Familiar Spirits
    V. A Wavering Ally
   VI. Denis Dussoubs
  VII. Items and Interviews
 VIII. The Situation
   IX. The Porte Saint Martin
    X. My Visit to the Barricades
   XI. The Barricade of the Rue Meslay
  XII. The Barricade of the Mairie of the Fifth Arrondissement
 XIII. The Barricade of the Rue Thévenot
  XIV. Ossian and Scipio
   XV. The Question presents itself
  XVI. The Massacre
 XVII. The Appointment made with the Workmen's Societies
XVIII. The Verification of Moral Laws

       THE FOURTH DAY--THE VICTORY.

    I. What happened during the Night--the Rue Tiquetonne
   II. What happened during the Night--the Market Quarter
  III. What happened during the Night--the Petit Carreau
   IV. What was done during the Night--the Passage du Saumon
    V. Other Deeds of Darkness
   VI. The Consultative Committee
  VII. The Other List
 VIII. David d'Angers
   IX. Our Last Meeting
    X. Duty can have two Aspects
   XI. The Combat finished, the Ordeal begins
  XII. The Exiled
 XIII. The Military Commissions and the mixed Commissions
  XIV. A Religious Incident
   XV. How they came out of Ham
  XVI. A Retrospect
 XVII. Conduct of the Left
XVIII. A Page written at Brussels
  XIX. The Infallible Benediction

       CONCLUSION--THE FALL.

CHAPTER    I
CHAPTER   II
CHAPTER  III
CHAPTER   IV
CHAPTER    V
CHAPTER   VI
CHAPTER  VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER   IX
CHAPTER    X




THE FIRST DAY--THE AMBUSH.




CHAPTER I.


"SECURITY"

On December 1, 1851, Charras[1] shrugged his shoulder and unloaded his
pistols. In truth, the belief in the possibility of a _coup d'état_ had
become humiliating. The supposition of such illegal violence on the part
of M. Louis Bonaparte vanished upon serious consideration. The great
question of the day was manifestly the Devincq election; it was clear
that the Government was only thinking of that matter. As to a conspiracy
against the Republic and against the People, how could any one
premeditate such a plot? Where was the man capable of entertaining such a
dream? For a tragedy there must be an actor, and here assuredly the actor
was wanting. To outrage Right, to suppress the Assembly, to abolish the
Constitution, to strangle the Republic, to overthrow the Nation, to sully
the Flag, to dishonor the Army, to suborn the Clergy and the Magistracy,
to succeed, to triumph, to govern, to administer, to exile, to banish, to
transport, to ruin, to assassinate, to reign, with such complicities that
the law at last resembles a foul bed of corruption. What! All these
enormities were to be committed! And by whom? By a Colossus? No, by a
dwarf. People laughed at the notion. They no longer said "What a crime!"
but "What a farce!" For after all they reflected; heinous crimes require
stature. Certain crimes are too lofty for certain hands. A man who would
achieve an 18th Brumaire must have Arcola in his past and Austerlitz in
his future. The art of becoming a great scoundrel is not accorded to the
first comer. People said to themselves, Who is this son of Hortense? He
has Strasbourg behind him instead of Arcola, and Boulogne in place of
Austerlitz. He is a Frenchman, born a Dutchman, and naturalized a Swiss;
he is a Bonaparte crossed with a Verhuell; he is only celebrated for the
ludicrousness of his imperial attitude, and he who would pluck a feather
from his eagle would risk finding a goose's quill in his hand. This
Bonaparte does not pass currency in the array, he is a counterfeit image
less of gold than of lead, and assuredly French soldiers will not give us
the change for this false Napoleon in rebellion, in atrocities, in
massacres, in outrages, in treason. If he should attempt roguery it would
miscarry. Not a regiment would stir. Besides, why should he make such an
attempt? Doubtless he has his suspicious side, but why suppose him an
absolute villain? Such extreme outrages are beyond him; he is incapable
of them physically, why judge him capable of them morally? Has he not
pledged honor? Has he not said, "No one in Europe doubts my word?" Let us
fear nothing. To this could be answered, Crimes are committed either on a
grand or on a mean scale. In the first category there is Caesar; in the
second there is Mandrin. Caesar passes the Rubicon, Mandrin bestrides the
gutter. But wise men interposed, "Are we not prejudiced by offensive
conjectures? This man has been exiled and unfortunate. Exile enlightens,
misfortune corrects."

For his part Louis Bonaparte protested energetically. Facts abounded in
his favor. Why should he not act in good faith? He had made remarkable
promises. Towards the end of October, 1848, then a candidate for the
Presidency, he was calling at No. 37, Rue de la Tour d'Auvergne, on a
certain personage, to whom he remarked, "I wish to have an explanation
with you. They slander me. Do I give you the impression of a madman? They
think that I wish to revivify Napoleon. There are two men whom a great
ambition can take for its models, Napoleon and Washington. The one is a
man of Genius, the other is a man of Virtue. It is ridiculous to say, 'I
will be a man of Genius;' it is honest to say, 'I will be a man of
Virtue.' Which of these depends upon ourselves? Which can we accomplish
by our will? To be Genius? No. To be Probity? Yes. The attainment of
Genius is not possible; the attainment of Probity is a possibility. And
what could I revive of Napoleon? One sole thing--a crime. Truly a worthy
ambition! Why should I be considered man? The Republic being established,
I am not a great man, I shall not copy Napoleon; but I am an honest man.
I shall imitate Washington. My name, the name of Bonaparte, will be
inscribed on two pages of the history of France: on the first there will
be crime and glory, on the second probity and honor. And the second will
perhaps be worth the first. Why? Because if Napoleon is the greater,
Washington is the better man. Between the guilty hero and the good
citizen I choose the good citizen. Such is my ambition."

From 1848 to 1851 three years elapsed. People had long suspected Louis
Bonaparte; but long-continued suspicion blunts the intellect and wears
itself out by fruitless alarms. Louis Bonaparte had had dissimulating
ministers such as Magne and Rouher; but he had also had straightforward
ministers such as Léon Faucher and Odilon Barrot; and these last had
affirmed that he was upright and sincere. He had been seen to beat his
breast before the doors of Ham; his foster sister, Madame Hortense
Cornu, wrote to Mieroslawsky, "I am a good Republican, and I can answer
for him." His friend of Ham, Peauger, a loyal man, declared, "Louis
Bonaparte is incapable of treason." Had not Louis Bonaparte written the
work entitled "Pauperism"? In the intimate circles of the Elysée Count
Potocki was a Republican and Count d'Orsay was a Liberal; Louis
Bonaparte said to Potocki, "I am a man of the Democracy," and to
D'Orsay, "I am a man of Liberty." The Marquis du Hallays opposed the
_coup d'état_, while the Marquise du Hallays was in its favor. Louis
Bonaparte said to the Marquis, "Fear nothing" (it is true that he
whispered to the Marquise, "Make your mind easy"). The Assembly, after
having shown here and there some symptoms of uneasiness, had grown calm.
There was General Neumayer, "who was to be depended upon," and who from
his position at Lyons would at need march upon Paris. Changarnier
exclaimed, "Representatives of the people, deliberate in peace." Even
Louis Bonaparte himself had pronounced these famous words, "I should see
an enemy of my country in any one who would change by force that which
has been established by law," and, moreover, the Army was "force," and
the Army possessed leaders, leaders who were beloved and victorious.
Lamoricière, Changarnier, Cavaignac, Leflô, Bedeau, Charras; how could
any one imagine the Army of Africa arresting the Generals of Africa? On
Friday, November 28, 1851, Louis Bonaparte said to Michel de Bourges,
"If I wanted to do wrong, I could not. Yesterday, Thursday, I invited to
my table five Colonels of the garrison of Paris, and the whim seized me
to question each one by himself. All five declared to me that the Army
would never lend itself to a _coup de force_, nor attack the
inviolability of the Assembly. You can tell your friends this."--"He
smiled," said Michel de Bourges, reassured, "and I also smiled." After
this, Michel de Bourges declared in the Tribune, "this is the man for
me." In that same month of November a satirical journal, charged with
calumniating the President of the Republic, was sentenced to fine and
imprisonment for a caricature depicting a shooting-gallery and Louis
Bonaparte using the Constitution as a target. Morigny, Minister of the
Interior, declared in the Council before the President "that a Guardian
of Public Power ought never to violate the law as otherwise he would
be--" "a dishonest man," interposed the President. All these words and
all these facts were notorious. The material and moral impossibility of
the _coup d'état_ was manifest to all. To outrage the National Assembly!
To arrest the Representatives! What madness! As we have seen, Charras,
who had long remained on his guard, unloaded his pistols. The feeling of
security was complete and unanimous. Nevertheless there were some of us
in the Assembly who still retained a few doubts, and who occasionally
shook our heads, but we were looked upon as fools.


[1] Colonel Charras was Under-Secretary of State in 1848, and Acting
Secretary of War under the Provisional Government.




CHAPTER II.


PARIS SLEEPS--THE BELL RINGS

On the 2d December, 1851, Representative Versigny, of the Haute-Saône,
who resided at Paris, at No. 4, Rue Léonie, was asleep. He slept
soundly; he had been working till late at night. Versigny was a young
man of thirty-two, soft-featured and fair-complexioned, of a courageous
spirit, and a mind tending towards social and economical studies. He had
passed the first hours of the night in the perusal of a book by Bastiat,
in which he was making marginal notes, and, leaving the book open on the
table, he had fallen asleep. Suddenly he awoke with a start at the sound
of a sharp ring at the bell. He sprang up in surprise. It was dawn. It
was about seven o'clock in the morning.

Never dreaming what could be the motive for so early a visit, and
thinking that someone had mistaken the door, he again lay down, and was
about to resume his slumber, when a second ring at the bell, still
louder than the first, completely aroused him. He got up in his
night-shirt and opened the door.

Michel de Bourges and Théodore Bac entered. Michel de Bourges was the
neighbor of Versigny; he lived at No. 16, Rue de Milan.

Théodore Bac and Michel were pale, and appeared greatly agitated.

"Versigny," said Michel, "dress yourself at once--Baune has just been
arrested."

"Bah!" exclaimed Versigny. "Is the Mauguin business beginning again?"

"It is more than that," replied Michel. "Baune's wife and daughter came
to me half-an-hour ago. They awoke me. Baune was arrested in bed at six
o'clock this morning."

"What does that mean?" asked Versigny.

The bell rang again.

"This will probably tell us," answered Michel de Bourges.

Versigny opened the door. It was the Representative Pierre Lefranc. He
brought, in truth, the solution of the enigma.

"Do you know what is happening?" said he.

"Yes," answered Michel. "Baune is in prison."

"It is the Republic who is a prisoner," said Pierre Lefranc. "Have you
read the placards?"

"No."

Pierre Lefranc explained to them that the walls at that moment were
covered with placards which the curious crowd were thronging to read,
that he had glanced over one of them at the corner of his street, and
that the blow had fallen.

"The blow!" exclaimed Michel. "Say rather the crime."

Pierre Lefranc added that there were three placards--one decree and two
proclamations--all three on white paper, and pasted close together.

The decree was printed in large letters.

The ex-Constituent Laissac, who lodged, like Michel de Bourges, in the
neighborhood (No. 4, Cité Gaillard), then came in. He brought the same
news, and announced further arrests which had been made during the
night.

There was not a minute to lose.

They went to impart the news to Yvan, the Secretary of the Assembly, who
had been appointed by the Left, and who lived in the Rue de Boursault.

An immediate meeting was necessary. Those Republican Representatives who
were still at liberty must be warned and brought together without delay.

Versigny said, "I will go and find Victor Hugo."

It was eight o'clock in the morning. I was awake and was working in bed.
My servant entered and said, with an air of alarm,--

"A Representative of the people is outside who wishes to speak to you,
sir."

"Who is it?"

"Monsieur Versigny:"

"Show him in."

Versigny entered, and told me the state of affairs. I sprang out of bed.

He told me of the "rendezvous" at the rooms of the ex-Constituent
Laissac.

"Go at once and inform the other Representatives," said I.

He left me.




CHAPTER III.


WHAT HAD HAPPENED DURING THE NIGHT

Previous to the fatal days of June, 1848, the esplanade of the Invalides
was divided into eight huge grass plots, surrounded by wooden railings
and enclosed between two groves of trees, separated by a street running
perpendicularly to the front of the Invalides. This street was traversed
by three streets running parallel to the Seine. There were large lawns
upon which children were wont to play. The centre of the eight grass
plots was marred by a pedestal which under the Empire had borne the
bronze lion of St. Mark, which had been brought from Venice; under the
Restoration a white marble statue of Louis XVIII.; and under Louis
Philippe a plaster bust of Lafayette. Owing to the Palace of the
Constituent Assembly having been nearly seized by a crowd of insurgents on
the 22d of June, 1848, and there being no barracks in the neighborhood,
General Cavaignac had constructed at three hundred paces from the
Legislative Palace, on the grass plots of the Invalides, several rows of
long huts, under which the grass was hidden. These huts, where three or
four thousand men could be accommodated, lodged the troops specially
appointed to keep watch over the National Assembly.

On the 1st December, 1851, the two regiments hutted on the Esplanade were
the 6th and the 42d Regiments of the Line, the 6th commanded by Colonel
Garderens de Boisse, who was famous before the Second of December, the
42d by Colonel Espinasse, who became famous since that date.

The ordinary night-guard of the Palace of the Assembly was composed of a
battalion of Infantry and of thirty artillerymen, with a captain. The
Minister of War, in addition, sent several troopers for orderly service.
Two mortars and six pieces of cannon, with their ammunition wagons, were
ranged in a little square courtyard situated on the right of the Cour
d'Honneur, and which was called the Cour des Canons. The Major, the
military commandant of the Palace, was placed under the immediate control
of the Questors.[2] At nightfall the gratings and the doors were secured,
sentinels were posted, instructions were issued to the sentries, and the
Palace was closed like a fortress. The password was the same as in the
Place de Paris.

The special instructions drawn up by the Questors prohibited the entrance
of any armed force other than the regiment on duty.

On the night of the 1st and 2d of December the Legislative Palace was
guarded by a battalion of the 42d.

The sitting of the 1st of December, which was exceedingly peaceable,
and had been devoted to a discussion on the municipal law, had finished
late, and was terminated by a Tribunal vote. At the moment when M.
Baze, one of the Questors, ascended the Tribune to deposit his vote, a
Representative, belonging to what was called "Les Bancs Elyséens"
approached him, and said in a low tone, "To-night you will be carried
off." Such warnings as these were received every day, and, as we have
already explained, people had ended by paying no heed to them.
Nevertheless, immediately after the sitting the Questors sent for the
Special Commissary of Police of the Assembly, President Dupin being
present. When interrogated, the Commissary declared that the reports of
his agents indicated "dead calm"--such was his expression--and that
assuredly there was no danger to be apprehended for that night. When
the Questors pressed him further, President Dupin, exclaiming "Bah!"
left the room.

On that same day, the 1st December, about three o'clock in the afternoon,
as General Leflô's father-in-law crossed the boulevard in front of
Tortoni's, some one rapidly passed by him and whispered in his ear these
significant words, "Eleven o'clock--midnight." This incident excited but
little attention at the Questure, and several even laughed at it. It had
become customary with them. Nevertheless General Leflô would not go to
bed until the hour mentioned had passed by, and remained in the Offices
of the Questure until nearly one o'clock in the morning.

The shorthand department of the Assembly was done out of doors by four
messengers attached to the _Moniteur_, who were employed to carry the
copy of the shorthand writers to the printing-office, and to bring back
the proof-sheets to the Palace of the Assembly, where M. Hippolyte Prévost
corrected them. M. Hippolyte Prévost was chief of the stenographic staff,
and in that capacity had apartments in the Legislative Palace. He was at
the same time editor of the musical _feuilleton_ of the _Moniteur_. On
the 1st December he had gone to the Opéra Comique for the first
representation of a new piece, and did not return till after midnight.
The fourth messenger from the _Moniteur_ was waiting for him with a proof
of the last slip of the sitting; M. Prévost corrected the proof, and the
messenger was sent off. It was then a little after one o'clock, profound
quiet reigned around, and, with the exception of the guard, all in the
Palace slept. Towards this hour of the night, a singular incident
occurred. The Captain-Adjutant-Major of the Guard of the Assembly came to
the Major and said, "The Colonel has sent for me," and he added according
to military etiquette, "Will you permit me to go?" The Commandant was
astonished. "Go," he said with some sharpness, "but the Colonel is wrong
to disturb an officer on duty." One of the soldiers on guard, without
understanding the meaning of the words, heard the Commandant pacing up
and down, and muttering several times, "What the deuce can he want?"

Half an hour afterwards the Adjutant-Major returned. "Well," asked the
Commandant, "what did the Colonel want with you?" "Nothing," answered the
Adjutant, "he wished to give me the orders for to-morrow's duties." The
night became further advanced. Towards four o'clock the Adjutant-Major
came again to the Major. "Major," he said, "the Colonel has asked for
me." "Again!" exclaimed the Commandant. "This is becoming strange;
nevertheless, go."

The Adjutant-Major had amongst other duties that of giving out the
instructions to the sentries, and consequently had the power of
rescinding them.

As soon as the Adjutant-Major had gone out, the Major, becoming uneasy,
thought that it was his duty to communicate with the Military Commandant
of the Palace. He went upstairs to the apartment of the Commandant--
Lieutenant Colonel Niols. Colonel Niols had gone to bed and the attendants
had retired to their rooms in the attics. The Major, new to the Palace,
groped about the corridors, and, knowing little about the various rooms,
rang at a door which seemed to him that of the Military Commandant. Nobody
answered, the door was not opened, and the Major returned downstairs,
without having been able to speak to anybody.

On his part the Adjutant-Major re-entered the Palace, but the Major did
not see him again. The Adjutant remained near the grated door of the
Place Bourgogne, shrouded in his cloak, and walking up and down the
courtyard as though expecting some one.

At the instant that five o'clock sounded from the great clock of the
dome, the soldiers who slept in the hut-camp before the Invalides were
suddenly awakened. Orders were given in a low voice in the huts to take
up arms, in silence. Shortly afterwards two regiments, knapsack on back
were marching upon the Palace of the Assembly; they were the 6th and the
42d.

At this same stroke of five, simultaneously in all the quarters of Paris,
infantry soldiers filed out noiselessly from every barrack, with their
colonels at their head. The _aides-de-camp_ and orderly officers of Louis
Bonaparte, who had been distributed in all the barracks, superintended
this taking up of arms. The cavalry were not set in motion until
three-quarters of an hour after the infantry, for fear that the ring of
the horses' hoofs on the stones should wake slumbering Paris too soon.

M. de Persigny, who had brought from the Elysée to the camp of the
Invalides the order to take up arms, marched at the head of the 42d, by
the side of Colonel Espinasse. A story is current in the army, for at the
present day, wearied as people are with dishonorable incidents, these
occurrences are yet told with a species of gloomy indifference--the story
is current that at the moment of setting out with his regiment one of the
colonels who could be named hesitated, and that the emissary from the
Elysée, taking a sealed packet from his pocket, said to him, "Colonel, I
admit that we are running a great risk. Here in this envelope, which I
have been charged to hand to you, are a hundred thousand francs in
banknotes _for contingencies_." The envelope was accepted, and the
regiment set out. On the evening of the 2d of December the colonel said
to a lady, "This morning I earned a hundred thousand francs and my
General's epaulets." The lady showed him the door.

Xavier Durrieu, who tells us this story, had the curiosity later on to
see this lady. She confirmed the story. Yes, certainly! she had shut the
door in the face of this wretch; a soldier, a traitor to his flag who
dared visit her! She receive such a man? No! she could not do that,
"and," states Xavier Durrieu, she added, "And yet I have no character to
lose."

Another mystery was in progress at the Prefecture of Police.

Those belated inhabitants of the Cité who may have returned home at a
late hour of the night might have noticed a large number of street cabs
loitering in scattered groups at different points round about the Rue de
Jerusalem.

From eleven o'clock in the evening, under pretext of the arrivals of
refugees at Paris from Genoa and London, the Brigade of Surety and the
eight hundred _sergents de ville_ had been retained in the Prefecture. At
three o'clock in the morning a summons had been sent to the forty-eight
Commissaries of Paris and of the suburbs, and also to the peace officers.
An hour afterwards all of them arrived. They were ushered into a separate
chamber, and isolated from each other as much as possible. At five
o'clock a bell was sounded in the Prefect's cabinet. The Prefect Maupas
called the Commissaries of Police one after another into his cabinet,
revealed the plot to them, and allotted to each his portion of the crime.
None refused; many thanked him.

It was a question of arresting at their own homes seventy-eight Democrats
who were influential in their districts, and dreaded by the Elysée as
possible chieftains of barricades. It was necessary, a still more daring
outrage, to arrest at their houses sixteen Representatives of the People.
For this last task were chosen among the Commissaries of Police such of
those magistrates who seemed the most likely to become ruffians. Amongst
these were divided the Representatives. Each had his man. Sieur Courtille
had Charras, Sieur Desgranges had Nadaud, Sieur Hubaut the elder had M.
Thiers, and Sieur Hubaut the younger General Bedeau, General Changarnier
was allotted to Lerat, and General Cavaignac to Colin. Sieur Dourlens
took Representative Valentin, Sieur Benoist Representative Miot, Sieur
Allard Representative Cholat, Sieur Barlet took Roger (Du Nord), General
Lamoricière fell to Commissary Blanchet, Commissary Gronfier had
Representative Greppo, and Commissary Boudrot Representative Lagrange.
The Questors were similarly allotted, Monsieur Baze to the Sieur
Primorin, and General Leflô to Sieur Bertoglio.

Warrants with the name of the Representatives had been drawn up in the
Prefect's private Cabinet. Blanks had been only left for the names of the
Commissaries. These were filled in at the moment of leaving.

In addition to the armed force which was appointed to assist them, it had
been decided that each Commissary should be accompanied by two escorts,
one composed of _sergents de ville_, the other of police agents in plain
clothes. As Prefect Maupas had told M. Bonaparte, the Captain of the
Republican Guard, Baudinet, was associated with Commissary Lerat in the
arrest of General Changarnier.

Towards half-past five the _fiacres_ which were in waiting were called
up, and all started, each with his instructions.

During this time, in another corner of Paris--the old Rue du Temple--in
that ancient Soubise Mansion which had been transformed into a Royal
Printing Office, and is to-day a National Printing Office, another
section of the Crime was being organized.

Towards one in the morning a passer-by who had reached the old Rue du
Temple by the Rue de Vieilles-Haudriettes, noticed at the junction of
these two streets several long and high windows brilliantly lighted up,
These were the windows of the work-rooms of the National Printing Office.
He turned to the right and entered the old Rue du Temple, and a moment
afterwards paused before the crescent-shaped entrance of the front of the
printing-office. The principal door was shut, two sentinels guarded the
side door. Through this little door, which was ajar, he glanced into the
courtyard of the printing-office, and saw it filled with soldiers. The
soldiers were silent, no sound could be heard, but the glistening of
their bayonets could be seen. The passer-by surprised, drew nearer. One
of the sentinels thrust him rudely back, crying out, "Be off."

Like the _sergents de ville_ at the Prefecture of Police, the workmen had
been retained at the National Printing Office under plea of night-work.
At the same time that M. Hippolyte Prévost returned to the Legislative
Palace, the manager of the National Printing Office re-entered his
office, also returning from the Opéra Comique, where he had been to see
the new piece, which was by his brother, M. de St. Georges. Immediately
on his return the manager, to whom had come an order from the Elysée
during the day, took up a pair of pocket pistols, and went down into the
vestibule, which communicates by means of a few steps with the courtyard.
Shortly afterwards the door leading to the street opened, a _fiacre_
entered, a man who carried a large portfolio alighted. The manager went
up to the man, and said to him, "Is that you, Monsieur de Béville?"

"Yes," answered the man.

The _fiacre_ was put up, the horses placed in a stable, and the coachman
shut up in a parlor, where they gave him drink, and placed a purse in his
hand. Bottles of wine and louis d'or form the groundwork of this hind of
politics. The coachman drank and then went to sleep. The door of the
parlor was bolted.

The large door of the courtyard of the printing-office was hardly shut
than it reopened, gave passage to armed men, who entered in silence, and
then reclosed. The arrivals were a company of the Gendarmerie Mobile, the
fourth of the first battalion, commanded by a captain named La Roche
d'Oisy. As may be remarked by the result, for all delicate expeditions
the men of the _coup d'état_ took care to employ the Gendarmerie Mobile
and the Republican Guard, that it is to say the two corps almost entirely
composed of former Municipal Guards, bearing at heart a revengeful
remembrance of the events of February.

Captain La Roche d'Oisy brought a letter from the Minister of War, which
placed himself and his soldiers at the disposition of the manager of the
National Printing Office. The muskets were loaded without a word being
spoken. Sentinels were placed in the workrooms, in the corridors, at the
doors, at the windows, in fact, everywhere, two being stationed at the
door leading into the street. The captain asked what instructions he
should give to the sentries. "Nothing more simple," said the man who had
come in the _fiacre_. "Whoever attempts to leave or to open a window,
shoot him."

This man, who, in fact, was De Béville, orderly officer to M. Bonaparte,
withdrew with the manager into the large cabinet on the first story, a
solitary room which looked out on the garden. There he communicated to
the manager what he had brought with him, the decree of the dissolution
of the Assembly, the appeal to the Army, the appeal to the People, the
decree convoking the electors, and in addition, the proclamation of the
Prefect Maupas and his letter to the Commissaries of Police. The four
first documents were entirely in the handwriting of the President, and
here and there some erasures might be noticed.

The compositors were in waiting. Each man was placed between two
gendarmes, and was forbidden to utter a single word, and then the
documents which had to be printed were distributed throughout the room,
being cut up in very small pieces, so that an entire sentence could not
be read by one workman. The manager announced that he would give them an
hour to compose the whole. The different fragments were finally brought
to Colonel Béville, who put them together and corrected the proof sheets.
The machining was conducted with the same precautions, each press being
between two soldiers. Notwithstanding all possible diligence the work
lasted two hours. The gendarmes watched over the workmen. Béville watched
over St. Georges.

When the work was finished a suspicious incident occurred, which greatly
resembled a treason within a treason. To a traitor a greater traitor.
This species of crime is subject to such accidents. Béville and St.
Georges, the two trusty confidants in whose hands lay the secret of the
_coup d'état_, that is to say the head of the President;--that secret,
which ought at no price to be allowed to transpire before the appointed
hour, under risk of causing everything to miscarry, took it into their
heads to confide it at once to two hundred men, in order "to test the
effect," as the ex-Colonel Béville said later on, rather naïvely. They
read the mysterious document which had just been printed to the Gendarmes
Mobiles, who were drawn up in the courtyard. These ex-municipal guards
applauded. If they had hooted, it might be asked what the two
experimentalists in the _coup d'état_ would have done. Perhaps M.
Bonaparte would have waked up from his dream at Vincennes.

The coachman was then liberated, the _fiacre_ was horsed, and at four
o'clock in the morning the orderly officer and the manager of the
National Printing Office, henceforward two criminals, arrived at the
Prefecture of Police with the parcels of the decrees. Then began for
them the brand of shame. Prefect Maupas took them by the hand.

Bands of bill-stickers, bribed for the occasion, started in every
direction, carrying with them the decrees and proclamations.

This was precisely the hour at which the Palace of the National Assembly
was invested. In the Rue de l'Université there is a door of the Palace
which is the old entrance to the Palais Bourbon, and which opened into
the avenue which leads to the house of the President of the Assembly.
This door, termed the Presidency door, was according to custom guarded by
a sentry. For some time past the Adjutant-Major, who had been twice sent
for during the night by Colonel Espinasse, had remained motionless and
silent, close by the sentinel. Five minutes after, having left the huts
of the Invalides, the 42d Regiment of the line, followed at some distance
by the 6th Regiment, which had marched by the Rue de Bourgogne, emerged
from the Rue de l'Université. "The regiment," says an eye-witness,
"marched as one steps in a sickroom." It arrived with a stealthy step
before the Presidency door. This ambuscade came to surprise the law.

The sentry, seeing these soldiers arrive, halted, but at the moment when
he was going to challenge them with a _qui-vive_, the Adjutant-Major
seized his arm, and, in his capacity as the officer empowered to
countermand all instructions, ordered him to give free passage to the
42d, and at the same time commanded the amazed porter to open the door.
The door turned upon its hinges, the soldiers spread themselves through
the avenue. Persigny entered and said, "It is done."

The National Assembly was invaded.

At the noise of the footsteps the Commandant Mennier ran up.
"Commandant," Colonel Espinasse cried out to him, "I come to relieve your
battalion." The Commandant turned pale for a moment, and his eyes
remained fixed on the ground. Then suddenly he put his hands to his
shoulders, and tore off his epaulets, he drew his sword, broke it across
his knee, threw the two fragments on the pavement, and, trembling with
rage, exclaimed with a solemn voice, "Colonel, you disgrace the number of
your regiment."

"All right, all right," said Espinasse.

The Presidency door was left open, but all the other entrances remained
closed. All the guards were relieved, all the sentinels changed, and the
battalion of the night guard was sent back to the camp of the Invalides,
the soldiers piled their arms in the avenue, and in the Cour d'Honneur.
The 42d, in profound silence, occupied the doors outside and inside, the
courtyard, the reception-rooms, the galleries, the corridors, the
passages, while every one slept in the Palace.

Shortly afterwards arrived two of those little chariots which are called
"forty sons," and two _fiacres_, escorted by two detachments of the
Republican Guard and of the Chasseurs de Vincennes, and by several squads
of police. The Commissaries Bertoglio and Primorin alighted from the two
chariots.

As these carriages drove up a personage, bald, but still young, was seen
to appear at the grated door of the Place de Bourgogne. This personage
had all the air of a man about town, who had just come from the opera,
and, in fact, he had come from thence, after having passed through a den.
He came from the Elysée. It was De Morny. For an instant he watched the
soldiers piling their arms, and then went on to the Presidency door.
There he exchanged a few words with M. de Persigny. A quarter of an hour
afterwards, accompanied by 250 Chasseurs de Vincennes, he took possession
of the ministry of the Interior, startled M. de Thorigny in his bed, and
handed him brusquely a letter of thanks from Monsieur Bonaparte. Some
days previously honest M. De Thorigny, whose ingenuous remarks we have
already cited, said to a group of men near whom M. de Morny was passing,
"How these men of the Mountain calumniate the President! The man who
would break his oath, who would achieve a _coup d'état_ must necessarily
be a worthless wretch." Awakened rudely in the middle of the night, and
relieved of his post as Minister like the sentinels of the Assembly, the
worthy man, astounded, and rubbing his eyes, muttered, "Eh! then the
President _is_ a ----."

"Yes," said Morny, with a burst of laughter.

He who writes these lines knew Morny. Morny and Walewsky held in the
quasi-reigning family the positions, one of Royal bastard, the other of
Imperial bastard. Who was Morny? We will say, "A noted wit, an intriguer,
but in no way austere, a friend of Romieu, and a supporter of Guizot
possessing the manners of the world, and the habits of the roulette
table, self-satisfied, clever, combining a certain liberality of ideas
with a readiness to accept useful crimes, finding means to wear a
gracious smile with bad teeth, leading a life of pleasure, dissipated but
reserved, ugly, good-tempered, fierce, well-dressed, intrepid, willingly
leaving a brother prisoner under bolts and bars, and ready to risk his
head for a brother Emperor, having the same mother as Louis Bonaparte,
and like Louis Bonaparte, having some father or other, being able to call
himself Beauharnais, being able to call himself Flahaut, and yet calling
himself Morny, pursuing literature as far as light comedy, and politics,
as far as tragedy, a deadly free liver, possessing all the frivolity
consistent with assassination, capable of being sketched by Marivaux and
treated of by Tacitus, without conscience, irreproachably elegant,
infamous, and amiable, at need a perfect duke. Such was this malefactor."

It was not yet six o'clock in the morning. Troops began to mass
themselves on the Place de la Concorde, where Leroy-Saint-Arnaud on
horseback held a review.

The Commissaries of Police, Bertoglio and Primorin ranged two companies
in order under the vault of the great staircase of the Questure, but did
not ascend that way. They were accompanied by agents of police, who knew
the most secret recesses of the Palais Bourbon, and who conducted them
through various passages.

General Leflô was lodged in the Pavilion inhabited in the time of the Duc
de Bourbon by Monsieur Feuchères. That night General Leflô had staying
with him his sister and her husband, who were visiting Paris, and who
slept in a room, the door of which led into one of the corridors of the
Palace. Commissary Bertoglio knocked at the door, opened it, and together
with his agents abruptly burst into the room, where a woman was in bed.
The general's brother-in-out sprang out of bed, and cried out to the
Questor, who slept in an adjoining room, "Adolphe, the doors are being
forced, the Palace is full of soldiers. Get up!"

The General opened his eyes, he saw Commissary Bertoglio standing beside
his bed.

He sprang up.

"General," said the Commissary, "I have come to fulfil a duty."

"I understand," said General Leflô, "you are a traitor."

The Commissary stammering out the words, "Plot against the safety of the
State," displayed a warrant. The General, without pronouncing a word,
struck this infamous paper with the back of his hand.

Then dressing himself, he put on his full uniform of Constantine and of
Médéah, thinking in his imaginative, soldier-like loyalty that there were
still generals of Africa for the soldiers whom he would find on his way.
All the generals now remaining were brigands. His wife embraced him; his
son, a child of seven years, in his nightshirt, and in tears, said to the
Commissary of Police, "Mercy, Monsieur Bonaparte."

The General, while clasping his wife in his arms, whispered in her ear,
"There is artillery in the courtyard, try and fire a cannon."

The Commissary and his men led him away. He regarded these policemen with
contempt, and did not speak to them, but when he recognized Colonel
Espinasse, his military and Breton heart swelled with indignation.

"Colonel Espinasse," said he, "you are a villain, and I hope to live long
enough to tear the buttons from your uniform."

Colonel Espinasse hung his head, and stammered, "I do not know you."

A major waved his sword, and cried, "We have had enough of lawyer
generals." Some soldiers crossed their bayonets before the unarmed
prisoner, three _sergents de ville_ pushed him into a _fiacre_, and a
sub-lieutenant approaching the carriage, and looking in the face of the
man who, if he were a citizen, was his Representative, and if he were a
soldier was his general, flung this abominable word at him, "Canaille!"

Meanwhile Commissary Primorin had gone by a more roundabout way in order
the more surely to surprise the other Questor, M. Baze.

Out of M. Baze's apartment a door led to the lobby communicating with the
chamber of the Assembly. Sieur Primorin knocked at the door. "Who is
there?" asked a servant, who was dressing. "The Commissary of Police,"
replied Primorin. The servant, thinking that he was the Commissary of
Police of the Assembly, opened the door.

At this moment M. Baze, who had heard the noise, and had just awakened,
put on a dressing-gown, and cried, "Do not open the door."

He had scarcely spoken these words when a man in plain clothes and three
_sergents de ville_ in uniform rushed into his chamber. The man, opening
his coat, displayed his scarf of office, asking M. Baze, "Do you
recognize this?"

"You are a worthless wretch," answered the Questor.

The police agents laid their hands on M. Baze. "You will not take me
away," he said. "You, a Commissary of Police, you, who are a magistrate,
and know what you are doing, you outrage the National Assembly, you
violate the law, you are a criminal!" A hand-to-hand struggle
ensued--four against one. Madame Baze and her two little girls giving
vent to screams, the servant being thrust back with blows by the
_sergents de ville_. "You are ruffians," cried out Monsieur Baze. They
carried him away by main force in their arms, still struggling, naked,
his dressing-gown being torn to shreds, his body being covered with
blows, his wrist torn and bleeding.

The stairs, the landing, the courtyard, were full of soldiers with fixed
bayonets and grounded arms. The Questor spoke to them. "Your
Representatives are being arrested, you have not received your arms to
break the laws!" A sergeant was wearing a brand-new cross. "Have you been
given the cross for this?" The sergeant answered, "We only know one
master." "I note your number," continued M. Baze. "You are a dishonored
regiment." The soldiers listened with a stolid air, and seemed still
asleep. Commissary Primorin said to them, "Do not answer, this has
nothing to do with you." They led the Questor across the courtyard to the
guard-house at the Porte Noire.

This was the name which was given to a little door contrived under the
vault opposite the treasury of the Assembly, and which opened upon the
Rue de Bourgogne, facing the Rue de Lille.

Several sentries were placed at the door of the guard-house, and at the
top of the flight of steps which led thither, M. Baze being left there in
charge of three _sergents de ville_. Several soldiers, without their
weapons, and in their shirt-sleeves, came in and out. The Questor
appealed to them in the name of military honor. "Do not answer," said the
_sergent de ville_ to the soldiers.

M. Baze's two little girls had followed him with terrified eyes, and when
they lost sight of him the youngest burst into tears. "Sister," said the
elder, who was seven years old, "let us say our prayers," and the two
children, clasping their hands, knelt down.

Commissary Primorin, with his swarm of agents, burst into the Questor's
study, and laid hands on everything. The first papers which he perceived
on the middle of the table, and which he seized, were the famous decrees
which had been prepared in the event of the Assembly having voted the
proposal of the Questors. All the drawers were opened and searched. This
overhauling of M. Baze's papers, which the Commissary of Police termed a
domiciliary visit, lasted more than an hour.

M. Baze's clothes had been taken to him, and he had dressed. When the
"domiciliary visit" was over, he was taken out of the guard-house. There
was a _fiacre_ in the courtyard, into which he entered, together with the
three _sergents de ville_. The vehicle, in order to reach the Presidency
door, passed by the Cour d'Honneur and then by the Courde Canonis. Day
was breaking. M. Baze looked into the courtyard to see if the cannon were
still there. He saw the ammunition wagons ranged in order with their
shafts raised, but the places of the six cannon and the two mortars were
vacant.

In the avenue of the Presidency the _fiacre_ stopped for a moment. Two
lines of soldiers, standing at ease, lined the footpaths of the avenue.
At the foot of a tree were grouped three men: Colonel Espinasse, whom M.
Baze knew and recognized, a species of Lieutenant-Colonel, who wore a
black and orange ribbon round his neck, and a Major of Lancers, all three
sword in hand, consulting together. The windows of the _fiacre_ were
closed; M. Baze wished to lower them to appeal to these men; the
_sergents de ville_ seized his arms. The Commissary Primorin then came
up, and was about to re-enter the little chariot for two persons which
had brought him.

"Monsieur Baze," said he, with that villainous kind of courtesy which the
agents of the _coup d'état_ willingly blended with their crime, "you must
be uncomfortable with those three men in the _fiacre_. You are cramped;
come in with me."

"Let me alone," said the prisoner. "With these three men I am cramped;
with you I should be contaminated."

An escort of infantry was ranged on both sides of the _fiacre_. Colonel
Espinasse called to the coachman, "Drive slowly by the Quai d'Orsay until
you meet a cavalry escort. When the cavalry shall have assumed the
charge, the infantry can come back." They set out.

As the _fiacre_ turned into the Quai d'Orsay a picket of the 7th Lancers
arrived at full speed. It was the escort: the troopers surrounded the
_fiacre_, and the whole galloped off.

No incident occurred during the journey. Here and there, at the noise of
the horses' hoofs, windows were opened and heads put forth; and the
prisoner, who had at length succeeded in lowering a window heard startled
voices saying, "What is the matter?"

The _fiacre_ stopped. "Where are we?" asked M. Baze.

"At Mazas," said a _sergent de ville_.

The Questor was taken to the office of the prison. Just as he entered he
saw Baune and Nadaud being brought out. There was a table in the centre,
at which Commissary Primorin, who had followed the _fiacre_ in his
chariot, had just seated himself. While the Commissary was writing, M.
Baze noticed on the table a paper which was evidently a jail register, on
which were these names, written in the following order: Lamoricière,
Charras, Cavaignac, Changarnier, Leflô, Thiers, Bedeau, Roger (du Nord),
Chambolle. This was probably the order in which the Representatives had
arrived at the prison.

When Sieur Primorin had finished writing, M. Baze said, "Now, you will be
good enough to receive my protest, and add it to your official report."
"It is not an official report," objected the Commissary, "it is simply an
order for committal." "I intend to write my protest at once," replied M.
Baze. "You will have plenty of time in your cell," remarked a man who
stood by the table. M. Baze turned round. "Who are you?" "I am the
governor of the prison," said the man. "In that case," replied M. Baze,
"I pity you, for you are aware of the crime you are committing." The man
turned pale, and stammered a few unintelligible words.

The Commissary rose from his seat; M. Baze briskly took possession of his
chair, seated himself at the table, and said to Sieur Primorin, "You are
a public officer; I request you to add my protest to your official
report." "Very well," said the Commissary, "let it be so." Baze wrote the
protest as follows:--

  "I, the undersigned, Jean-Didier Baze, Representative of the People,
  and Questor of the National Assembly, carried off by violence from my
  residence in the Palace of the National Assembly, and conducted to this
  prison by an armed force which it was impossible for me to resist,
  protest in the name of the National Assembly and in my own name against
  the outrage on national representation committed upon my colleagues and
  upon myself.

  "Given at Mazas on the 2d December 1851, at eight o'clock in the
  morning.

  "BAZE."

While this was taking place at Mazas, the soldiers were laughing and
drinking in the courtyard of the Assembly. They made their coffee in the
saucepans. They had lighted enormous fires in the courtyard; the flames,
fanned by the wind, at times reached the walls of the Chamber. A
superior official of the Questure, an officer of the National Guard,
Ramond de la Croisette, ventured to say to them, "You will set the
Palace on fire;" whereupon a soldier struck him a blow with his fist.

Four of the pieces taken from the Cour de Canons were ranged in battery
order against the Assembly; two on the Place de Bourgogne were pointed
towards the grating, and two on the Pont de la Concorde were pointed
towards the grand staircase.

As side-note to this instructive tale let us mention a curious fact. The
42d Regiment of the line was the same which had arrested Louis
Bonaparte at Boulogne. In 1840 this regiment lent its aid to the law
against the conspirator. In 1851 it lent its aid to the conspirator
against the law: such is the beauty of passive obedience.


[2] The Questors were officers elected by the Assembly, whose special
duties were to keep and audit the accounts, and who controlled all
matters affecting the social economy of the House.




CHAPTER IV.


OTHER DOINGS OF THE NIGHT

During the same night in all parts of Paris acts of brigandage took
place. Unknown men leading armed troops, and themselves armed with
hatchets, mallets, pincers, crow-bars, life-preservers, swords hidden
under their coats, pistols, of which the butts could be distinguished
under the folds of their cloaks, arrived in silence before a house,
occupied the street, encircled the approaches, picked the lock of the
door, tied up the porter, invaded the stairs, and burst through the doors
upon a sleeping man, and when that man, awakening with a start, asked of
these bandits, "Who are you?" their leader answered, "A Commissary of
Police." So it happened to Lamoricière who was seized by Blanchet, who
threatened him with the gag; to Greppo, who was brutally treated and
thrown down by Gronfier, assisted by six men carrying a dark lantern and
a pole-axe; to Cavaignac, who was secured by Colin, a smooth-tongued
villain, who affected to be shocked on hearing him curse and swear; to M.
Thiers, who was arrested by Hubaut (the elder); who professed that he had
seen him "tremble and weep," thus adding falsehood to crime; to Valentin,
who was assailed in his bed by Dourlens, taken by the feet and shoulders,
and thrust into a padlocked police van; to Miot, destined to the tortures
of African casemates; to Roger (du Nord), who with courageous and witty
irony offered sherry to the bandits. Charras and Changarnier were taken
unawares.

They lived in the Rue St. Honoré, nearly opposite to each other,
Changarnier at No. 3, Charras at No. 14. Ever since the 9th of September
Changarnier had dismissed the fifteen men armed to the teeth by whom he
had hitherto been guarded during the night, and on the 1st December, as
we have said, Charras had unloaded his pistols. These empty pistols were
lying on the table when they came to arrest him. The Commissary of Police
threw himself upon them. "Idiot," said Charras to him, "if they had been
loaded, you would have been a dead man." These pistols, we may note, had
been given to Charras upon the taking of Mascara by General Renaud, who
at the moment of Charras' arrest was on horseback in the street helping
to carry out the _coup d'état_. If these pistols had remained loaded, and
if General Renaud had had the task of arresting Charras, it would have
been curious if Renaud's pistols had killed Renaud. Charras assuredly
would not have hesitated. We have already mentioned the names of these
police rascals. It is useless to repeat them. It was Courtille who
arrested Charras, Lerat who arrested Changarnier, Desgranges who arrested
Nadaud. The men thus seized in their own houses were Representatives of
the people; they were inviolable, so that to the crime of the violation
of their persons was added this high treason, the violation of the
Constitution.

There was no lack of impudence in the perpetration of these outrages. The
police agents made merry. Some of these droll fellows jested. At Mazas
the under-jailors jeered at Thiers, Nadaud reprimanded them severely. The
Sieur Hubaut (the younger) awoke General Bedeau. "General, you are a
prisoner."--"My person is inviolable."--"Unless you are caught red-handed,
in the very act."--"Well," said Bedeau, "I am caught in the act, the
heinous act of being asleep." They took him by the collar and dragged him
to a _fiacre_.

On meeting together at Mazas, Nadaud grasped the hand of Greppo, and
Lagrange grasped the hand of Lamoricière. This made the police gentry
laugh. A colonel, named Thirion, wearing a commander's cross round his
neck, helped to put the Generals and the Representatives into jail. "Look
me in the face," said Charras to him. Thirion moved away.

Thus, without counting other arrests which took place later on, there
were imprisoned during the night of the 2d of December, sixteen
Representatives and seventy-eight citizens. The two agents of the crime
furnished a report of it to Louis Bonaparte. Morny wrote "Boxed up;"
Maupas wrote "Quadded." The one in drawing-room slang, the other in the
slang of the galleys. Subtle gradations of language.




CHAPTER V.


THE DARKNESS OF THE CRIME

Versigny had just left me.

While I dressed hastily there came in a man in whom I had every
confidence. He was a poor cabinet-maker out of work, named Girard, to
whom I had given shelter in a room of my house, a carver of wood, and
not illiterate. He came in from the street; he was trembling.

"Well," I asked, "what do the people say?"

Girard answered me,--

"People are dazed. The blow has been struck in such a manner that it
is not realized. Workmen read the placards, say nothing, and go to
their work. Only one in a hundred speaks. It is to say, 'Good!' This
is how it appears to them. The law of the 31st May is abrogated--'Well
done!' Universal suffrage is re-established--'Also well done!' The
reactionary majority has been driven away--'Admirable!' Thiers is
arrested--'Capital!' Changarnier is seized--'Bravo!' Round each placard
there are _claqueurs_. Ratapoil explains his _coup d'état_ to Jacques
Bonhomme, Jacques Bonhomme takes it all in. Briefly, it is my impression
that the people give their consent."

"Let it be so," said I.

"But," asked Girard of me, "what will you do, Monsieur Victor Hugo?"

I took my scarf of office from a cupboard, and showed it to him.

He understood.

We shook hands.

As he went out Carini entered.

Colonel Carini is an intrepid man. He had commanded the cavalry under
Mieroslawsky in the Sicilian insurrection. He has, in a few moving and
enthusiastic pages, told the story of that noble revolt. Carini is one of
those Italians who love France as we Frenchmen love Italy. Every
warm-hearted man in this century has two fatherlands--the Rome of
yesterday and the Paris of to-day.

"Thank God," said Carini to me, "you are still free," and he added, "The
blow has been struck in a formidable manner. The Assembly is invested. I
have come from thence. The Place de la Révolution, the Quays, the
Tuileries, the boulevards, are crowded with troops. The soldiers have
their knapsacks. The batteries are harnessed. If fighting takes place it
will be desperate work."

I answered him, "There will be fighting."

And I added, laughing, "You have proved that the colonels write like
poets; now it is the turn of the poets to fight like colonels."

I entered my wife's room; she knew nothing, and was quietly reading her
paper in bed.

I had taken about me five hundred francs in gold. I put on my wife's bed
a box containing nine hundred francs, all the money which remained to me,
and I told her what had happened.

She turned pale, and said to me, "What are you going to do?"

"My duty."

She embraced me, and only said two words:--

"Do it."

My breakfast was ready. I ate a cutlet in two mouthfuls. As I finished,
my daughter came in. She was startled by the manner in which I kissed
her, and asked me, "What is the matter?"

"Your mother will explain to you."

And I left them.

The Rue de la Tour d'Auvergne was as quiet and deserted as usual. Four
workmen were, however, chatting near my door; they wished me "Good
morning."

I cried out to them, "You know what is going on?"

"Yes," said they.

"Well. It is treason! Louis Bonaparte is strangling the Republic. The
people are attacked. The people must defend themselves."

"They will defend themselves."

"You promise me that?"

"Yes," they answered.

One of them added, "We swear it."

They kept their word. Barricades were constructed in my street (Rue de la
Tour d'Auvergne), in the Rue des Martyrs, in the Cité Rodier, in the Rue
Coquenard, and at Notre-Dame de Lorette.




CHAPTER VI.


"PLACARDS"

On leaving these brave men I could read at the corner of the Rue de la
Tour d'Auvergne and the Rue des Martyrs, the three infamous placards
which had been posted on the walls of Paris during the night.

Here they are.

  "PROCLAMATION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC.

  "_Appeal to the People_.

  "FRENCHMEN! The present situation can last no longer. Every day which
  passes enhances the dangers of the country. The Assembly, which ought
  to be the firmest support of order, has become a focus of conspiracies.
  The patriotism of three hundred of its members has been unable to check
  its fatal tendencies. Instead of making laws in the public interest it
  forges arms for civil war; it attacks the power which I hold directly
  from the People, it encourages all bad passions, it compromises the
  tranquillity of France; I have dissolved it, and I constitute the whole
  People a judge between it and me.

  "The Constitution, as you know, was constructed with the object of
  weakening beforehand the power which you were about to confide to me.
  Six millions of votes formed an emphatic protest against it, and yet
  I have faithfully respected it. Provocations, calumnies, outrages,
  have found me unmoved. Now, however, that the fundamental compact is
  no longer respected by those very men who incessantly invoke it, and
  that the men who have ruined two monarchies wish to tie my hands in
  order to overthrow the Republic, my duty is to frustrate their
  treacherous schemes, to maintain the Republic, and to save the Country
  by appealing to the solemn judgment of the only Sovereign whom I
  recognize in France--the People.

  "I therefore make a loyal appeal to the whole nation, and I say to
  you: If you wish to continue this condition of uneasiness which
  degrades us and compromises our future, choose another in my place,
  for I will no longer retain a power which is impotent to do good,
  which renders me responsible for actions which I cannot prevent, and
  which binds me to the helm when I see the vessel driving towards the
  abyss.

  "If on the other hand you still place confidence in me, give me the
  means of accomplishing the great mission which I hold from you.

  "This mission consists in closing the era of revolutions, by satisfying
  the legitimate needs of the People, and by protecting them from
  subversive passions. It consists, above all, in creating institutions
  which survive men, and which shall in fact form the foundations on
  which something durable may be established.

  "Persuaded that the instability of power, that the preponderance of a
  single Assembly, are the permanent causes of trouble and discord, I
  submit to your suffrage the following fundamental bases of a
  Constitution which will be developed by the Assemblies later on:--

  "1. A responsible Chief appointed for ten years.

  "2. Ministers dependent upon the Executive Power alone.

  "3. A Council of State composed of the most distinguished men, who shall
  prepare laws and shall support them in debate before the Legislative
  Body.

  "4. A Legislative Body which shall discuss and vote the laws, and which
  shall be elected by universal suffrage, without _scrutin de liste_,
  which falsifies the elections.

  "5. A Second Assembly composed of the most illustrious men of the
  country, a power of equipoise the guardian of the fundamental compact,
  and of the public liberties.

  "This system, created by the first Consul at the beginning of the
  century, has already given repose and prosperity to France; it would
  still insure them to her.

  "Such is my firm conviction. If you share it, declare it by your votes.
  If, on the contrary, you prefer a government without strength,
  Monarchical or Republican, borrowed I know not from what past, or from
  what chimerical future, answer in the negative.

  "Thus for the first time since 1804, you will vote with a full knowledge
  of the circumstances, knowing exactly for whom and for what.

  "If I do not obtain the majority of your suffrages I shall call together
  a New Assembly and shall place in its hands the commission which I have
  received from you.

  "But if you believe that the cause of which my name is the symbol,--that
  is to say, France regenerated by the Revolution of '89, and organized by
  the Emperor, is to be still your own, proclaim it by sanctioning the
  powers which I ask from you.

  "Then France and Europe will be preserved from anarchy, obstacles will
  be removed, rivalries will have disappeared, for all will respect, in
  the decision of the People, the decree of Providence.

  "Given at the Palace of the Elysée, 2d December, 1851.

  "LOUIS NAPOLEON BONAPARTE."



  PROCLAMATION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC TO THE ARMY.

  "Soldiers! Be proud of your mission, you will save the country, for I
  count upon you not to violate the laws, but to enforce respect for the
  first law of the country, the national Sovereignty, of which I am the
  Legitimate Representative.

  "For a long time past, like myself, you have suffered from obstacles
  which have opposed themselves both to the good that I wished to do and
  to the demonstrations of your sympathies in my favor. These obstacles
  have been broken down.

  "The Assembly has tried to attack the authority which hold from the
  whole Nation. It has ceased to exist.

  "I make a loyal appeal to the People and to the Army, and I say to them:
  Either give me the means of insuring your prosperity, or choose another
  in my place.

  "In 1830, as in 1848, you were treated as vanquished men. After having
  branded your heroic disinterestedness, they disdained to consult your
  sympathies and your wishes, and yet you are the flower of the Nation.
  To-day, at this solemn moment, I am resolved that the voice of the Army
  shall be heard.

  "Vote, therefore, freely as citizens; but, as soldiers do not forget
  that passive obedience to the orders of the Chief of the State is the
  rigorous duty of the Army, from the general to the private soldier.

  "It is for me, responsible for my actions both to the People and to
  posterity, to take those measures which may seem to me indispensable for
  the public welfare.

  "As for you, remain immovable within the rules of discipline and of
  honor. By your imposing attitude help the country to manifest its will
  with calmness and reflection.

  "Be ready to repress every attack upon the free exercise of the
  sovereignty of the People.

  "Soldiers, I do not speak to you of the memories which my name recalls.
  They are engraven in your hearts. We are united by indissoluble ties.
  Your history is mine. There is between us, in the past, a community of
  glory and of misfortune.

  "There will be in the future community of sentiment and of resolutions
  for the repose and the greatness of France.

  "Given at the Palace of the Elysée, December 2d, 1851.

  "(Signed) L.N. BONAPARTE."



  "IN THE NAME OF THE FRENCH PEOPLE.

  "The President of the Republic decrees:--

  "ARTICLE I. The National Assembly is dissolved.

  "ARTICLE II. Universal suffrage is re-established. The law of May 31
  is abrogated.

  "ARTICLE III. The French People are convoked in their electoral
  districts from the 14th December to the 21st December following.

  "ARTICLE IV. The State of Siege is decreed in the district of the
  first Military Division.

  "ARTICLE V. The Council of State is dissolved.

  "ARTICLE VI. The Minister of the Interior is charged with the execution
  of this decree.

  "Given at the Palace of the Elysée, 2d December, 1851.

  "LOUIS NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.

  "DE MORNY, Minister of the Interior."




CHAPTER VII.


NO. 70, RUE BLANCHE

The Cité Gaillard is somewhat difficult to find. It is a deserted alley
in that new quarter which separates the Rue des Martyrs from the Rue
Blanche. I found it, however. As I reached No. 4, Yvan came out of the
gateway and said, "I am here to warn you. The police have an eye upon
this house, Michel is waiting for you at No. 70, Rue Blanche, a few
steps from here."

I knew No. 70, Rue Blanche. Manin, the celebrated President of the
Venetian Republic, lived there. It was not in his rooms, however, that
the meeting was to take place.

The porter of No. 70 told me to go up to the first floor. The door was
opened, and a handsome, gray-haired woman of some forty summers, the
Baroness Coppens, whom I recognized as having seen in society and at my
own house, ushered me into a drawing-room.

Michel de Bourges and Alexander Rey were there, the latter an
ex-Constituent, an eloquent writer, a brave man. At that time Alexander
Rey edited the _National_.

We shook hands.

Michel said to me,--

"Hugo, what will you do?"

I answered him,--

"Everything."

"That also is my opinion," said he.

Numerous representatives arrived, and amongst others Pierre Lefranc,
Labrousse, Théodore Bac, Noël Parfait, Arnauld (de l'Ariége), Demosthenes
Ollivier, an ex-Constituent, and Charamaule. There was deep and
unutterable indignation, but no useless words were spoken.

All were imbued with that manly anger whence issue great resolutions.

They talked. They set forth the situation. Each brought forward the news
which he had learnt.

Théodore Bac came from Léon Faucher, who lived in the Rue Blanche. It
was he who had awakened Léon Faucher, and had announced the news to him.
The first words of Léon Faucher were, "It is an infamous deed."

From the first moment Charamaule displayed a courage which, during
the four days of the struggle, never flagged for a single instant.
Charamaule is a very tall man, possessed of vigorous features and
convincing eloquence; he voted with the Left, but sat with the Right.
In the Assembly he was the neighbor of Montalembert and of Riancey.
He sometimes had warm disputes with them, which we watched from afar
off, and which amused us.

Charamaule had come to the meeting at No. 70 dressed in a sort of blue
cloth military cloak, and armed, as we found out later on.

The situation was grave; sixteen Representatives arrested, all the
generals of the Assembly, and he who was more than a general, Charras.
All the journals suppressed, all the printing offices occupied by
soldiers. On the side of Bonaparte an army of 80,000 men which could be
doubled in a few hours; on our side nothing. The people deceived, and
moreover disarmed. The telegraph at their command. All the walls covered
with their placards, and at our disposal not a single printing case, not
one sheet of paper. No means of raising the protest, no means of
beginning the combat. The _coup d'état_ was clad with mail, the Republic
was naked; the _coup d'état_ had a speaking trumpet, the Republic wore a
gag.

What was to be done?

The raid against the Republic, against the Assembly, against Right,
against Law, against Progress, against Civilization, was commanded by
African generals. These heroes had just proved that they were cowards.
They had taken their precautions well. Fear alone can engender so much
skill. They had arrested all the men of war of the Assembly, and all the
men of action of the Left, Baune, Charles Lagrange, Miot, Valentin,
Nadaud, Cholat. Add to this that all the possible chiefs of the
barricades were in prison. The organizers of the ambuscade had carefully
left at liberty Jules Favre, Michel de Bourges, and myself, judging us
to be less men of action than of the Tribune; wishing to leave the Left
men capable of resistance, but incapable of victory, hoping to dishonor
us if we did not fight, and to shoot us if we did fight.

Nevertheless, no one hesitated. The deliberation began. Other
representatives arrived every minute, Edgar Quinet, Doutre, Pelletier,
Cassal, Bruckner, Baudin, Chauffour. The room was full, some were
seated, most were standing, in confusion, but without tumult.

I was the first to speak.

I said that the struggle ought to be begun at once. Blow for blow.

That it was my opinion that the hundred and fifty Representatives of the
Left should put on their scarves of office, should march in procession
through the streets and the boulevards as far as the Madeleine, and
crying "Vive la République! Vive la Constitution!" should appear before
the troops, and alone, calm and unarmed, should summon Might to obey
Right. If the soldiers yielded, they should go to the Assembly and make
an end of Louis Bonaparte. If the soldiers fired upon their legislators,
they should disperse throughout Paris, cry "To Arms," and resort to
barricades. Resistance should be begun constitutionally, and if that
failed, should be continued revolutionarily. There was no time to be
lost.

"High treason," said I, "should be seized red-handed, is a great mistake
to suffer such an outrage to be accepted by the hours as they elapse.
Each minute which passes is an accomplice, and endorses the crime.
Beware of that calamity called an 'Accomplished fact.' To arms!"

Many warmly supported this advice, among others Edgar Quinet, Pelletier,
and Doutre.

Michel de Bourges seriously
objected. My instinct was to begin at once, his advice was to wait and
see. According to him there was danger in hastening the catastrophe. The
_coup d'état_ was organized, and the People were not. They had been
taken unawares. We must not indulge in illusion. The masses could not
stir yet. Perfect calm reigned in the faubourgs; Surprise existed, yes;
Anger, no. The people of Paris, although so intelligent, did not
understand.

Michel added, "We are not in 1830. Charles X., in turning out the 221,
exposed himself to this blow, the re-election of the 221. We are not in
the same situation. The 221 were popular. The present Assembly is not: a
Chamber which has been insultingly dissolved is always sure to conquer,
if the People support it. Thus the People rose in 1830. To-day they
wait. They are dupes until they shall be victims." Michel de Bourges
concluded, "The People must be given time to understand, to grow angry,
to rise. As for us, Representative, we should be rash to precipitate the
situation. If we were to march immediately straight upon the troops, we
should only be shot to no purpose, and the glorious insurrection for
Right would thus be beforehand deprived of its natural leaders--the
Representatives of the People. We should decapitate the popular army.
Temporary delay, on the contrary, would be beneficial. Too much zeal
must be guarded against, self-restraint is necessary, to give way would
be to lose the battle before having begun it. Thus, for example, we must
not attend the meeting announced by the Right for noon, all those who
went there would be arrested. We must remain free, we must remain in
readiness, we must remain calm, and must act waiting the advent of the
People. Four days of this agitation without fighting would weary the
army." Michel, however, advised a beginning, but simply by placarding
Article 68 of the Constitution. But where should a printer be found?

Michel de Bourges spoke with an experience of revolutionary procedure
which was wanting in me. For many years past he had acquired a certain
practical knowledge of the masses. His council was wise. It must be
added that all the information which came to us seconded him, and
appeared conclusive against me. Paris was dejected.

The army of the _coup d'état_ invaded her peaceably. Even the placards
were not torn down. Nearly all the Representatives present, even the
most daring, agreed with Michel's counsel, to wait and see what would
happen. "At night," said they, "the agitation will begin," and they
concluded, like Michel de Bourges, that the people must be given time
to understand. There would be a risk of being alone in too hasty a
beginning. We should not carry the people with us in the first moment.
Let us leave the indignation to increase little by little in their
hearts. If it were begun prematurely our manifestation would miscarry.
These were the sentiments of all. For myself, while listening to them, I
felt shaken. Perhaps they were right. It would be a mistake to give the
signal for the combat in vain. What good is the lightning which is not
followed by the thunderbolt?

To raise a voice, to give vent to a cry, to find a printer, there was
the first question. But was there still a free Press?

The brave old ex-chief of the 6th Legion, Colonel Forestier, came in. He
took Michel de Bourges and myself aside.

"Listen," said he to us. "I come to you. I have been dismissed. I no
longer command my legion, but appoint me in the name of the Left,
Colonel of the 6th. Sign me an order and I will go at once and call them
to arms. In an hour the regiment will be on foot."

"Colonel," answered I, "I will do more than sign an order, I will
accompany you."

And I turned towards Charamaule, who had a carriage in waiting.

"Come with us," said I.

Forestier was sure of two majors of the 6th. We decided to drive to them
at once, while Michel and the other Representatives should await us at
Bonvalet's, in the Boulevard du Temple, near the Café Turc. There they
could consult together.

We started.

We traversed Paris, where people were already beginning to swarm in a
threatening manner. The boulevards were thronged with an uneasy crowd.
People walked to and fro, passers-by accosted each other without any
previous acquaintance, a noteworthy sign of public anxiety; and groups
talked in loud voices at the corners of the streets. The shops were
being shut.

"Come, this looks better," cried Charamaule.

He had been wandering about the town since the morning, and he had
noticed with sadness the apathy of the masses.

We found the two majors at home upon whom Colonel Forestier counted.
They were two rich linendrapers, who received us with some
embarrassment. The shopmen had gathered together at the windows, and
watched us pass by. It was mere curiosity.

In the meanwhile one of the two majors countermanded a journey which he
was going to undertake on that day, and promised us his co-operation.

"But," added he, "do not deceive yourselves, one can foresee that we
shall be cut to pieces. Few men will march out."

Colonel Forestier said to us, "Watrin, the present colonel of the 6th,
does not care for fighting; perhaps he will resign me the command
amicably. I will go and find him alone, so as to startle him the less,
and will join you at Bonvalet's."

Near the Porte St. Martin we left our carriage, and Charamaule and
myself proceeded along the boulevard on foot, in order to observe the
groups more closely, and more easily to judge the aspect of the crowd.

The recent levelling of the road had converted the boulevard of the
Porte St. Martin into a deep cutting, commanded by two embankments. On
the summits of these embankments were the footways, furnished with
railings. The carriages drove along the cutting, the foot passengers
walked along the footways.

Just as we reached the boulevard, a long column of infantry filed into
this ravine with drummers at their head. The thick waves of bayonets
filled the square of St. Martin, and lost themselves in the depths of
the Boulevard Bonne Nouvelle.

An enormous and compact crowd covered the two pavements of the Boulevard
St. Martin. Large numbers of workmen, in their blouses, were there,
leaning upon the railings.

At the moment when the head of the column entered the defile before the
Theatre of the Porte St. Martin a tremendous shout of "Vive la
République!" came forth from every mouth as though shouted by one man.
The soldiers continued to advance in silence, but it might have been
said that their pace slackened, and many of them regarded the crowd with
an air of indecision. What did this cry of "Vive la République!" mean?
Was it a token of applause? Was it a shout of defiance?

It seemed to me at that moment that the Republic raised its brow, and
that the _coup d'état_ hung its head.

Meanwhile Charamaule said to me, "You are recognized."

In fact, near the Château d'Eau the crowd surrounded me. Some young men
cried out, "Vive Victor Hugo!" One of them asked me, "Citizen Victor
Hugo, what ought we to do?"

I answered, "Tear down the seditious placards of the _coup d'état_, and
cry 'Vive la Constitution!'"

"And suppose they fire on us?" said a young workman.

"You will hasten to arms."

"Bravo!" shouted the crowd.

I added, "Louis Bonaparte is a rebel, he has steeped himself to-day in
every crime. We, Representatives of the People, declare him an outlaw,
but there is no need for our declaration, since he is an outlaw by the
mere fact of his treason. Citizens, you have two hands; take in one your
Right, and in the other your gun and fall upon Bonaparte."

"Bravo! Bravo!" again shouted the people.

A tradesman who was shutting up his shop said to me, "Don't speak so
loud, if they heard you talking like that, they would shoot you."

"Well, then," I replied, "you would parade my body, and my death would
be a boon if the justice of God could result from it."

All shouted "Long live Victor Hugo!"

"Shout 'Long live the Constitution,'" said I.

A great cry of "Vive la Constitution! Vive la République;" came forth
from every breast.

Enthusiasm, indignation, anger flashed in the faces of all. I thought
then, and I still think, that this, perhaps, was the supreme moment. I
was tempted to carry off all that crowd, and to begin the battle.

Charamaule restrained me. He whispered to me,--

"You will bring about a useless fusillade. Every one is unarmed. The
infantry is only two paces from us, and see, here comes the artillery."

I looked round; in truth several pieces of cannon emerged at a quick
trot from the Rue de Bondy, behind the Château d'Eau.

The advice to abstain, given by Charamaule, made a deep impression on
me. Coming from such a man, and one so dauntless, it was certainly not
to be distrusted. Besides, I felt myself bound by the deliberation which
had just taken place at the meeting in the Rue Blanche.

I shrank before the responsibility which I should have incurred. To have
taken advantage of such a moment might have been victory, it might also
have been a massacre. Was I right? Was I wrong?

The crowd thickened around us, and it became difficult to go forward. We
were anxious, however, to reach the _rendezvous_ at Bonvalet's.

Suddenly some one touched me on the arm. It was Léopold Duras, of the
_National_.

"Go no further," he whispered, "the Restaurant Bonvalet is surrounded.
Michel de Bourges has attempted to harangue the People, but the soldiers
came up. He barely succeeded in making his escape. Numerous
Representatives who came to the meeting have been arrested. Retrace your
steps. We are returning to the old _rendezvous_ in the Rue Blanche. I
have been looking for you to tell you this."

A cab was passing; Charamaule hailed the driver. We jumped in, followed
by the crowd, shouting, "Vive la République! Vive Victor Hugo!"

It appears that just at that moment a squadron of _sergents de ville_
arrived on the Boulevard to arrest me. The coachman drove off at full
speed. A quarter of an hour afterwards we reached the Rue Blanche.




CHAPTER VIII.


"VIOLATION OF THE CHAMBER"

At seven o'clock in the morning the Pont de la Concorde was still free.
The large grated gate of the Palace of the Assembly was closed; through
the bars might be seen the flight of steps, that flight of steps whence
the Republic had been proclaimed on the 4th May, 1848, covered with
soldiers; and their piled arms might be distinguished upon the platform
behind those high columns, which, during the time of the Constituent
Assembly, after the 15th of May and the 23d June, masked small mountain
mortars, loaded and pointed.

A porter with a red collar, wearing the livery of the Assembly, stood by
the little door of the grated gate. From time to time Representatives
arrived. The porter said, "Gentlemen, are you Representatives?" and
opened the door. Sometimes he asked their names.

M. Dupin's quarters could be entered without hindrance. In the great
gallery, in the dining-room, in the _salon d'honneur_ of the Presidency,
liveried attendants silently opened the doors as usual.

Before daylight, immediately after the arrest of the Questors MM. Baze
and Leflô, M. de Panat, the only Questor who remained free, having been
spared or disdained as a Legitimist, awoke M. Dupin and begged him to
summon immediately the Representatives from their own homes. M. Dupin
returned this unprecedented answer, "I do not see any urgency."

Almost at the same time as M. Panat, the Representative Jerôme Bonaparte
had hastened thither. He had summoned M. Dupin to place himself at the
head of the Assembly. M. Dupin had answered, "I cannot, I am guarded."
Jerôme Bonaparte burst out laughing. In fact, no one had deigned to
place a sentinel at M. Dupin's door; they knew that it was guarded by
his meanness.

It was only later on, towards noon, that they took pity on him. They
felt that the contempt was too great, and allotted him two sentinels.

At half-past seven, fifteen or twenty Representatives, among whom were
MM. Eugène Sue, Joret, de Rességuier, and de Talhouet, met together in
M. Dupin's room. They also had vainly argued with M. Dupin. In the
recess of a window a clever member of the Majority, M. Desmousseaux de
Givré, who was a little deaf and exceedingly exasperated, almost
quarrelled with a Representative of the Right like himself whom he
wrongly supposed to be favorable to the _coup d'état_.

M. Dupin, apart from the group of Representatives, alone dressed in
black, his hands behind his back, his head sunk on his breast, walked up
and down before the fire-place, where a large fire was burning. In his
own room, and in his very presence, they were talking loudly about
himself, yet he seemed not to hear.

Two members of the Left came in, Benoît (du Rhône), and Crestin. Crestin
entered the room, went straight up to M. Dupin, and said to him,
"President, you know what is going on? How is it that the Assembly has
not yet been convened?"

M. Dupin halted, and answered, with a shrug which was habitual with him,--

"There is nothing to be done."

And he resumed his walk.

"It is enough," said M. de Rességuier.

"It is too much," said Eugène Sue.

All the Representatives left the room.

In the meantime the Pont de la Concorde became covered with troops.
Among them General Vast-Vimeux, lean, old, and little; his lank white
hair plastered over his temples, in full uniform, with his laced hat on
his head. He was laden with two huge epaulets, and displayed his scarf,
not that of a Representative, but of a general, which scarf, being too
long, trailed on the ground. He crossed the bridge on foot, shouting to
the soldiers inarticulate cries of enthusiasm for the Empire and the
_coup d'état_. Such figures as these were seen in 1814. Only instead of
wearing a large tri-colored, cockade, they wore a large white cockade.
In the main the same phenomenon; old men crying, "Long live the Past!"
Almost at the same moment M. de Larochejaquelein crossed the Place de la
Concorde, surrounded by a hundred men in blouses, who followed him in
silence, and with an air of curiosity. Numerous regiments of cavalry
were drawn up in the grand avenue of the Champs Elysées.

At eight o'clock a formidable force invested the Legislative Palace.
All the approaches were guarded, all the doors were shut. Some
Representatives nevertheless succeeded in penetrating into the interior
of the Palace, not, as has been wrongly stated, by the passage of the
President's house on the side of the Esplanade of the Invalides, but by
the little door of the Rue de Bourgogne, called the Black Door. This
door, by what omission or what connivance I do not know, remained open
till noon on the 2d December. The Rue de Bourgogne was nevertheless full
of troops. Squads of soldiers scattered here and there in the Rue de
l'Université allowed passers-by, who were few and far between, to use it
as a thoroughfare.

The Representatives who entered by the door in Rue de Bourgogne,
penetrated as far as the Salle des Conférences, where they met their
colleagues coming out from M. Dupin.

A numerous group of men, representing every shade of opinion in the
Assembly, was speedily assembled in this hall, amongst whom were MM.
Eugène Sue, Richardet, Fayolle, Joret, Marc Dufraisse, Benoît (du
Rhône), Canet, Gambon, d'Adelsward, Créqu, Répellin, Teillard-Latérisse,
Rantion, General Leydet, Paulin Durrieu, Chanay, Brilliez, Collas (de la
Gironde), Monet, Gaston, Favreau, and Albert de Rességuier.

Each new-comer accosted M. de Panat.

"Where are the vice-Presidents?"

"In prison."

"And the two other Questors?"

"Also in prison. And I beg you to believe, gentlemen," added M. de
Panat, "that I have had nothing to do with the insult which has been
offered me, in not arresting me."

Indignation was at its height; every political shade was blended in the
same sentiment of contempt and anger, and M. de Rességuier was no less
energetic than Eugène Sue. For the first time the Assembly seemed only
to have one heart and one voice. Each at length said what he thought of
the man of the Elysée, and it was then seen that for a long time past
Louis Bonaparte had imperceptibly created a profound unanimity in the
Assembly--the unanimity of contempt.

M. Collas (of the Gironde) gesticulated and told his story. He came from
the Ministry of the Interior. He had seen M. de Morny, he had spoken to
him; and he, M. Collas, was incensed beyond measure at M. Bonaparte's
crime. Since then, that Crime has made him Councillor of State.

M. de Panat went hither and thither among the groups, announcing to the
Representatives that he had convened the Assembly for one o'clock. But it
was impossible to wait until that hour. Time pressed. At the Palais
Bourbon, as in the Rue Blanche, it was the universal feeling that each
hour which passed by helped to accomplish the _coup d'état_. Every one
felt as a reproach the weight of his silence or of his inaction; the
circle of iron was closing in, the tide of soldiers rose unceasingly,
and silently invaded the Palace; at each instant a sentinel the more was
found at a door, which a moment before had been free. Still, the group of
Representatives assembled together in the Salle des Conférences was as
yet respected. It was necessary to act, to speak, to deliberate, to
struggle, and not to lose a minute.

Gambon said, "Let us try Dupin once more; he is our official man, we
have need of him." They went to look for him. They could not find him.
He was no longer there, he had disappeared, he was away, hidden,
crouching, cowering, concealed, he had vanished, he was buried. Where?
No one knew. Cowardice has unknown holes.

Suddenly a man entered the hall. A man who was a stranger to the Assembly,
in uniform, wearing the epaulet of a superior officer and a sword by his
side. He was a major of the 42d, who came to summon the Representatives
to quit their own House. All, Royalists and Republicans alike, rushed
upon him. Such was the expression of an indignant eye-witness. General
Leydet addressed him in language such as leaves an impression on the
cheek rather than on the ear.

"I do my duty, I fulfil my instructions," stammered the officer.

"You are an idiot, if you think you are doing your duty," cried Leydet
to him, "and you are a scoundrel if you know that you are committing a
crime. Your name? What do you call yourself? Give me your name."

The officer refused to give his name, and replied, "So, gentlemen, you
will not withdraw?"

"No."

"I shall go and obtain force."

"Do so."

He left the room, and in actual fact went to obtain orders from the
Ministry of the Interior.

The Representatives waited in that kind of indescribable agitation which
might be called the Strangling of Right by Violence.

In a short time one of them who had gone out came back hastily, and warned
them that two companies of the _Gendarmerie Mobile_ were coming with
their guns in their hands.

Marc Dufraisse cried out, "Let the outrage be thorough. Let the _coup
d'état_ find us on our seats. Let us go to the Salle des Séances," he
added. "Since things have come to such a pass, let us afford the genuine
and living spectacle of an 18th Brumaire."

They all repaired to the Hall of Assembly. The passage was free. The
Salle Casimir-Périer was not yet occupied by the soldiers.

They numbered about sixty. Several were girded with their scarves of
office. They entered the Hall meditatively.

There, M. de Rességuier, undoubtedly with a good purpose, and in order
to form a more compact group, urged that they should all install
themselves on the Right side.

"No," said Marc Dufraisse, "every one to his bench." They scattered
themselves about the Hall, each in his usual place.

M. Monet, who sat on one of the lower benches of the Left Centre, held
in his hand a copy of the Constitution.

Several minutes elapsed. No one spoke. It was the silence of expectation
which precedes decisive deeds and final crises, and during which every
one seems respectfully to listen to the last instructions of his
conscience.

Suddenly the soldiers of the _Gendarmerie Mobile_, headed by a captain
with his sword drawn, appeared on the threshold. The Hall of Assembly
was violated. The Representatives rose from their seats simultaneously,
shouting "Vive la République!"

The Representative Monet alone remained standing, and in a loud and
indignant voice, which resounded through the empty hall like a trumpet,
ordered the soldiers to halt.

The soldiers halted, looking at the Representatives with a bewildered
air.

The soldiers as yet only blocked up the lobby of the Left, and had not
passed beyond the Tribune.

Then the Representative Monet read the Articles 36, 37, and 68 of the
Constitution.

Articles 36 and 37 established the inviolability of the
Representatives. Article 68 deposed the President in the event of
treason.

That moment was a solemn one. The soldiers listened in silence.

The Articles having been read, Representative d'Adelsward, who sat on
the first lower bench of the Left, and who was nearest to the soldiers,
turned towards them and said,--

"Soldiers, you see that the President of the Republic is a traitor, and
would make traitors of you. You violate the sacred precinct of rational
Representation. In the name of the Constitution, in the name of the Law,
we order you to withdraw."

While Adelsward was speaking, the major commanding the _Gendarmerie
Mobile_ had entered.

"Gentlemen," said he, "I have orders to request you to retire, and, if
you do not withdraw of your own accord, to expel you."

"Orders to expel us!" exclaimed Adelsward; and all the Representatives
added, "Whose orders; Let us see the orders. Who signed the orders?"

The major drew forth a paper and unfolded it. Scarcely had he unfolded
it than he attempted to replace it in his pocket, but General Leydet
threw himself upon him and seized his arm. Several Representatives leant
forward, and read the order for the expulsion of the Assembly, signed
"Fortoul, Minister of the Marine."

Marc Dufraisse turned towards the _Gendarmes Mobiles_, and cried out to
them,--

"Soldiers, your very presence here is an act of treason. Leave the
Hall!"

The soldiers seemed undecided. Suddenly a second column emerged from the
door on the right, and at a signal from the commander, the captain
shouted,--

"Forward! Turn them all out!"

Then began an indescribable hand-to-hand fight between the gendarmes and
the legislators. The soldiers, with their guns in their hands, invaded
the benches of the Senate. Repellin, Chanay, Rantion, were forcibly torn
from their seats. Two gendarmes rushed upon Marc Dufraisse, two upon
Gambon. A long struggle took place on the first bench of the Right, the
same place where MM. Odilon Barrot and Abbatucci were in the habit of
sitting. Paulin Durrieu resisted violence by force, it needed three men
to drag him from his bench. Monet was thrown down upon the benches of the
Commissaries. They seized Adelsward by the throat, and thrust him outside
the Hall. Richardet, a feeble man, was thrown down and brutally treated.
Some were pricked with the points of the bayonets; nearly all had their
clothes torn.

The commander shouted to the soldiers, "Rake them out."

It was thus that sixty Representatives of the People were taken by the
collar by the _coup d'état_, and driven from their seats. The manner in
which the deed was executed completed the treason. The physical
performance was worthy of the moral performance.

The three last to come out were Fayolle, Teillard-Latérisse, and Paulin
Durrieu.

They were allowed to pass by the great door of the Palace, and they
found themselves in the Place Bourgogne.

The Place Bourgogne was occupied by the 42d Regiment of the Line, under
the orders of Colonel Garderens.

Between the Palace and the statue of the Republic, which occupied the
centre of the square, a piece of artillery was pointed at the Assembly
opposite the great door.

By the side of the cannon some Chasseurs de Vincennes were loading their
guns and biting their cartridges.

Colonel Garderens was on horseback near a group of soldiers, which
attracted the attention of the Representatives Teillard-Latérisse,
Fayolle, and Paulin Durrieu.

In the middle of this group three men, who had been arrested, were
struggling crying, "Long live the Constitution! Vive la République!"

Fayolle, Paulin Durrieu, and Teillard-Latérisse approached, and
recognized in the three prisoners three members of the majority,
Representatives Toupet-des-Vignes Radoubt, Lafosse, and Arbey.

Representative Arbey was warmly protesting. As he raised his voice,
Colonel Garderens cut him short with these words, which are worthy of
preservation,--

"Hold your tongue! One word more, and I will have you thrashed with the
butt-end of a musket."

The three Representatives of the Left indignantly called on the Colonel
to release their colleagues.

"Colonel," said Fayolle, "You break the law threefold."

"I will break it sixfold," answered the Colonel, and he arrested
Fayolle, Durrieu, and Teillard-Latérisse.

The soldiery were ordered to conduct them to the guard house of the
Palace then being built for the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

On the way the six prisoners, marching between a double file of bayonets,
met three of their colleagues Representatives Eugène Sue, Chanay, and
Benoist (du Rhône).

Eugène Sue placed himself before the officer who commanded the detachment,
and said to him,--

"We summon you to set our colleagues at liberty."

"I cannot do so," answered the officer.

"In that case complete your crimes," said Eugène Sue, "We summon you to
arrest us also."

The officer arrested them.

They were taken to the guard-house of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
and, later on, to the barracks of the Quai d'Orsay. It was not till
night that two companies of the line came to transfer them to this
ultimate resting-place.

While placing them between his soldiers the commanding officer bowed
down to the ground, politely remarking, "Gentlemen, my men's guns are
loaded."

The clearance of the hall was carried out, as we have said, in a
disorderly fashion, the soldiers pushing the Representatives before them
through all the outlets.

Some, and amongst the number those of whom we have just spoken, wens out
by the Rue de Bourgogne, others were dragged through the Salle des Pas
Perdus towards the grated door opposite the Pont de la Concorde.[3]

The Salle des Pas Perdus has an ante-chamber, a sort of crossway room,
upon which opened the staircase of the High Tribune, and several doors,
amongst others the great glass door of the gallery which leads to the
apartments of the President of the Assembly.

As soon as they had reached this crossway room which adjoins the little
rotunda, where the side door of exit to the Palace is situated, the
soldiers set the Representatives free.

There, in a few moments, a group was formed, in which the
Representatives Canet and Favreau began to speak. One universal cry was
raised, "Let us search for Dupin, let us drag him here if it is
necessary."

They opened the glass door and rushed into the gallery. This time M.
Dupin was at home. M. Dupin, having learnt that the gendarmes had
cleared out the Hall, had come out of his hiding-place. The Assembly
being thrown prostrate, Dupin stood erect. The law being made prisoner,
this man felt himself set free.

The group of Representatives, led by MM. Canet and Favreau, found him in
his study.

There a dialogue ensued. The Representatives summoned the President to
put himself at their head, and to re-enter the Hall, he, the man of the
Assembly, with them, the men of the Nation.

M. Dupin refused point-blank, maintained his ground, was very firm, and
clung bravely to his nonentity.

"What do you want me to do?" said he, mingling with his alarmed protests
many law maxims and Latin quotations, an instinct of chattering jays,
who pour forth all their vocabulary when they are frightened. "What do
you want me to do? Who am I? What can I do? I am nothing. No one is any
longer anything. _Ubi nihil, nihil_. Might is there. Where there is
Might the people lose their Rights. _Novus nascitur ordo_. Shape your
course accordingly. I am obliged to submit. _Dura lex, sed lex_. A law
of necessity we admit, but not a law of right. But what is to be done? I
ask to be let alone. I can do nothing. I do what I can. I am not wanting
in good will. If I had a corporal and four men, I would have them
killed."

"This man only recognizes force," said the Representatives. "Very well,
let us employ force."

They used violence towards him, they girded him with a scarf like a cord
round his neck, and, as they had said, they dragged him towards the
Hall, begging for his "liberty," moaning, kicking--I would say
wrestling, if the word were not too exalted.

Some minutes after the clearance, this Salle des Pas Perdus, which had
just witnessed Representatives pass by in the clutch of gendarmes, saw
M. Dupin in the clutch of the Representatives.

They did not get far. Soldiers barred the great green folding-doors.
Colonel Espinasse hurried thither, the commander of the gendarmerie came
up. The butt-ends of a pair of pistols were seen peeping out of the
commander's pocket.

The colonel was pale, the commander was pale, M. Dupin was livid. Both
sides were afraid. M. Dupin was afraid of the colonel; the colonel
assuredly was not afraid of M. Dupin, but behind this laughable and
miserable figure he saw a terrible phantom rise up--his crime, and he
trembled. In Homer there is a scene where Nemesis appears behind
Thersites.

M. Dupin remained for some moments stupefied, bewildered and speechless.

The Representative Gambon exclaimed to him,--

"Now then, speak, M. Dupin, the Left does not interrupt you."

Then, with the words of the Representatives at his back, and the
bayonets of the soldiers at his breast, the unhappy man spoke. What
his mouth uttered at this moment, what the President of the Sovereign
Assembly of France stammered to the gendarmes at this intensely critical
moment, no one could gather.

Those who heard the last gasps of this moribund cowardice, hastened
to purify their ears. It appears, however, that he stuttered forth
something like this:--

"You are Might, you have bayonets; I invoke Right and I leave you. I
have the honor to wish you good day."

He went away.

They let him go. At the moment of leaving he turned round and let fall a
few more words. We will not gather them up. History has no rag-picker's
basket.


[3] This grated door was closed on December 2, and was not reopened
until the 12th March, when M. Louis Bonaparte came to inspect the works
of the Hall of the Corps Legislatif.




CHAPTER IX.


AN END WORSE THAN DEATH

We should have been glad to have put aside, never to have spoken of him
again, this man who had borne for three years this most honorable title,
President of the National Assembly of France, and who had only known how
to be lacquey to the majority. He contrived in his last hour to sink
even lower than could have been believed possible even for him. His
career in the Assembly had been that of a valet, his end was that of a
scullion.

The unprecedented attitude that M. Dupin assumed before the gendarmes
when uttering with a grimace his mockery of a protest, even engendered
suspicion. Gambion exclaimed, "He resists like an accomplice. He knew
all."

We believe these suspicions to be unjust. M. Dupin knew nothing. Who
indeed amongst the organizers of the _coup d'état_ would have taken the
trouble to make sure of his joining them? Corrupt M. Dupin? was it
possible? and, further, to what purpose? To pay him? Why? It would be
money wasted when fear alone was enough. Some connivances are secured
before they are sought for. Cowardice is the old fawner upon felony. The
blood of the law is quickly wiped up. Behind the assassin who holds the
poniard comes the trembling wretch who holds the sponge.

Dupin took refuge in his study. They followed him. "My God!" he cried,
"can't they understand that I want to be left in peace."

In truth they had tortured him ever since the morning, in order to
extract from him an impossible scrap of courage.

"You ill-treat me worse than the gendarmes," said he.

The Representatives installed themselves in his study, seated themselves
at his table, and, while he groaned and scolded in an arm-chair, they
drew up a formal report of what had just taken place, as they wished to
leave an official record of the outrage in the archives.

When the official report was ended Representative Canet read it to the
President, and offered him a pen.

"What do you want me to do with this?" he asked.

"You are the President," answered Canet. "This is our last sitting. It
is your duty to sign the official report."

This man refused.




CHAPTER X.


THE BLACK DOOR

M. Dupin is a matchless disgrace.

Later on he had his reward. It appears that he became some sort of an
Attorney-General at the Court of Appeal.

M. Dupin renders to Louis Bonaparte the service of being in his place
the meanest of men.

To continue this dismal history.

The Representatives of the Right, in their first bewilderment caused
by the _coup d'état_, hastened in large numbers to M. Daru, who was
Vice-President of the Assembly, and at the same time one of the
Presidents of the Pyramid Club. This Association had always supported
the policy of the Elysée, but without believing that a _coup d'état_
was premeditated. M. Daru lived at No. 75, Rue de Lille.

Towards ten o'clock in the morning about a hundred of these
Representatives had assembled at M. Daru's home. They resolved to
attempt to penetrate into the Hall where the Assembly held its sittings.
The Rue de Lille opens out into the Rue de Bourgogne, almost opposite
the little door by which the Palace is entered, and which is called the
Black Door.

They turned their steps towards this door, with M. Daru at their head.
They marched arm in arm and three abreast. Some of them had put on their
scarves of office. They took them off later on.

The Black Door, half-open as usual, was only guarded by two sentries.

Some of the most indignant, and amongst them M. de Kerdrel, rushed
towards this door and tried to pass. The door, however, was violently
shut, and there ensued between the Representatives and the _sergents de
ville_ who hastened up, a species of struggle, in which a Representative
had his wrist sprained.

At the same time a battalion which was drawn up on the Place de
Bourgogne moved on, and came at the double towards the group of
Representatives. M. Daru, stately and firm, signed to the commander
to stop; the battalion halted, and M. Daru, in the name of the
Constitution, and in his capacity as Vice-President of the Assembly,
summoned the soldiers to lay down their arms, and to give free passage
to the Representatives of the Sovereign People.

The commander of the battalion replied by an order to clear the street
immediately, declaring that there was no longer an Assembly; that as for
himself, he did not know what the Representatives of the People were,
and that if those persons before him did not retire of their own accord,
he would drive them back by force.

"We will only yield to violence," said M. Daru.

"You commit high treason," added M. de Kerdrel.

The officer gave the order to charge.

The soldiers advanced in close order.

There was a moment of confusion; almost a collision. The Representatives,
forcibly driven back, ebbed into the Rue de Lille. Some of them fell
down. Several members of the Right were rolled in the mud by the
soldiers. One of them, M. Etienne, received a blow on the shoulder from
the butt-end of a musket. We may here add that a week afterwards M.
Etienne was a member of that concern which they styled the Consultative
Committee. He found the _coup d'état_ to his taste, the blow with the
butt-end of a musket included.

They went back to M. Daru's house, and on the way the scattered group
reunited, and was even strengthened by some new-comers.

"Gentlemen," said M. Daru, "the President has failed us, the Hall is
closed against us. I am the Vice-President; my house is the Palace of
the Assembly."

He opened a large room, and there the Representatives of the Right
installed themselves. At first the discussions were somewhat noisy. M.
Daru, however, observed that the moments were precious, and silence was
restored.

The first measure to be taken was evidently the deposition of the
President of the Republic by virtue of Article 68 of the Constitution.
Some Representatives of the party which was called _Burgraves_ sat round
a table and prepared the deed of deposition.

As they were about to read it aloud a Representative who came in from
out of doors appeared at the door of the room, and announced to the
Assembly that the Rue de Lille was becoming filled with troops, and that
the house was being surrounded.

There was not a moment to lose.

M. Benoist-d'Azy said, "Gentlemen, let us go to the Mairie of the tenth
arrondissement; there we shall be able to deliberate under the protection
of the tenth legion, of which our colleague, General Lauriston, is the
colonel."

M. Daru's house had a back entrance by a little door which was at the
bottom of the garden. Most of the Representatives went out that way.

M. Daru was about to follow them. Only himself, M. Odilon Barrot, and
two or three others remained in the room, when the door opened. A
captain entered, and said to M. Daru,--

"Sir, you are my prisoner."

"Where am I to follow you?" asked M. Daru.

"I have orders to watch over you in your own house."

The house, in truth, was militarily occupied, and it was thus that M.
Daru was prevented from taking part in the sitting at the Mairie of the
tenth arrondissement.

The officer allowed M. Odilon Barrot to go out.




CHAPTER XI.


THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

While all this was taking place on the left bank of the river, towards
noon a man was noticed walking up and down the great Salles des Pas
Perdus of the Palace of Justice. This man, carefully buttoned up in an
overcoat, appeared to be attended at a distance by several possible
supporters--for certain police enterprises employ assistants whose
dubious appearance renders the passers-by uneasy, so much so that they
wonder whether they are magistrates or thieves. The man in the
buttoned-up overcoat loitered from door to door, from lobby to lobby,
exchanging signs of intelligence with the myrmidons who followed him;
then came back to the great Hall, stopping on the way the barristers,
solicitors, ushers, clerks, and attendants, and repeating to all in a low
voice, so as not to be heard by the passers-by, the same question. To
this question some answered "Yes," others replied "No." And the man set
to work again, prowling about the Palace of Justice with the appearance
of a bloodhound seeking the trail.

He was a Commissary of the Arsenal Police.

What was he looking for?

The High Court of Justice.

What was the High Court of Justice doing?

It was hiding.

Why? To sit in Judgment?

Yes and no.

The Commissary of the Arsenal Police had that morning received from the
Prefect Maupas the order to search everywhere for the place where the
High Court of Justice might be sitting, if perchance it thought it its
duty to meet. Confusing the High Court with the Council of State, the
Commissary of Police had first gone to the Quai d'Orsay. Having found
nothing, not even the Council of State, he had come away empty-handed, at
all events had turned his steps towards the Palace of Justice, thinking
that as he had to search for justice he would perhaps find it there.

Not finding it, he went away.

The High Court, however, had nevertheless met together.

Where, and how? We shall see.

At the period whose annals we are now chronicling, before the present
reconstruction of the old buildings of Paris, when the Palace of Justice
was reached by the Cour de Harlay, a staircase the reverse of majestic
led thither by turning out into a long corridor called the Gallerie
Mercière. Towards the middle of this corridor there were two doors; one
on the right, which led to the Court of Appeal, the other on the left,
which led to the Court of Cassation. The folding-doors to the left opened
upon an old gallery called St. Louis, recently restored, and which serves
at the present time for a Salle des Pas Perdus to the barristers of the
Court of Cassation. A wooden statue of St. Louis stood opposite the
entrance door. An entrance contrived in a niche to the right of this
statue led into a winding lobby ending in a sort of blind passage, which
apparently was closed by two double doors. On the door to the right might
be read "First President's Room;" on the door to the left, "Council
Chamber." Between these two doors, for the convenience of the barristers
going from the Hall to the Civil Chamber, which formerly was the Great
Chamber of Parliament, had been formed a narrow and dark passage, in
which, as one of them remarked, "every crime could be committed with
impunity."

Leaving on one side the First President's Room and opening the door which
bore the inscription "Council Chamber," a large room was crossed,
furnished with a huge horse-shoe table, surrounded by green chairs. At
the end of this room, which in 1793 had served as a deliberating hall for
the juries of the Revolutionary Tribunal, there was a door placed in the
wainscoting, which led into a little lobby where were two doors, on the
right the door of the room appertaining to the President of the Criminal
Chamber, on the left the door of the Refreshment Room. "Sentenced to
death!--Now let us go and dine!" These two ideas, Death and Dinner, have
jostled against each other for centuries. A third door closed the
extremity of this lobby. This door was, so to speak, the last of the
Palace of Justice, the farthest off, the least known, the most hidden; it
opened into what was called the Library of the Court of Cassation, a
large square room lighted by two windows overlooking the great inner yard
of the Concièrgerie, furnished with a few leather chairs, a large table
covered with green cloth, and with law books lining the walls from the
floor to the ceiling.

This room, as may be seen, is the most secluded and the best hidden of
any in the Palace.

It was here,--in this room, that there arrived successively on the 2d
December, towards eleven o'clock in the morning, numerous men dressed in
black, without robes, without badges of office, affrighted, bewildered,
shaking their heads, and whispering together. These trembling men were
the High Court of Justice.

The High Court of Justice, according to the terms of the Constitution,
was composed of seven magistrates; a President, four Judges, and two
Assistants, chosen by the Court of Cassation from among its own members
and renewed every year.

In December, 1851, these seven judges were named Hardouin, Pataille,
Moreau, Delapalme, Cauchy, Grandet, and Quesnault, the two last-named
being Assistants.

These men, almost unknown, had nevertheless some antecedents. M. Cauchy,
a few years previously President of the Chamber of the Royal Court of
Paris, an amiable man and easily frightened, was the brother of the
mathematician, member of the Institute, to whom we owe the computation of
waves of sound, and of the ex-Registrar Archivist of the Chamber of
Peers. M. Delapalme had been Advocate-General, and had taken a prominent
part in the Press trials under the Restoration; M. Pataille had been
Deputy of the Centre under the Monarchy of July; M. Moreau (de la Seine)
was noteworthy, inasmuch he had been nicknamed "de la Seine" to
distinguish him from M. Moreau (de la Meurthe), who on his side was
noteworthy, inasmuch as he had been nicknamed "de la Meurthe" to
distinguish him from M. Moreau (de la Seine). The first Assistant, M.
Grandet, had been President of the Chamber at Paris. I have read this
panegyric of him: "He is known to possess no individuality or opinion of
his own whatsoever." The second Assistant, M. Quesnault, a Liberal, a
Deputy, a Public Functionary, Advocate-General, a Conservative, learned,
obedient, had attained by making a stepping-stone of each of these
attributes, to the Criminal Chamber of the Court of Cassation, where he
was known as one of the most severe members. 1848 had shocked his notion
of Right, he had resigned after the 24th of February; he did not resign
after the 2d December.

M. Hardouin, who presided over the High Court, was an ex-President of
Assizes, a religious man, a rigid Jansenist, noted amongst his colleagues
as a "scrupulous magistrate," living in Port Royal, a diligent reader of
Nicolle, belonging to the race of the old Parliamentarians of the Marais,
who used to go to the Palais de Justice mounted on a mule; the mule had
now gone out of fashion, and whoever visited President Hardouin would
have found no more obstinacy in his stable than in his conscience.

On the morning of the 2d December, at nine o'clock, two men mounted the
stairs of M. Hardouin's house, No. 10, Rue de Condé, and met together at
his door. One was M. Pataille; the other, one of the most prominent
members of the bar of the Court of Cassation, was the ex-Constituent
Martin (of Strasbourg). M. Pataille had just placed himself at M.
Hardouin's disposal.

Martin's first thought, while reading the placards of the _coup d'état_,
had been for the High Court. M. Hardouin ushered M. Pataille into a room
adjoining his study, and received Martin (of Strasbourg) as a man to
whom he did not wish to speak before witnesses. Being formally requested
by Martin (of Strasbourg) to convene the High Court, he begged that he
would leave him alone, declared that the High Court would "do its duty,"
but that first he must "confer with his colleagues," concluding with
this expression, "It shall be done to-day or to-morrow." "To-day or
to-morrow!" exclaimed Martin (of Strasbourg); "Mr. President, the safety
of the Republic, the safety of the country, perhaps, depends on what the
High Court will or will not do. Your responsibility is great; bear that
in mind. The High Court of Justice does not do its duty to-day or
to-morrow; it does it at once, at the moment, without losing a minute,
without an instant's hesitation."

Martin (of Strasbourg) was right, Justice always belongs to To-day.

Martin (of Strasbourg) added, "If you want a man for active work, I am at
your service." M. Hardouin declined the offer; declared that he would not
lose a moment, and begged Martin (of Strasbourg) to leave him to "confer"
with his colleague, M. Pataille.

In fact, he called together the High Court for eleven o'clock, and it was
settled that the meeting should take place in the Hall of the Library.

The Judges were punctual. At a quarter-past eleven they were all
assembled. M. Pataille arrived the last.

They sat at the end of the great green table. They were alone in the
Library.

There was no ceremonial. President Hardouin thus opened the debate:
"Gentlemen, there is no need to explain the situation, we all know what
it is."

Article 68 of the Constitution was imperative. It was necessary that the
High Court should meet _under penalty of high treason_. They gained time,
they swore themselves in, they appointed as Recorder of the High Court M.
Bernard, Recorder of the Court of Cassation, and they sent to fetch him,
and while waiting requested the librarian, M. Denevers, to hold his pen
in readiness. They settled the time and place for an evening meeting.
They talked of the conduct of the Constituent Martin (of Strasbourg),
with which they were offended, regarding it almost as a nudge of the
elbow given by Politics to Justice. They spoke a little of Socialism, of
the Mountain, and of the Red Republic, and a little also of the judgment
which they had to pronounce. They chatted, they told stories, they found
fault, they speculated, they spun out the time.

What were they waiting for?

We have related what the Commissary of police was doing for his part in
his department.

And, in reference to this design, when the accomplices of the _coup
d'état_ considered that the people in order to summon the High Court to
do its duty, could invade the Palace of Justice, and that they would
never look for it where it was assembled, they felt that this room had
been excellently chosen. When, however, they considered that the police
would also doubtless come to expel the High Court, and that perhaps they
would not succeed in finding it, each one regretted to himself the choice
of the room. They wished to hide the High Court, they had succeeded too
well. It was grievous to think that perhaps when the police and the armed
force should arrive, matters would have gone too far, and the High Court
would be too deeply compromised.

They had appointed a Recorder, now they must organize a Court. A second
step, more serious than the first.

The judges delayed, hoping that fortune would end by deciding on one side
or the other, either for the Assembly or for the President, either
against the _coup d'état_ or for it, and that there might thus be a
vanquished party, so that the High Court could then with all safety lay
its hands upon somebody.

They lengthily argued the question, whether they should immediately
decree the accusation of the President, or whether they should draw up a
simple order of inquiry. The latter course was adopted.

They drew up a judgment, not the honest and outspoken judgment which
was placarded by the efforts of the Representatives of the Left and
published, in which are found these words of bad taste, _Crime_ and
_High Treason_; this judgment, a weapon of war, has never existed
otherwise than as a projectile. Wisdom in a judge sometimes consists in
drawing up a judgment which is not one, one of those judgments which has
no binding force, in which everything is conditional; in which no one is
incriminated, and nothing, is called by its right name. There are species
of intermediate courses which allow of waiting and seeing; in delicate
crises men who are in earnest must not inconsiderately mingle with
possible events that bluntness which is called Justice. The High Court
took advantage of this, it drew up a prudent judgment; this judgment is
not known; it is published here for the first time. Here it is. It is a
masterpiece of equivocal style:--

  EXTRACT FROM THE REGISTRY OF THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE.

  "The High Court of Justice.

  "According to Article 68 of the Constitution, considering that
  printed placards beginning with these words, 'The President of the
  Republic' and ending with the signatures, 'Louis Napoléon Bonaparte'
  and 'De Morny, Minister of the Interior,' the said placards ordaining
  amongst other measures the dissolution of the National Assembly, have
  been posted to-day on the walls of Paris, that this fact of the
  dissolution of the National Assembly by the President of the Republic
  would be of the nature to constitute the case provided for by Article
  68 of the Constitution, and renders, in the terms of the aforesaid
  article, the meeting of the High Court indispensable.

  "It is declared that the High Court of Justice is organized, that it
  appoints[4] ... to fulfil with it the functions of the Public
  Ministry; that M. Bernard, the Recorder of the Court of Cassation,
  should fulfil the duties of Recorder, and in order to proceed
  further, according to the terms of the aforesaid Article 68 of the
  Constitution, the Court will adjourn until to-morrow, the 3d of
  December, at noon.

  "Drawn up and discussed in the Council Chamber, where were sitting
  MM. Hardouin, president, Pataille, Moreau, Delapalme, and Cauchy,
  judges, December 2, 1851."

The two Assistants, MM. Grandet and Quesnault, offered to sign the
decree, but the President ruled that it would be more correct only to
accept the signatures of the titular judges, the Assistants not being
qualified when the Court was complete.

In the meantime it was one o'clock, the news began to spread through the
palace that a decree of deposition against Louis Bonaparte had been drawn
up by a part of the Assembly; one of the judges who had gone out during
the debate, brought back this rumor to his colleagues. This coincided
with an outburst of energy. The President observed that it would be to
the purpose to appoint a Procureur-General.

There was a difficulty. Whom should they appoint? In all preceding trials
they had always chosen for a Procureur-General at the High Court the
Procureur-General at the Court of Appeal of Paris. Why should they
introduce an innovation? They determined upon this Procureur-General of
the Court of Appeal. This Procureur-General was at the time M. de Royer,
who had been keeper of the Seals for M. Bonaparte. Thence a new
difficulty and a long debate.

Would M. de Royer consent? M. Hardouin undertook to go and make the offer
to him. He had only to cross the Mercière Gallery.

M. de Royer was in his study. The proposal greatly embarrassed him. He
remained speechless from the shock. To accept was serious, to refuse was
still more serious.

There was risk of treason. On the 2d December, an hour after noon, the
_coup d'état_ was still a crime. M. de Royer, not knowing whether the
high treason would succeed, ventured to stigmatize the deed as such in
private, and cast down his eyes with a noble shame before this violation
of the laws which, three months later, numerous purple robes, including
his own, endorsed with their oaths. But his indignation did not go to
the extent of supporting the indictment. An indictment speaks aloud. M.
de Royer as yet only murmured. He was perplexed.

M. Hardouin understood this state of conscience. Persistence would have
been unreasonable. He withdrew.

He returned to the room where his colleagues were awaiting him.

In the meantime the Commissary of the Arsenal Police had come back.

He had ended by succeeding in "unearthing"--such was his expression--the
High Court. He penetrated as far as the Council Chamber of the Civil
Chamber; at that moment he had still no other escort than the few police
agents of the morning. A boy was passing by. The Commissary asked him
the whereabouts of the High Court. "The High Court?" answered the boy;
"what is that?" Nevertheless the boy told the Librarian, who came up. A
few words were exchanged between M. Denevers and the Commissary.

"What are you asking for?"

"The High Court."

"Who are you?"

"I want the high Court."

"It is in session."

"Where is it sitting?"

"Here."

And the Librarian pointed to the door.

"Very well," said the Commissary.

He did not add another word, and returned into the Mercière Gallery.

We have just said that he was only accompanied at that time by a few
police agents.

The High Court was, in truth, in session. The President was relating to
the judges his visit to the Procureur General. Suddenly a tumultuous
sound of footsteps is heard in the lobby which leads from the Council
Chamber to the room where they were deliberating. The door opens
abruptly. Bayonets appear, and in the midst of the bayonets a man in a
buttoned-up overcoat, with a tricolored sash upon his coat.

The magistrates stare, stupefied.

"Gentlemen," said the man, "dissolve your meeting immediately."

President Hardouin rises.

"What does this mean? Who are you? Are you aware to whom you are
speaking?"

"I am aware. You are the High Court, and I am the Commissary of the
Police."

"Well, then?"

"Be off."

There were there thirty-five municipal guards, commanded by a lieutenant,
and with a drum at their head.

"But----" said the President.

The Commissary interrupted him with these words, which are literally
given,--

"Mr. President, I am not going to enter upon an oratorical combat with
you. I have my orders, and I transmit them to you. Obey."

"Whom?"

"The Prefect of Police."

The President asked this strange question, which implied the acceptance
of an order,--

"Have you a warrant?"

The Commissary answered,--

"Yes."

And he handed a paper to the President.

The judges turned pale.

The President unfolded the paper; M. Cauchy put his head over M.
Hardouin's shoulder. The President read but,--

"You are ordered to dissolve the High Court, and, in case of refusal, to
arrest MM. Béranger, Rocher, De Boissieux, Pataille, and Hello."

And, turning towards the judges, the President added,--

"Signed, Maupas."

Then, addressing himself to the Commissary, he resumed,--

"There is some mistake, these are not our names. MM. Béranger, Rocher,
and De Boissieux have served their time and are no longer judges of the
High Court; as for M. Hello, he is dead."

The High Court, in reality, was temporary and renewable; the _coup
d'état_ overthrew the Constitution, but did not understand it. The
warrant signed "Maupas" was applicable to the preceding High Court. The
_coup d'état_ had been misled by an old list. Such is the heedlessness of
assassins.

"Mr. Commissary of Police," continued the President, "you see that these
names are not ours."

"That does not matter to me," replied the Commissary. "Whether this
warrant does or does not apply to you, disperse, or I shall arrest all of
you."

And he added,--

"At once."

The judges were silenced; one of them picked up from the table a loose
sheet of paper, which was the judgment they had drawn up, and put the
paper in his pocket.

Then they went away.

The Commissary pointed to the door where the bayonets were, and said,--

"That way."

They went out by the lobby between two ranks of soldiers. The detachment
of Republican Guards escorted them as far as the St. Louis Gallery.

There they set them free; their heads bowed down.

It was about three o'clock.

While these events were taking place in the Library, close by, in the
former great Chamber of the Parliament, the Court of Cassation was
sitting in judgment as usual, without noticing what was happening so near
at hand. It would appear, then, that the police exhaled no odor.

Let us at once have done with this High Court.

In the evening at half-past seven the seven judges met together at the
house of one of their number, he who had taken away the decree; they
framed an official report, drew up a protest, and recognizing the
necessity of filling in the line left blank in their decree, on the
proposition of M. Quesnault, appointed as Procureur-General M. Renouard,
their colleague at the Court of Cessation. M. Renouard, who was
immediately informed, consented.

They met together for the last time on the next day, the 3d, at eleven
o'clock in the morning, an hour before the time mentioned in the judgment
which we have read above,--again in the Library of the Court of
Cassation. M. Renouard was present. An official minute was given to him,
recording his appointment, as well as certain details with which he asked
to be supplied. The judgment which had been drawn up was taken by M.
Quesnault to the Recorder's Office, and immediately entered upon the
Register of the Secret Deliberations of the Court of Cassation, the High
Court not having a Special Register, and having decided, from its
creation, to use the Register of the Court of Cassation. After the decree
they also transcribed the two documents described as follows on the
Register:--

I. An official report recording the interference of the police during the
discussion upon the preceding decree.

II. A minute of the appointment of M. Renouard to the office of
Procureur-General.

In addition seven copies of these different documents drawn up by the
hands of the judges themselves, and signed by them all, were put in a
place of safety, as also, it is said, a note-book, in which were written
five other secret decisions relating to the _coup d'état_.

Does this page of the Register of the Court of Cassation exist at the
present time? Is it true, as has been stated, that the prefect Maupas
sent for the Register and tore out the leaf containing the decree? We
have not been able to clear up this point. The Register now is shown to
no one, and those employed at the Recorder's Office are dumb.

Such are the facts, let us summarize them. If this Court so called
"High," had been of a character to conceive such an idea as that of doing
its duty--when it had once met together the mere organization of itself
was a matter of a few minutes--it would have proceeded resolutely and
rapidly, it would have appointed as Procureur-General some energetic man
belonging to the Court of Cassation, either from the body of magistrates,
such as Freslon, or from the bar, like Martin (of Strasbourg). By virtue
of Article 68, and without waiting the initiative of the Assembly, it
would have drawn up a judgment stigmatizing the crime, it would have
launched an order of arrest against the President and his accomplices and
have ordered the removal of the person of Louis Bonaparte to jail. As for
the Procureur-General he would have issued a warrant of arrest. All this
could have been done by half-past eleven, and at that time no attempt had
been made to dissolve the High Court. These preliminary proceedings
concluded, the High Court, by going out through a nailed-up door leading
into the Salle des Pas Perdus, could have descended into the street, and
there have proclaimed its judgment to the people. At this time it would
have met with no hindrance. Finally, and this in any case, it should have
sat robed on the Judges' Bench, with all magisterial state, and when the
police agent and his soldiers appeared should have ordered the soldiers,
who perhaps would have obeyed them, to arrest the agent, and if the
soldiers had disobeyed, should have allowed themselves to be formally
dragged to prison, so that the people could see, under their own eyes,
out in the open street, the filthy hoof of the _coup d'état_ trampling
upon the robe of Justice.

Instead of this, what steps did the High Court take? We have just seen.

"Be off with you!"

"We are going."

We can imagine, after a very different fashion, the dialogue between
Mathieu Molé and Vidocq.


[4] This line was left blank. It was filled in later on with the name of
M. Renouard, Councillor of the Court of Cassation.




CHAPTER XII.


THE MAIRIE OF THE TENTH ARRONDISSEMENT

The Representatives, having come out from M. Daru, rejoined each other
and assembled in the street. There they consulted briefly, from group to
group. There were a large number of them. In less than an hour, by
sending notices to the houses on the left bank of the Seine alone, on
account of the extreme urgency, more than three hundred members could be
called together. But where should they meet? At Lemardelay's? The Rue
Richelieu was guarded. At the Salle Martel? It was a long way off. They
relied upon the Tenth Legion, of which General Lauriston was colonel.
They showed a preference for the Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement.
Besides, the distance was short, and there was no need to cross any
bridges.

They formed themselves into column, and set forth.

M. Daru, as we have said, lived in the Rue de Lille, close by the
Assembly. The section of the Rue de Lille lying between his house and
the Palais Bourbon was occupied by infantry. The last detachment
barred his door, but it only barred it on the right, not on the left.
The Representatives, on quitting M. Daru, bent their steps on the side
of the Rue des Saints-Pères, and left the soldiers behind them. At
that moment the soldiers had only been instructed to prevent their
meeting in the Palace of the Assembly; they could quietly form
themselves into a column in the street, and set forth. If they had
turned to the right instead of to the left, they would have been
opposed. But there were no orders for the other alternative; they
passed through a gap in the instructions.

An hour afterwards this threw St. Arnaud into a fit of fury.

On their way fresh Representatives came up and swelled the column. As the
members of the Right lived for the most part in the Faubourg St. Germain,
the column was composed almost entirely of men belonging to the majority.

At the corner of the Quai d'Orsay they met a group of members of the
Left, who had reunited after their exit from the Palace of the Assembly,
and who were consulting together. There were the Representatives
Esquiros, Marc Dufraisse, Victor Hennequin, Colfavru, and Chamiot.

Those who were marching at the head of the column left their places, went
up to the group, and said, "Come with us."

"Where are you going?" asked Marc Dufraisse.

To the Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement."

"What do you intend to do there?"

"To decree the deposition of Louis Bonaparte."

"And afterwards?"

"Afterwards we shall go in a body to the Palace of the Assembly; we will
force our way in spite of all resistance, and from the top of the steps
we will read out the decree of deposition to the soldiers."

"Very good, we will join you," said Mare Dufraisse.

The five members of the Left marched at some distance from the column.
Several of their friends who were mingled with the members of the Right
rejoined them; and we may here mention a fact without giving it more
importance than it possesses, namely, that the two fractions of the
Assembly represented in this unpremeditated gathering marched towards the
Mairie without being mingled together; one on each side of the street. It
chanced that the men of the majority kept on the right side of the
street, and the men of the minority on the left.

No one had a scarf of office. No outward token caused them to be
recognized. The passers-by stared at them with surprise, and did not
understand what was the meaning of this procession of silent men through
the solitary streets of the Faubourg St. Germain. One district of Paris
was as yet unaware of the _coup d'état_.

Strategically speaking, from a defensive point of view, the Mairie of
the tenth Arrondissement was badly chosen. Situated in a narrow street
in that short section of the Rue de Grenelle-St.-Germain which lies
between the Rue des Saints-Pères and the Rue du Sépulcre, close by the
cross-roads of the Croix-Rouge, where the troops could arrive from so
many different points, the Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement, confined,
commanded, and blockaded on every side, was a pitiful citadel for the
assailed National Representation. It is true that they no longer had the
choice of a citadel, any more than later on they had the choice of a
general.

Their arrival at the Mairie might have seemed a good omen. The great
gate which leads into a square courtyard was shut; it opened. The post
of the National Guards, composed of some twenty men, took up their arms
and rendered military honors to the Assembly. The Representatives
entered, a Deputy Mayor received them with respect on the threshold of
the Mairie. "The Palace of the Assembly is closed by the troops," said
the Representatives, "we have come to deliberate here." The Deputy Mayor
led them to the first story, and admitted them to the Great Municipal
Hall. The National Guard cried, "Long live the National Assembly!"

The Representatives having entered, the door was shut. A crowd began to
gather in the street and shouted "Long live the Assembly!" A certain
number of strangers to the Assembly entered the Mairie at the same time
as the Representatives. Overcrowding was feared, and two sentries were
placed at a little side-door, which was left open, with orders only to
allow members of the Assembly who might come afterwards to enter. M.
Howyn Tranchère stationed himself at this door, and undertook to identify
them.

On their arrival at the Mairie, the Representatives numbered somewhat
under three hundred. They exceeded this number later on. It was about
eleven o'clock in the morning. All did not go up at once into the hall
where the meeting was to take place. Several, those of the Left in
particular, remained in the courtyard, mingling with the National Guards
and citizens.

They talked of what they were going to do.

This was the first difficulty.

The Father of the meeting was M. de Kératry.

Was he going to preside?

The Representatives who were assembled in the Great Hall were in his
favor.

The Representatives remaining in the courtyard hesitated.

Marc Dufraisse went up to MM. Jules de Lasteyrie and Léon de Maleville,
who had stayed behind with the Representatives of the Left, and said to
them, "What are they thinking of upstairs? To make Kératry President? The
name of Kératry would frighten the people as thoroughly as mine would
frighten the middle classes."

A member of the Right, M. de Keranflech, came up, and intending to
support the objection, added, "And then, think of Kératry's age. It is
madness to pit a man of eighty against this hour of danger."

But Esquiros exclaimed,--

"That is a bad reason! Eighty years! They constitute a force."

"Yes; where they are well borne," said Colfavru. "Kératry bears them
badly."

"Nothing is greater," resumed Esquiros, "than great octogenarians."

"It is glorious," added Chamiot, "to be presided over by Nestor."

"No, by Gerontes,"[5] said Victor Hennequin.

These words put an end to the debate. Kératry was thrown out. MM. Léon
de Maleville and Jules de Lasteyrie, two men respected by all parties,
undertook to make the members of the Right listen to reason. It was
decided that the "bureau"[6] should preside. Five members of the "bureau"
were present; two Vice-Presidents, MM. Benoist d'Azy and Vitet, and three
Secretaries, MM. Griumult, Chapot, and Moulin. Of the two other
Vice-Presidents, one, General Bedrau, was at Mazas; the other, M. Daru,
was under guard in his own house. Of the three other Secretaries, two,
MM. Peapin and Lacaze, men of the Elysée, were absentees; the other, M.
Yvan, a member of the Left, was at the meeting of the Left, in the Rue
Blanche, which was taking place almost at the same moment.

In the meantime an usher appeared on the steps of the Mairie, and cried
out, as on the most peaceful days of the Assembly, "Representatives, to
the sitting!"

This usher, who belonged to the Assembly, and who had followed it, shared
its fortunes throughout this day, the sequestration on the Quai d'Orsay
included.

At the summons of the usher all the Representatives in the courtyard, and
amongst whom was one of the Vice-Presidents, M. Vitei, went upstairs to
the Hall, and the sitting was opened.

This sitting was the last which the Assembly held under regular
conditions. The Left, which, as we have seen, had on its side boldly
recaptured the Legislative power, and had added to it that which
circumstances required--as was the duty of Revolutionists; the Left,
without a "bureau," without an usher, and without secretaries, held
sittings in which the accurate and passionless record of shorthand was
wanting, but which live in our memories and which History will gather up.

Two shorthand writers of the Assembly, MM. Grosselet and Lagache, were
present at the sitting at the Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement. They
have been able to record it. The censorship of the victorious _coup
d'état_ has mutilated their report and has published through its
historians this mangled version as the true version. One lie more. That
does not matter. This shorthand recital belongs to the brief of the 2d
December, it is one of the leading documents in the trial which the
future will institute. In the notes of this book will be found this
document complete. The passages in inverted commas are those which the
censorship of M. Bonaparte has suppressed. This suppression is a proof of
their significance and importance.

Shorthand reproduces everything except life. Stenography is an ear. It
hears and sees not. It is therefore necessary to fill in here the
inevitable blanks of the shorthand account.

In order to obtain a complete idea of this sitting of the Tenth
Arrondissement, we must picture the great Hall of the Mairie, a sort of
parallelogram, lighted on the right by four or five windows overlooking
the courtyard; on the left, along the wall, furnished with several rows
of benches which had been hastily brought thither, on which were piled up
the three hundred Representatives, assembled together by chance. No one
was sitting down, those in front were standing, those behind were mounted
on the benches. Here and there were a few small tables. In the centre
people walked to and fro. At the bottom, at the end opposite the door,
was a long table furnished with benches, which occupied the whole width
of the wall, behind which sat the "bureau." "Sitting" is merely the
conventional term. The "bureau" did not "sit;" like the rest of the
Assembly it was on its feet. The secretaries, M.M. Chapot, Moulin, and
Grimault wrote standing. At certain moments the two Vice-Presidents
mounted on the benches so as to be better seen from all points of the
room. The table was covered by an old green tablecloth, stained with ink,
three or four inkstands had been brought in, and a quire of paper was
scattered about. There the decrees were written as soon as they were
drawn up. They multiplied the copies, some Representatives became
secretaries on the spur of the moment, and helped the official
secretaries.

This great hall was on a level with the landing. It was situated, as we
have said, on the first floor; it was reached by a very narrow staircase.

We must recollect that nearly the whole of the members present were
members of the Right.

The first moment was a serious one. Berryer came out to advantage.
Berryer, like all those extemporizers without style, will only be
remembered as a name, and a much disputed name, Berryer having been
rather a special pleader than an orator who believed what he said. On
that day Berryer was to the point, logical and earnest. They began by
this cry, "What shall we do?" "Draw up a declaration," said M. de
Falloux. "A protest," said M. de Flavigny. "A decree," said Berryer.

In truth a declaration was empty air, a protest was noise, a decree was
action. They cried out, "What decree?" "Deposition," said Berryer.
Deposition was the extreme limit of the energy of the Right. Beyond
deposition, there was outlawry; deposition was practicable for the Right,
outlawry was only possible for the Left. In fact it was the Left who
outlawed Louis Bonaparte. They did it at their first meeting in the Rue
Blanche. We shall see this later on. At deposition, Legality came to an
end; at outlawry, the Revolution began. The recurrence of Revolutions are
the logical consequences of _coups d'état_. The deposition having been
voted, a man who later on turned traitor, Quentin Bauchart, exclaimed,
"Let us all sign it." All signed it. Odilon Barrot came in and signed it.
Antony Thouret came in and signed it. Suddenly M. Piscatory announced
that the Mayor was refusing to allow Representatives who had arrived to
enter the Hall. "Order him to do so by decree," said Berryer. And the
decree was voted. Thanks to this decree, MM. Favreau and Monet entered;
they came from the Legislative Palace; they related the cowardice of
Dupin. M. Dahirel, one of the leaders of the Right, was exasperated, and
said, "We have received bayonet thrusts." Voices were raised, "Let us
summon the Tenth Legion. Let the call to arms be beaten. Lauriston
hesitates. Let us order him to protect the Assembly." "Let us order him
by decree," said Berryer. This decree was drawn up, which, however, did
not prevent Lauriston from refusing. Another decree, again proposed by
Berryer, pronounced any one who had outraged the Parliamentary
inviolability to be a traitor, and ordered the immediate release of those
Representatives who had been wrongfully made prisoners. All this was
voted at once without debate, in a sort of great unanimous confusion, and
in the midst of a storm of fierce conversations. From time to time
Berryer imposed silence. Then the angry outcries broke forth again. "The
_coup d'état_ will not dare to come here." "We are masters here." "We are
at home." "It would be impossible to attack us here." "These wretches
will not dare to do so." If the uproar had been less violent, the
Representatives might have heard through the open windows close at hand,
the sound of soldiers loading their guns.

A regiment of Chasseurs of Vincennes had just entered silently into the
garden of the Mairie, and, while waiting for orders, were loading their
guns.

Little by little the sitting, at first disorderly and tumultuous, had
assumed an ordinary aspect. The uproar had relapsed into a murmur. The
voice of the usher, crying "Silence, gentlemen," had succeeded in
overcoming the hubbub. Every moment fresh Representatives came in, and
hastened to sign the decree of deposition at the "bureau." As there was
a great crowd round the "bureau" waiting to sign, a dozen loose sheets
of paper to which the Representatives affixed their signatures were
circulated in the great Hall and the two adjoining rooms.

The first to sign the decree of deposition was M. Dufaure, the last was
M. Betting de Lancastel. Of the two Presidents, one, M. Benoist d'Azy,
was addressing the Assembly; the other, M. Vitet, pale, but calm and
resolute, distributed instructions and orders. M. Benoist d'Azy
maintained a decorous countenance, but a certain hesitation in his
speech revealed an inner agitation. Divisions, even in the Right, had not
disappeared at this critical moment. A Legitimist member was overheard
saying in a low voice, while speaking of one of the Vice-Presidents,
"This great Vitet looks like a whited sepulchre." Vitet was an Orleanist.

Given this adventurer with whom they had to deal, this Louis Bonaparte,
capable of everything, the hour and the man being wrapt in mystery, some
Legitimist personages of a candid mind were seriously but comically
frightened. The Marquis of ----, who acted the fly on the coach-wheel
to the Right, went hither and thither, harangued, shouted, declaimed,
remonstrated, proclaimed, and trembled. Another, M. A---- N----,
perspiring, red-faced, out of breath, rushed about distractedly. "Where
is the guard? How many men are there? Who commands them? The officer!
send me the officer! Long live the Republic! National Guard, stand firm!
Long live the Republic!" All the Right shouted this cry. "You wish then
to kill it," said Esquiros. Some of them were dejected; Bourbousson
maintained the silence of a vanquished placeman. Another, the Viscount of
----, a relative of the Duke of Escars, was so alarmed that every moment
he adjourned to a corner of the courtyard. In the crowd which filled the
courtyard there was a _gamin_ of Paris, a child of Athens, who has since
become am elegant and charming poet, Albert Glatigny. Albert Glatigny
cried out to this frightened Viscount, "Hulloa there! Do you think that
_coups d'état_ are extinguished in the way Gulliver put out the fire?"

Oh, Laughter, how gloomy you are when attended with Tragedy!

The Orleanists were quieter, and maintained a more becoming attitude.
This arose from the fact that they ran greater danger.

Pascal Duprat replaced at the top of the decrees the words, "République
Française," which had been forgotten.

From time to time men who were not speaking on the subject of the moment
mentioned this strange word, "Dupin," open which there ensued shouts of
derision and bursts of laughter. "Utter the name of that coward no more,"
cried Antony Thouret.

There were motions and counter-motions; it was a continual uproar
interrupted by deep and solemn silences. Alarmist phrases circulated from
group to group. "We are in a blind alley." "We are caught here as in a
rat trap;" and then on each motion voices were raised: "That is it!" "It
is right!" "It is settled!" They agreed in a low voice upon a rendezvous
at No. 19, Rue de la Chaussée-d'Antin, in case they should be expelled
from the Mairie. M. Bixio carried off the decree of deposition to get it
printed. Esquiros, Marc Dufraisse, Pascal Duprat, Rigal, Lherbette,
Chamiot, Latrade, Colfavru, Antony Thouret, threw in here and there
energetic words of advice. M. Dufaure, resolute and indignant, protested
with authority. M. Odilon Barrot, motionless in a corner, maintained the
silence of stupefied silliness.

MM. Passy and de Tocqueville, in the midst of the groups, described that
when they were Ministers they had always entertained an uneasy suspicion
of a _coup d'état_, and that they clearly perceived this fixed idea in
the brain of Louis Bonaparte. M. de Tocqueville added, "I said to myself
every night, 'I lie down to sleep a Minister; what if I should awake a
prisoner?'" Some of those men who were termed "men of order," muttered
while signing the degree of deposition, "Beware of the Red Republic!" and
seemed to entertain an equal fear of failure and of success. M. de
Vatimesnil pressed the hands of the men of the Left, and thanked them for
their presence. "You make us popular," said he. And Antony Thouret
answered him, "I know neither Right nor Left to-day; I only see the
Assembly."

The younger of the two shorthand writers handed their written sheets
to the Representatives who had spoken, and, asked them to revise them at
once, saying, "We shall not have the time to read them over." Some
Representatives went down into the street, and showed the people copies
of the decree of deposition, signed by the members of the "bureau." One
of the populace took one of these copies, and cried out, "Citizens! the
ink is still quite wet! Long live the Republic!"

The Deputy-Mayor stood at the door of the Hall; the staircase was crowded
with National Guards and spectators. In the Assembly several had
penetrated into the Hall, and amongst them the ex-Constituent Beslay, a
man of uncommon courage. It was at first wished to turn them out, but
they resisted, crying, "This is our business. You are the Assembly, but
we are the People." "They are right," said M. Berryer.

M. de Falloux, accompanied by M. de Kéranflech, came up the Constituent
Beslay, and leaned by his side on the stove, saying to him, "Good-day,
colleague;" and reminded him that they both had formed part of the
Committee of the National Workshops, and that they had together visited
the Workmen at the Parc Monceaux. The Right felt themselves falling; they
became affectionate towards Republicans. The Republic is called
To-morrow.

Each spoke from his place; this member upon a bench, that member on a
chair, a few on the tables. All contradictory opinions burst forth at
once. In a corner some ex-leaders of "order" were scared at the possible
triumph of the "Reds." In another the men of the Right surrounded the men
of the Left, and asked them: "Are not the faubourgs going to rise?"

The narrator has but one duty, to tell his story; he relates everything,
the bad as well as the good. Whatever may have taken place, however, and
notwithstanding all these details of which it was our duty to speak,
apart from the exceptions which we had mentioned, the attitude of the
men of the Right who composed the large majority of this meeting was in
many respects honorable and worthy. Some of them, as we have just
mentioned, even prided themselves upon their resolution and their energy,
almost as though they had wished to rival the members of the Left.

We may here remark--for in the course of this narrative we shall more
than once see the gaze of some members of the Right turned towards the
people, and in this no mistake should be made--that these monarchical men
who talked of popular insurrection and who invoked the faubourgs were a
minority in the majority,--an imperceptible minority. Antony Thouret
proposed to those who were leaders there to go in a body through the
working-class neighborhoods with the decree of deposition in their
hands. Brought to bay, they refused. They declared that they would only
protect themselves by organized powers, not by the people. It is a
strange thing to say, but it must be noted, that with their habits of
political shortsightedness, the popular armed resistance, even in the
name of the Law, seemed sedition to them. The utmost appearance of
revolution which they could endure was a regiment of the National Guard,
with their drums at their head; they shrank from the barricade; Right in
a blouse was no longer Right, Truth armed with a pike was no longer
Truth, Law unpaving a street gave them the impression of a Fury. In the
main, however, and taking them for what they were, and considering their
position as politicians, these members of the Right were well-advised.
What would they have done with the people? And what would the people have
done with them? How would they have proceeded to set fire to the masses?
Imagine Falloux as a tribune, fanning the Faubourg St. Antoine into a
flame!

Alas! in the midst of this dense gloom, in these fatal complications of
circumstances by which the _coup d'état_ profited so odiously and so
perfidiously, in that mighty misunderstanding which comprised the whole
situation, for kindling the revolutionary spark in the heart of the
people, Danton himself would not have sufficed.

The _coup d'état_ entered into this meeting impudently, with its
convict's cap on its head. It possessed an infamous assurance there, as
well as everywhere else. There were in this majority three hundred
Representatives of the People. Louis Napoleon sent a sergeant to drive
them away. The Assembly, having resisted the sergeant, he sent an
officer, the temporary commander of the sixth battalion of the Chasseurs
de Vincennes. This officer, young, fair-haired, a scoffer, half laughing,
half threatening, pointed with his finger to the stairs filled with
bayonets, and defied the Assembly. "Who is this young spark?" asked a
member of the Right. A National Guard who was there said, "Throw him out
of the window!" "Kick him downstairs!" cried one of the people.

This Assembly, grievous as were its offences against the principles of
the Revolution--and with these wrongs Democracy alone had the right to
reproach it--this Assembly, I repeat, was the National Assembly, that is
to say, the Republic incarnate, the living Universal Suffrage, the
Majesty of the Nation, upright and visible. Louis Bonaparte assassinated
this Assembly, and moreover insulted it. A slap on the face is worse than
a poniard thrust.

The gardens of the neighborhood occupied by the troops were full of
broken bottles. They had plied the soldiers with drink. They obeyed the
"epaulettes" unconditionally, and according to the expression of
eyewitnesses, appeared "dazed-drunk." The Representatives appealed to
them, and said to them, "It is a crime!" They answered, "We are not aware
of it."

One soldier was heard to say to another, "What have you done with your
ten francs of this morning?"

The sergeants hustled the officers. With the exception of the commander,
who probably earned his cross of honor, the officers were respectful, the
sergeants brutal.

A lieutenant showing signs of flinching, a sergeant cried out to him,
"You are not the only one who commands here! Come, therefore, march!"

M. de Vatimesnil asked a soldier, "Will you dare to arrest us--us, the
Representatives of the People?"

"Assuredly!" said the soldier.

Several soldiers hearing some Representatives say that they had eaten
nothing since the morning, offered them their ration bread. Some
Representatives accepted. M. de Tocqueville, who was unwell, and who was
noticed to be pale and leaning on the sill of a window, received from a
soldier a piece of this bread, which he shared with M. Chambolle.

Two Commissaries of Police appeared in "full dress," in black coats
girded with their sash-girdles and their black corded hats. One was an
old man, the other a young man. The first was named Lemoine-Tacherat, and
not Bacherel, as has been wrongly printed: the second was named Barlet.
These names should be noted. The unprecedented assurance of this Barlet
was remarked. Nothing was wanting in him,--cynical speech, provoking
gesture, sardonic intonation. It was with an inexpressible air of
insolence that Barlet, when summoning the meeting to dissolve itself,
added, "Rightly or Wrongly." They murmured on the benches of the
Assembly, "Who is this scoundrel?" The other, compared to him, seemed
moderate and inoffensive. Emile Péan exclaimed, "The old man is simply
working in his profession, but the young man is working out his
promotion."

Before this Tacherat and this Barlet entered, before the butts of the
muskets had been heard ringing on the stones of the staircase, this
Assembly had talked of resistance. Of what kind of resistance? We have
just stated. The majority could only listen to a regular organized
resistance, a military resistance in uniform and in epaulets. Such a
resistance was easy to decree, but it was difficult to organize. The
Generals on whom the Assembly were accustomed to rely having been
arrested, there only remained two possible Generals, Oudinot and
Lauriston. General Marquis de Lauriston, ex-peer of France, and at the
same time Colonel of the Tenth Legion and Representative of the People,
drew a distinction between his duty as Representative and his duty as
Colonel. Summoned by some of his friends of the Right to beat to arms and
call together the Tenth Legion, he answered, "As Representative of the
People I ought to indict the Executive Power, but as Colonel I ought to
obey it." It appears that he obstinately shut himself up in this singular
reasoning, and that it was impossible to draw him out of it.

"How stupid he is!" said Piscatory.

"How sharp he is!" said Falloux.

The first officer of the National Guard who appeared in uniform, seemed
to be recognized by two members of the Right, who said, "It is M. de
Perigord!" They made a mistake, it was M. Guilbot, major of the third
battalion of the Tenth Legion. He declared that he was ready to march on
the first order from his Colonel, General Lauriston. General Lauriston
went down into the courtyard, and came up a moment afterwards, saying,
"They do not recognize my authority. I have just resigned," Moreover, the
name of Lauriston was not familiar to the soldiers. Oudinot was better
known in the army. But how?

At the moment when the name of Oudinot was pronounced, a shudder ran
through this meeting, almost exclusively composed of members of the
Right. In fact at this critical time, at this fatal name of Oudinot,
reflections crowded upon each other in every mind.

What was the _coup d'état_?

It was the "Roman expedition at home." Which was undertaken against whom?
Against those who had undertaken the "Roman expedition abroad." The
National Assembly of France, dissolved by violence, could find only one
single General to defend it in its dying hour. And whom? Precisely he,
who in the name of the National Assembly of France had dissolved by
violence the National Assembly of Rome. What power could Oudinot, the
strangler of a Republic, possess to save a Republic? Was it not evident
that his own soldiers would answer him, "What do you want with us? That
which we have done at Rome we now do at Paris." What a story is this
story of treason! The French Legislature had written the first chapter
with the blood of the Roman Constituent Assembly: Providence wrote the
second chapter with the blood of the French Legislature, Louis Bonaparte
holding the pen.

In 1849, Louis Bonaparte had assassinated the sovereignty of the People
in the person of its Roman Representatives; in 1851 he assassinated it in
the person of its French Representatives. It was logical, and although it
was infamous, it was just. The Legislative Assembly bore at the same time
the weight of two crimes; it was the accomplice of the first, the victim
of the second. All these men of the majority felt this, and were humbled.
Or rather it was the same crime, the crime of the Second of July, 1849,
ever erect, ever alive, which had only changed its name, which now called
itself the Second of December, and which, the offspring of this Assembly,
stabbed it to the heart. Nearly all crimes are parricidal. On a certain
day they recoil upon those who have committed them, and slay them.

At this moment, so full of anxiety, M. de Falloux must have glanced round
for M. de Montalembert. M. de Montalembert was at the Elysée.

When Tamisier rose and pronounced this terrifying word, "The Roman
Question?" distracted M. de Dampierre shouted to him, "Silence! You kill
us!"

It was not Tamisier who was killing them--it was Oudinot.

M. de Dampierre did not perceive that he cried "Silence!" to history.

And then without even reckoning the fatal remembrance which at such a
moment would have crushed a man endowed in the highest degree with great
military qualities, General Oudinot, in other respects an excellent
officer, and a worthy son of his brave father, possessed none of those
striking qualities which in the critical hour of revolution stir the
soldier and carry with them the people. At that instant to win back an
army of a hundred thousand men, to withdraw the balls from the cannons'
mouths, to find beneath the wine poured out to the Praetorians the true
soul of the French soldier half drowned and nearly dead, to tear the flag
from the _coup d'état_ and restore it to the Law, to surround the
Assembly with thunders and lightnings, it would have needed one of those
men who exist no longer; it would have needed the firm hand, the calm
oratory, the cold and searching glance of Desaix, that French Phocion; it
would have needed the huge shoulders, the commanding stature, the
thundering voice, the abusive, insolent, cynical, gay, and sublime
eloquence of Kléber, that military Mirabeau. Desaix, the countenance of a
just man, or Kléber, the face of the lion! General Oudinot, little,
awkward, embarrassed, with an indecisive and dull gaze, red cheeks, low
forehead, with grizzled and lank hair, polite tone of voice, a humble
smile, without oratory, without gesture, without power, brave before the
enemy, timid before the first comer, having assuredly the bearing of a
soldier, but having also the bearing of a priest; he caused the mind to
hesitate between the sword and the taper; he had in his eyes a sort of
"Amen!"

He had the best intentions in the world, but what could he do? Alone,
without prestige, without true glory, without personal authority, and
dragging Rome after him! He felt all this himself, and he was as it were
paralyzed by it. As soon as they had appointed him he got upon a chair
and thanked the Assembly, doubtless with a firm heart, but with
hesitating speech. When the little fair-haired officer dared to look him
in the face and insult him, he, holding the sword of the people, he,
General of the sovereign Assembly, he only knew how to stammer out such
wretched phrases as these, "I have just declared to you that we are
unable, 'unless compelled and constrained,' to obey the order which
prohibits us from remaining assembled together." He spoke of obeying, he
who ought to command. They had girded him with his scarf, and it seemed
to make him uncomfortable. He inclined his head alternately first to one
shoulder and then to the other; he held his hat and cane in his hand, he
had a benevolent aspect. A Legitimist member muttered in a low voice to
his neighbor, "One might imagine he was a bailiff speechifying at a
wedding." And his neighbor, a Legitimist also, replied, "He reminds me of
the Duc d'Angoulême."

What a contrast to Tamisier! Tamisier, frank, earnest confident, although
a mere Captain of Artillery, had the bearing of a General. Had Tamisier,
with his grave and gentle countenance, high intelligence, and dauntless
heart, a species of soldier-philosopher, been better known, he could have
rendered decisive services. No one can tell what would have happened if
Providence had given the soul of Tamisier to Oudinot, or the epaulets of
Oudinot to Tamisier.

In this bloody enterprise of December we failed to find a General's
uniform becomingly worn. A book might be written on the part which gold
lace plays in the destiny of nations.

Tamisier, appointed Chief of the Staff some instants before the invasion
of the hall, placed himself at the disposal of the Assembly. He was
standing on a table. He spoke with a resonant and hearty voice. The most
downcast became reassured by this modest, honest, devoted attitude.
Suddenly he drew himself up, and looking all that Royalist majority in
the face, exclaimed, "Yes, I accept the charge you offer me. I accept the
charge of defending the Republic! Nothing but the Republic! Do you
perfectly understand?"

A unanimous shout answered him. "Long live the Republic!"

"Ah!" said Beslay, "the voice comes back to you as on the Fourth of May."

"Long live the Republic! Nothing but the Republic!" repeated the men of
the Right, Oudinot louder than the others. All arms were stretched
towards Tamisier, every hand pressed his. Oh Danger! irresistible
converter! In his last hour the Atheist invokes God, and the Royalist the
Republic. They cling to that which they have repudiated.

The official historians of the _coup d'état_ have stated that at the
beginning of the sitting two Representatives had been sent by the
Assembly to the Ministry of the Interior to "negotiate." What is certain
is that these two Representatives had no authority. They presented
themselves, not on behalf of the Assembly, but in their own name. They
offered themselves as intermediaries to procure a peaceable termination
of the catastrophe which had begun. With an honesty which bordered on
simplicity they summoned Morny to yield himself a prisoner, and to return
within the law, declaring that in case of refusal the Assembly would do
its duty, and call the people to the defence of the Constitution and of
the Republic. Marny answered them with a smile, accompanied by these
plain words, "If you appeal to arms, and if I find any Representatives on
the barricades, I will have them all shot to the last man."

The meeting in the Tenth Arrondissement yielded to force. President Vitet
insisted that they should forcibly arrest him. A police agent who seized
him turned pale and trembled. In certain circumstances, to lay violent
hands upon a man is to lay them upon Right, and those who dare to do so
are made to tremble by outraged Law. The exodus from the Mairie was long
and beset with obstructions. Half-an-hour elapsed while the soldiers were
forming a line, and while the Commissaries of Police, all the time
appearing solely occupied with the care of driving back the crowd in the
street, sent for orders to the Ministry of the Interior. During that time
some of the Representatives, seated round a table in the great Hall,
wrote to their families, to their wives, to their friends. They snatched
up the last leaves of paper; the pens failed; M. de Luynes wrote to his
wife a letter in pencil. There were no wafers; they were forced to send
the letters unsealed; some soldiers offered to post them. M. Chambolle's
son, who had accompanied his father thus far, undertook to take the
letters addressed to Mesdames de Luynes, de Lasteyrie, and Duvergier de
Hauranne. General Forey--the same who had refused a battalion to the
President of the Constituent Assembly, Marrast, who had promoted him from
a colonel to a general--General Forey, in the centre of the courtyard of
the Mairie, his face inflamed, half drunk, coming out, they said, from
breakfast at the Elysée, superintended the outrage. A member, whose name
we regret we do not know, dipped his boot into the gutter and wiped it
along the gold stripe of the regimental trousers of General Forey.
Representative Lherbette came up to General Forey, and said to him,
"General, you are a coward." Then turning to his colleagues, he
exclaimed, "Do you hear? I tell this general that he is a coward."
General Forey did not stir. He kept the mud on his uniform and the
epithet on his cheek.

The meeting did not call the people to arms. We have just explained that
it was not strong enough to do so; nevertheless, at the last moment, a
member of the Left, Latrade, made a fresh effort. He took M. Berryer
aside, and said to him, "Our official measures of resistance have come to
an end; let us not allow ourselves now to be arrested. Let us disperse
throughout the streets crying, 'To arms!'" M. Berryer consulted a few
seconds on the matter with the Vice-President, M. Benoist d'Azy, who
refused.

The Deputy Mayor, hat in hand, reconducted the members of the Assembly as
far as the gate of the Mairie. As soon as they appeared in the courtyard
ready to go out between two lines of soldiers, the post of National
Guards presented arms, acid shouted, "Long live the Assembly! Long live
the Representatives of the People!" The National Guards were at once
disarmed, almost forcibly, by the Chasseurs de Vincennes.

There was a wine-shop opposite the Mairie. As soon as the great folding
gates of the Mairie opened, and the Assembly appeared in the street, led
by General Forey on horseback, and having at its head the Vice-President
Vitet, grasped by the necktie by a police agent, a few men in white
blouses, gathered at the windows of this wine-shop, clapped their hands
and shouted, "Well done! down with the 'twenty-five francs!'"[7]

They set forth.

The Chasseurs de Vincennes, who marched in a double line on each side of
the prisoners, cast at them looks of hatred. General Oudinot said in a
whisper, "These little infantry soldiers are terrible fellows. At the
siege of Rome they flung themselves at the assault like madmen. These
lads are very devils." The officers avoided the gaze of the
Representatives. On leaving the Mairie, M. de Coislin passed by an
officer and exclaimed, "What a disgrace for the uniform!" the officer
retaliated with angry words, and incensed M. de Coislin. Shortly
afterwards, during the march, he came up to M. de Coislin and said to
him, "Sir, I have reflected; it is I who am wrong."

They proceeded on the way slowly. At a few steps from the Mairie the
precession met M. Chegaray. The Representatives called out to him,
"Come!" He answered, while making an expressive gesture with his hands
and his shoulders, "Oh! I dare say! As they have not arrested me...." and
he feigned as though he would pass on. He was ashamed, however, and went
with them. His name is found in the list of the roll-call at the
barracks.

A little further on M. de Lespérut passed them. They cried out to him.
"Lespérut! Lespérut!" "I am with you," answered he. The soldiers pushed
him back. He seized the butt-ends of the muskets, and forced his way into
the column.

In one of the streets through which they went a window was opened.
Suddenly a woman appeared with a child; the child, recognizing its father
amongst the prisoners, held out its arms and called to him, the mother
wept in the background.

It was at first intended to take the Assembly in a body straight to
Mazas, but this was counter-ordered by the Ministry of the Interior. It
was feared that this long walk, in broad daylight, through populous and
easily aroused streets, might prove dangerous; the D'Orsay barracks were
close at hand. They selected these as a temporary prison.

One of the commanders insolently pointed out with his sword the arrested
Representatives to the passers-by, and said in a fond voice, "These are
the Whites, we have orders to spare them. Now it is the turn of the Red
Representatives, let them look out for themselves!"

Wherever the procession passed, the populace shouted from the pavements,
at the doors, at the windows, "Long live the National Assembly!" When
they perceived a few Representatives of the Left sprinkled in the column
they cried, "Vive la République!" "Vive la Constitution!" and "Vive la
Loi!" The shops were not shut, and passers-by went to and fro. Some
people said, "Wait until the evening; this is not the end of it."

A staff-officer on horseback, in full uniform, met the procession,
recognized M. de Vatimesnil, and came up to greet him. In the Rue de
Beaune, as they passed the house of the _Démocratic Pacifique_ a group
shouted, "Down with the Traitor of the Elysée!"

On the Quai d'Orsay, the shouting was redoubled. There was a great crowd
there. On either side of the quay a file of soldiers of the Line, elbow
to elbow, kept back the spectators. In the middle of the space left
vacant, the members of the Assembly slowly advanced between a double file
of soldiers, the one stationary, which threatened the people, the other
on the march, which threatened tire Representatives.

Serious reflections arise in the presence of all the details of the great
crime which this book is designed to relate. Every honest man who sets
himself face to face with the _coup d'état_ of Louis Bonaparte hears
nothing but a tumult of indignant thoughts in his conscience. Whoever
reads our work to the end will assuredly not credit us with the intention
of extenuating this monstrous deed. Nevertheless, as the deep logic of
actions ought always to be italicized by the historian, it is necessary
here to call to mind and to repeat, even to satiety, that apart from the
members of the Left, of whom a very small number were present, and whom
we have mentioned by name, the three hundred Representatives who thus
defiled before the eyes of the crowd, constituted the old Royalists and
reactionary majority of the Assembly. If it were possible to forget,
that--whatever were their errors, whatever were their faults, and, we
venture to add, whatever were their illusions--these persons thus treated
were the Representatives of the leading civilized nation, were sovereign
Legislators, senators of the people, inviolable Deputies, and sacred by
the great law of Democracy, and that in the same manner as each man bears
in himself something of the mind of God, so each of these nominees of
universal suffrage bore something of the soul of France; if it were
possible to forget this for a moment, it assuredly would be a spectacle
perhaps more laughable than sad, and certainly more philosophical than
lamentable to see, on this December morning, after so many laws of
repression, after so many exceptional measures, after so many votes of
censure and of the state of siege, after so many refusals of amnesty,
after so many affronts to equity, to justice, to the human conscience, to
the public good faith, to right, after so many favors to the police,
after so many smiles bestowed on absolution, the entire Party of Order
arrested in a body and taken to prison by the _sergents de ville_!

One day, or rather, one night, the moment having come to save society,
the _coup d'état_ abruptly seizes the Demagogues, and finds that it holds
by the collar, Whom? the Royalists.

They arrived at the barracks, formerly the barracks of the Royal Guard,
and on the pediment of which is a carved escutcheon, whereon are still
visible the traces of the three _fleurs de lis_ effaced in 1830. They
halted. The door was opened. "Why!" said M. de Broglie, "here we are."

At that moment a great placard posted on the barrack wall by the side of
the door bore in big letters--

  "REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION."

It was the advertisement of a pamphlet, published two or three days
previous to the _coup d'état_, without any author's name, demanding the
Empire, and was attributed to the President of the Republic.

The Representatives entered and the doors were closed upon them. The
shouts ceased; the crowd, which occasionally has its meditative moments,
remained for some time on the quay, dumb, motionless, gazing alternately
at the closed gate of the Barracks, and at the silent front of the
Palace of the Assembly, dimly visible in the misty December twilight,
two hundred paces distant.

The two Commissaries of Police went to report their "success" to M. de
Morny. M. de Morny said, "Now the struggle has begun. Excellent! These
are the last Representatives who will be made prisoners."


[5] The Gerontes, or Gerontia, were the Elders of Sparta, who constituted
the Senate.

[6] The "bureau" of the Assembly consists of the President, for the time
being of the Assembly, assisted by six secretaries, whose duties mainly
lie in deciding in what sense the Deputies have voted. The "bureau" of
the Assembly should not be confounded with the fifteen "bureaux" of the
Deputies, which answer to our Select Committees of the House of Commons,
and are presided over by self-chosen Presidents.

[7] An allusion to the twenty-five francs a day officially payable to the
members of the Assembly.




CHAPTER XIII.


LOUIS BONAPARTE'S SIDE-FACE

The minds of all these men, we repeat, were very differently affected.

The extreme Legitimist party, which represents the White of the flag, was
not, it must be said, highly exasperated at the _coup d'état_. Upon many
faces might be read the saying of M. de Falloux: "I am so satisfied that
I have considerable difficulty in affecting to be only resigned." The
ingenuous spirits cast down their eyes--that is becoming to purity; more
daring spirits raised their heads. They felt an impartial indignation
which permitted a little admiration. How cleverly these generals have
been ensnared! The Country assassinated,--it is a horrible crime; but
they were enraptured at the jugglery blended with the parricide. One of
the leaders said, with a sigh of envy and regret, "We do not possess a
man of such talent." Another muttered, "It is Order." And he added,
"Alas!" Another exclaimed, "It is a frightful crime, but well carried
out." Some wavered, attracted on one side by the lawful power which
rested in the Assembly, and on the other by the abomination which was in
Bonaparte; honest souls poised between duty and infamy. There was a M.
Thomines Desmazures who went as far as the door of the Great Hall of the
Mairie, halted, looked inside, looked outside, and did not enter. It
would be unjust not to record that others amongst the pure Royalists, and
above all M. de Vatimesnil, had the sincere intonation and the upright
wrath of justice.

Be it as it may, the Legitimist party, taken as a whole, entertained no
horror of the _coup d'état_. It feared nothing. In truth, should the
Royalists fear Louis Bonaparte? Why?

Indifference does not inspire fear. Louis Bonaparte was indifferent. He
only recognized one thing, his object. To break through the road in order
to reach it, that was quite plain; the rest might be left alone. There
lay the whole of his policy, to crush the Republicans, to disdain the
Royalists.

Louis Bonaparte had no passion. He who writes these lines, talking one
day about Louis Bonaparte with the ex-king of Westphalia, remarked, "In
him the Dutchman tones down the Corsican."--"If there be any Corsican,"
answered Jérome.

Louis Bonaparte has never been other than a man who has lain wait for
fortune, a spy trying to dupe God. He had that livid dreaminess of the
gambler who cheats. Cheating admits audacity, but excludes anger. In his
prison at Ham he only read one book, "The Prince." He belonged to no
family, as he could hesitate between Bonaparte and Verhuell; he had no
country, as he could hesitate between France and Holland.

This Napoleon had taken St. Helena in good part. He admired England.
Resentment! To what purpose? For him on earth there only existed his
interests. He pardoned, because he speculated; he forgot everything,
because he calculated upon everything. What did his uncle matter to him?
He did not serve him; he made use of him. He rested his shabby enterprise
upon Austerlitz. He stuffed the eagle.

Malice is an unproductive outlay. Louis Bonaparte only possessed as much
memory as is useful. Hudson Lowe did not prevent him from smiling upon
Englishmen; the Marquis of Montchenu did not prevent him from smiling
upon the Royalists.

He was a man of earnest politics, of good company, wrapped in his own
scheming, not impulsive, doing nothing beyond that which he intended,
without abruptness, without hard words, discreet, accurate, learned,
talking smoothly of a necessary massacre, a slaughterer, because it
served his purpose.

All this, we repeat, without passion, and without anger. Louis Bonaparte
was one of those men who had been influenced by the profound iciness of
Machiavelli.

It was through being a man of that nature that he succeeded in submerging
the name of Napoleon by superadding December upon Brumaire.




CHAPTER XIV.


THE D'ORSAY BARRACKS

It was half-past three.

The arrested Representatives entered into the courtyard of the barracks,
a huge parallelogram closed in and commanded by high walls. These walls
are pierced by three tiers of windows, and posses that dismal appearance
which distinguishes barracks, schools, and prisons.

This courtyard is entered by an arched portal which extends through all
the breadth of the front of the main building. This archway, under which
the guard-house has been made, is close on the side of the quay by large
solid folding doors, and on one side of the courtyard by an iron grated
gateway. They closed the door and the grated gateway upon the
Representatives. They "set them at liberty" in the bolted and guarded
courtyard.

"Let them stroll about," said an officer.

The air was cold, the sky was gray. Some soldiers, in their shirt-sleeves
and wearing foraging caps, busy with fatigue duty, went hither and
thither amongst the prisoners.

First M. Grimault and then M. Antony Thouret instituted a roll-call. The
Representatives made a ring around them. Lherbette said laughingly, "This
just suits the barracks. We look like sergeant-majors who have come to
report." They called over the seven hundred and fifty names of the
Representatives. To each name they answered "Absent" or "Present," and
the secretary jotted down with a pencil those who were present. When the
name of Morny was reached, some one cried out, "At Clichy!" At the name
of Persigny, the same voice exclaimed, "At Poissy!" The inventor of these
two jokes, which by the way are very poor, has since allied himself to
the Second of December, to Morny and Persigny; he has covered his
cowardice with the embroidery of a senator.

The roll-call verified the presence of two hundred and twenty
Representatives, whose names were as follows:--

Le Duc de Luynes, d'Andigné de la Chasse, Antony Thouret, Arène, Audren
de Kerdrel (Ille-et-Vilaine), Audren de Kerdrel (Morbihan), de Balzac,
Barchou de Penhoen, Barillon, O. Barrot, Barthélemy Saint-Hilaire,
Quentin Bauchard, G. deBeaumont, Béchard, Behaghel, de Belèvze,
Benoist-d'Azy, de Benardy, Berryer, de Berset, Basse, Betting de
Lancastel, Blavoyer, Bocher, Boissié, de Botmillan, Bouvatier, le Duc de
Broglie, de la Broise, de Bryas, Buffet, Caillet du Tertre, Callet, Camus
de la Guibourgère, Canet, de Castillon, de Cazalis, Admiral Cécile,
Chambolle, Chamiot, Champannet, Chaper, Chapot, de Charencey, Chasseigne,
Chauvin, Chazant, de Chazelles, Chegaray, Comte de Coislin, Colfavru,
Colas de la Motte, Coquerel, de Corcelles, Cordier, Corne, Creton,
Daguilhon, Pujol, Dahirel, Vicomte Dambray, Marquis de Dampierre, de
Brotonne, de Fontaine, de Fontenay, Vicomte de Sèze, Desmars, de la
Devansaye, Didier, Dieuleveult, Druet-Desvaux, A. Dubois, Dufaure,
Dufougerais, Dufour, Dufournel, Marc Dufraisse, P. Duprat, Duvergier de
Hauranne, Étienne, Vicomte de Falloux, de Faultrier, Faure (Rhône),
Favreau, Ferre, des Ferrès, Vicomte de Flavigny, de Foblant, Frichon,
Gain, Gasselin, Germonière, de Gicquiau, de Goulard, de Gouyon, de
Grandville, de Grasset, Grelier-Dufougerais, Grévy, Grillon, Grimault,
Gros, Guislier de la Tousche, Harscouët de Saint-Georges, Marquis
d'Havrincourt, Hennequin, d'Hespel, Houel, Hovyn-Tranchère, Huot, Joret,
Jouannet, de Kéranflech, de Kératry, de Kéridec, de Kermazec, de
Kersauron Penendreff, Lèo de Laborde, Laboulie, Lacave, Oscar Lafayette,
Lafosse, Lagarde, Lagrenée Laimé, Lainé, Comte Lanjuinais, Larabit, de
Larcy, J. de Lasteyrie, Latrade, Laureau, Laurenceau, General Marquis de
Lauriston, de Laussat, Lefebvre de Grosriez, Legrand, Legros-Desvaux,
Lemaire, Emile Leroux, Lespérut, de l'Espinoy, Lherbette, de Linsaval, de
Luppé, Maréchal, Martin de Villers, Maze-Saunay, Mèze, Arnauld de Melun,
Anatole de Melun, Merentié, Michaud, Mispoulet, Monet, Duc de Montebello,
de Montigny, Moulin, Murat-Sistrière, Alfred Nettement, d'Olivier,
General Oudinot, Duc de Reggio, Paillat, Duparc, Passy, Emile Péan,
Pécoul, Casimir Perier, Pidoux, Pigeon, de Piogé, Piscatory, Proa,
Prudhomme, Querhoent, Randoing, Raudot, Raulin, de Ravinel, de Rémusat,
Renaud, Rezal, Comte de Rességuier, Henri de Riancey, Rigal, de la
Rochette, Rodat, de Roquefeuille des Rotours de Chaulieu, Rouget-Lafosse,
Rouillé, Roux-Carbonel, Saint-Beuve, de Saint-Germain, General Comte de
Saint-Priest, Salmon (Meuse), Marquis Sauvaire-Barthélemy, de Serré,
Comte de Sesmaisons, Simonot, de Staplande, de Surville, Marquis de
Talhouet, Talon, Tamisier, Thuriot de la Rosière, de Tinguy, Comte de
Tocqueville, de la Tourette, Comte de Tréveneue, Mortimer-Ternaux, de
Vatimesnil, Baron de Vandoeuvre, Vernhette (Hérault), Vernhette
(Aveyron), Vézin, Vitet, Comte de Vogué.

After this list of names may be read as follows in the shorthand report:--

"The roll-call having been completed, General Oudinot asked the
Representatives who were scattered about in the courtyard to come round
him, and made the following announcement to them,--

"'The Captain-Adjutant-Major, who has remained here to command the
barracks, has just received an order to have rooms prepared for us, where
we are to withdraw, as we are considered to be in custody. (Hear! hear!)
Do you wish me to bring the Adjutant-Major here! (No, no; it is useless.)
I will tell him that he had better execute his orders.' (Yes, yes, that
is right.)"

The Representatives remained "penned" and "strolling" about in this yard
for two long hours. They walked about arm in arm. They walked quickly, so
as to warm themselves. The men of the Right said to the men of the Left,
"Ah! if you had only voted the proposals of the Questors!" They also
exclaimed: "Well, how about the _invisible sentry_!"[8] And they laughed.
Then Marc Dufraisse answered, "Deputies of the People! deliberate in
peace!" It was then the turn of the Left to laugh. Nevertheless, there
was no bitterness. The cordiality of a common misfortune reigned amongst
them.

They questioned his ex-ministers about Louis Bonaparte. They asked
Admiral Cécile, "Now, really, what does this mean?" The Admiral answered
by this definition: "It is a small matter." M. Vézin added, "He wishes
History to call him 'Sire.'" "Poor Sire, then," said M. de Camas de la
Guibourgère. M. Odilon Barrot exclaimed, "What a fatality, that we should
have been condemned to employ this man!"

This said, these heights attained, political philosophy was exhausted,
and they ceased talking.

On the right, by the side of the door, there was a canteen elevated a few
steps above the courtyard. "Let us promote this canteen to the dignity of
a refreshment room," said the ex-ambassador to China, M. de Lagrenée.
They entered, some went up to the stove, others asked for a basin of
soup. MM. Favreau, Piscatory, Larabit, and Vatimesnil took refuge in a
corner. In the opposite corner drunken soldiers chatted with the maids of
the barracks. M. de Kératry, bent with his eighty years, was seated near
the stove on an old worm-eaten chair; the chair tottered; the old man
shivered.

Towards four o'clock a regiment of Chasseurs de Vincennes arrived in the
courtyard with their platters, and began to eat, singing, with loud
bursts of merriment. M. de Broglie looked at them and said to M.
Piscatory, "It is a strange spectacle to see the porringers of the
Janissaries vanished from Constantinople reappearing at Paris!"

Almost at the same moment a staff officer informed the Representatives on
behalf of General Forey that the apartments assigned to them were ready,
and requested them to follow him. They were taken into the eastern
building, which is the wing of the barracks farthest from the Palace of
the Council of State; they were conducted to the third floor. They
expected chambers and beds. They found long rooms, vast garrets with
filthy walls and low ceilings, furnished with wooden tables and benches.
These were the "apartments." These garrets, which adjoin each other, all
open on the same corridor, a narrow passage, which runs the length of the
main building. In one of these rooms they saw, thrown into a corner,
side-drums, a big drum, and various instruments of military music. The
Representatives scattered themselves about in these rooms. M. de
Tocqueville, who was ill, threw his overcoat on the floor in the recess
of a window, and lay down. He remained thus stretched upon the ground for
several hours.

These rooms were warmed very badly by cast-iron stoves, shaped like
hives. A Representative wishing to poke the fire, upset one, and nearly
set fire to the wooden flooring.

The last of these rooms looked out on the quay. Antony Thouret opened a
window and leaned out. Several Representatives joined him. The soldiers
who were bivouacking below on the pavement, caught sight of them and
began to shout, "Ah! there they are, those rascals at 'twenty-five francs
a day,' who wish to cut down our pay!" In fact, on the preceding evening,
the police had spread this calumny through the barracks that a
proposition had been placed on the Tribune to lessen the pay of the
troops. They had even gone so far as to name the author of this
proposition. Antony Thouret attempted to undeceive the soldiers. An
officer cried out to him, "It is one of your party who made the proposal.
It is Lamennais!"

In about an hour and a half there were ushered into these rooms MM.
Vallette, Bixio, and Victor Lefranc, who had come to join their
colleagues and constitute themselves prisoners.

Night came. They were hungry. Several had not eaten since the morning. M.
Howyn de Tranchère, a man of considerable kindness and devotion, who had
acted as porter at the Mairie, acted as forager at the barracks. He
collected five francs from each Representative, and they sent and ordered
a dinner for two hundred and twenty from the Café d'Orsay, at the corner
of the Quay, and the Rue du Bac. They dined badly, but merrily. Cookshop
mutton, bad wine, and cheese. There was no bread. They ate as they best
could, one standing, another on a chair, one at a table, another astride
on his bench, with his plate before him, "as at a ball-room supper," a
dandy of the Right said laughingly, Thuriot de la Rosière, son of the
regicide Thuriot. M. de Rémusat buried his head in his hands. Emile Péan
said to him, "We shall get over it." And Gustave de Beaumont cried out,
addressing himself to the Republicans, "And your friends of the Left!
Will they preserve their honor? Will there be an insurrection at least?"
They passed each other the dishes and plates, the Right showing marked
attention to the Left. "Here is the opportunity to bring about a fusion,"
said a young Legitimist. Troopers and canteen men waited upon them. Two
or three tallow candles burnt and smoked on each table. There were few
glasses. Right and Left drank from the same. "Equality, fraternity,"
exclaimed the Marquis Sauvaire-Barthélemy, of the Right. And Victor
Hannequin answered him, "But not Liberty."

Colonel Feray, the son-in-law of Marshal Bugeaud, was in command at the
barracks; he offered the use of his drawing-room to M. de Broglie and to
M. Odilon Barrot, who accepted it. The barrack doors were opened to M. de
Kératry, on account of his great age, to M. Dufaure, as his wife had just
been confined, and to M. Etienne, on account of the wound which he had
received that morning in the Rue de Bourgogne. At the same time there
were added to the two hundred and twenty MM. Eugène Sue, Benoist (du
Rhône), Fayolle, Chanay, Toupet des Vignes, Radoubt-Lafosse, Arbey, and
Teillard-Latérisse, who up to that time had been detained in the new
Palace of Foreign Affairs.

Towards eight o'clock in the evening, when dinner was over, the
restrictions were a little relaxed, and the intermediate space between
the door and the barred gate of the barracks began to be littered with
carpet bags and articles of toilet sent by the families of the imprisoned
Representatives.

The Representatives were summoned by their names. Each went down in turn,
and briskly remounted with his cloak, his coverlet, or his foot-warmer. A
few ladies succeeded in making their way to their husbands. M.M. Chambolle
was able to press his son's hand through the bars.

Suddenly a voice called out, "Oho! We are going to spend the night here."
Mattresses were brought in, which were thrown on the tables, on the
floor, anywhere.

Fifty or sixty Representatives found resting-places on them. The greater
number remained on their benches. Marc Dufraisse settled himself to pass
the night on a footstool, leaning on a table. Happy was the man who had a
chair.

Nevertheless, cordiality and gaiety did not cease to prevail. "Make room
for the 'Burgraves!'" said smilingly a venerable veteran of the Right. A
young Republican Representative rose, and offered him his mattress. They
pressed on each offers of overcoats, cloaks, and coverlets.

"Reconciliation," said Chamiot, while offering the half of his mattress
to the Duc de Luynes. The Duc de Luynes, who had 80,000 francs a year,
smiled, and replied to Chamiot, "You are St. Martin, and I am the beggar."

M. Paillet, the well-known barrister, who belonged to the "Third Estate,"
used to say, "I passed the night on a Bonapartist straw mattress, wrapped
in a burnouse of the Mountain, my feet in a Democratic and Socialist
sheepskin, and my head in a Legitimist cotton nightcap." The
Representatives, although prisoners in the barracks, could stroll about
freely. They were allowed to go down into the courtyard. M. Cordier (of
Calvados) came upstairs again, saying, "I have just spoken to the
soldiers. They did not know that their generals had been arrested. They
appeared surprised and discontented." This incident raised the prisoners'
hopes.

Representative Michel Renaud of the Basses-Pyrénees, found several of his
compatriots of the Basque country amongst the Chasseurs de Vincennes who
occupied the courtyard. Some had voted for him, and reminded him of the
fact. They added, "Ah! We would again vote for the 'Red' list." One of
them, quite a young man, took him aside, and said to him. "Do you want
any money, sir? I have a forty-sous piece in my pocket."

Towards ten o'clock in the evening a great hubbub arose in the courtyard.
The doors and the barred gate turned noisily upon their hinges. Something
entered which rumbled like thunder. They leaned out of window, and saw at
the foot of the steps a sort of big, oblong chest, painted black, yellow,
red, and green, on four wheels, drawn by post-horses, and surrounded by
men in long overcoats, and with fierce-looking faces, holding torches. In
the gloom, and with the help of imagination, this vehicle appeared
completely black. A door could be seen, but no other opening. It
resembled a great coffin on wheels. "What is that? Is it a hearse?" "No,
it is a police-van." "And those people, are they undertakers?" "No, they
are jailers." "And for whom has this come?"

"For you, gentlemen!" cried out a voice.

It was the voice of an officer; and the vehicle which had just entered
was in truth a police-van.

At the same time a word of command was heard: "First squadron to horse."
And five minutes afterwards the Lancers who were to escort the vehicle
formed in line in the courtyard.

Then arose in the barracks the buzz of a hive of angry bees. The
Representatives ran up and down the stairs, and went to look at the
police-van close at hand. Some of them touched it, and could not believe
their eyes. M. Piscatory met M. Chambolle, and cried out to him, "I am
leaving in it!" M. Berryer met Eugène Sue, and they exchanged these
words: "Where are you going?" "To Mount Valérien. And you?" "I do not
know."

At half-past ten the roll-call of those who were to leave began. Police
agents stationed themselves at a table between two candles in a parlor at
the foot of the stairs, and the Representatives were summoned two by two.
The Representatives agreed not to answer to their names, and to reply to
each name which should be called out, "He is not here." But those
"Burgraves" who had accepted the hospitality of Colonel Feray considered
such petty resistance unworthy of them, and answered to the calling out
of their names. This drew the others after them. Everybody answered.
Amongst the Legitimists some serio-comic scenes were enacted. They who
alone were not threatened insisted on believing that they were in danger.
They would not let one of their orators go. They embraced him, and held
him back, almost with tears, crying out, "Do not go away! Do you know
where they are taking you? Think of the trenches of Vincennes!"

The Representatives, having been summoned two by two, as we have just
said, filed in the parlor before the police agents, and then they were
ordered to get into the "robbers' box." The stowage was apparently made
at haphazard and promiscuously; nevertheless, later, by the difference
of the treatment accorded to the Representatives in the various prisons,
it was apparent that this promiscuous loading had perhaps been somewhat
prearranged. When the first vehicle was full, a second, of a similar
construction drew up. The police agents, pencil and pocket-book in
hand, noted down the contents of each vehicle. These men knew the
Representatives. When Marc Dufraisse, called in his turn, entered the
parlor, he was accompanied by Benoist (du Rhône). "Ah! here is Marc
Dufraisse," said the attendant who held the pencil. When asked for his
name, Benoist replied "Benoist." "Du Rhône," added the police agent; and
he continued, "for there are also Benoist d'Azy and Benoist-Champy."

The loading of each vehicle occupied nearly half an hour. The successive
arrivals had raised the number of imprisoned Representatives to two
hundred and thirty-two Their embarkation, or, to use the expression of M.
de Vatimesnil, their "barrelling up," which began a little after ten in
the evening, was not finished until nearly seven o'clock in the morning.
When there were no more police-vans available omnibuses were brought in.
These various vehicles were portioned off into three detachments, each
escorted by Lancers. The first detachment left towards one o'clock in the
morning, and was driven to Mont Valérien; the second towards five
o'clock, and was driven to Mazas; the third towards half-past six, to
Vincennes.

As this business occupied a long time, those who had not yet been called
benefited by the mattresses and tried to sleep. Thus, from time to time,
silence reigned in the upper rooms. In the midst of one of these pauses
M. Bixio sat upright, and raising his voice, cried out, "Gentlemen, what
do you think of 'passive obedience'?" An unanimous burst of laughter was
the reply. Again, during one of these pauses another voice exclaimed,--

"Romieu will be a senator."

Emile Péan asked,--

"What will become of the Red Spectre?"

"He will enter the priesthood," answered Antony Thouret, "and will turn
into the Black Spectre."

Other exclamations which the historians of the Second of December have
spread abroad were not uttered. Thus, Marc Dufraisse never made the
remark with which the men of Louis Bonaparte have wished to excuse their
crimes: "If the President does not shoot all those among us who resist,
he does not understand his business."

For the _coup d'état_ such a remark might be convenient; but for History
it is false.

The interior of the police-vans was lighted while the Representatives
were entering. The air-holes of each compartment were not closed. In this
manner Marc Dufraisse through the aperture could see M. du Rémusat in the
opposite cell to his own. M. du Rémusat had entered the van coupled with
M. Duvergier de Hauranne.

"Upon my word, Monsieur Marc Dufraisse," exclaimed Duvergier de Hauranne
when they jostled each other in the gangway of the vehicle, "upon my
word, if any one had said to me, 'You will go to Marzas in a police-van,'
I should have said, 'It is improbable;' but if they had added, 'You will
go with Marc Dufraisse,' I should have said, 'It is impossible!'"

As soon as the vehicle was full, five or six policemen entered and stood
in the gangway. The door was shut, the steps were thrown up, and they
drove off.

When all the police-vans had been filled, there were still some
Representatives left. As we have said, omnibuses were brought into
requisition. Into these Representatives were thrust, one upon the other,
rudely, without deference for either age or name. Colonel Feray, on
horseback, superintended and directed operations. As he mounted the steps
of the last vehicle but one, the Duc de Montebello cried out to him,
"To-day is the anniversary of the battle of Austerlitz, and the
son-in-law of Marshal Bugeaud compels the son of Marshal Lannes to enter
a convict's van."

When the last omnibus was reached, there were only seventeen places for
eighteen Representatives. The most active mounted first. Antony Thouret,
who himself alone equalled the whole of the Right, for he had as much
mind as Thiers and as much stomach as Murat; Antony Thouret, corpulent
and lethargic, was the last. When he appeared on the threshold of the
omnibus in all his hugeness, a cry of alarm arose;--Where was he going to
sit?

Antony Thouret, noticing Berryer at the bottom of the omnibus, went
straight up to him, sat down on his knees, and quietly said to him, "You
wanted 'compression,' Monsieur Berryer. Now you have it."


[8] Michel de Bourges had thus characterized Louis Bonaparte as the
guardian of the Republic against the Monarchical parties.




CHAPTER XV.


MAZAS

The police-vans, escorted as far as Mazas by Lancers, found another
squadron of Lancers ready to receive them at Mazas. The Representatives
descended from the vehicle one by one. The officer commanding the Lancers
stood by the door, and watched them pass with a dull curiosity.

Mazas, which had taken the place of the prison of La Force, now pulled
down, is a lofty reddish building, close to the terminus of the Lyons
Railway, and stands on the waste land of the Faubourg St. Antoine. From a
distance the building appears as though built of bricks, but on closer
examination it is seen to be constructed of flints set in cement. Six
large detached buildings, three stories high, all radiating from a
rotunda which serves as the common centre, and touching each other at the
starting-point, separated by courtyards which grow broader in proportion
as the buildings spread out, pierced with a thousand little dormer
windows which give light to the cells, surrounded by a high wall, and
presenting from a bird's-eye point of view the drape of a fan--such is
Mazas. From the rotunda which forms the centre, springs a sort of
minaret, which is the alarm-tower. The ground floor is a round room,
which serves as the registrar's office. On the first story is a chapel
where a single priest says mass for all; and the observatory, where a
single attendant keeps watch over all the doors of all the galleries at
the same time. Each building is termed a "division." The courtyards are
intersected by high walls into a multitude of little oblong walks.

As each Representative descended from the vehicle he was conducted into
the rotunda where the registry office was situated. There his name was
taken down, and in exchange for his name he was assigned a number.
Whether the prisoner be a thief or a legislator, such is always the rule
in this prison; the _coup d'état_ reduced all to a footing of equality.
As soon as a Representative was registered and numbered, he was ordered
to "file off." They said to him, "Go upstairs," or "Go on;" and they
announced him at the end of the corridor to which he was allotted by
calling out, "Receive number So-and-So." The jailer in that particular
corridor answered, "Send him on." The prisoner mounted alone, went
straight on, and on his arrival found the jailer standing near an open
door. The jailer said, "Here it is, sir." The prisoner entered, the
jailer shut the door, and they passed on to another.

The _coup d'état_ acted in a very different manner towards the various
Representatives. Those whom it desired to conciliate, the men of the
Bight, were placed in Vincennes; those whom it detested, the men of the
Left, were placed in Mazas. Those at Vincennes had the quarters of M.
Montpensier, which were expressly reopened for them; an excellent dinner,
eaten in company; wax candles, fire, and the smiles and bows of the
governor, General Courtigis.

This is how it treated those at Mazas.

A police-van deposited them at the prison. They were transferred from one
box to another. At Mazas a clerk registered them, weighed them, measured
them, and entered them into the jail book as convicts. Having passed
through the office, each of them was conducted along a gallery shrouded
in darkness, through a long damp vault to a narrow door which was
suddenly opened. This reached, a jailer pushed the Representative in by
the shoulders, and the door was shut.

The Representative, thus immured, found himself in a little, long,
narrow, dark room. It is this which the prudent language of modern
legislation terms a "cell." Here the full daylight of a December noon
only produced a dusky twilight. At one end there was a door, with a
little grating; at the other, close to the ceiling, at a height of ten or
twelve feet, there was a loophole with a fluted glass window. This window
dimmed the eye, and prevented it from seeing the blue or gray of the sky,
or from distinguishing the cloud from the sun's ray, and invested the wan
daylight of winter with an indescribable uncertainty. It was even less
than a dim light, it was a turbid light. The inventors of this fluted
window succeeded in making the heavens squint.

After a few moments the prisoner began to distinguish objects confusedly,
and this is what he found: White-washed walls here and there turned green
by various exhalations; in one corner a round hole guarded by iron bars,
and exhaling a disgusting smell; in another corner a slab turning upon a
hinge like the bracket seat of a _fiacre_, and thus capable of being used
as a table; no bed; a straw-bottomed chair; under foot a brick floor.
Gloom was the first impression; cold was the second. There, then, the
prisoner found himself, alone, chilled, in this semi-darkness, being able
to walk up and down the space of eight square feet like a caged wolf, or
to remain seated on his chair like an idiot at Bicêtre.

In this situation an ex-Republican of the Eve, who had become a member of
the majority, and on occasions sided somewhat with the Bonapartists, M.
Emile Leroux, who had, moreover, been thrown into Mazas by mistake,
having doubtless been taken for some other Leroux, began to weep with
rage. Three, four, five hours thus passed away. In the meanwhile they had
not eaten since the morning; some of them, in the excitement caused by
the _coup d'état_ had not even breakfasted. Hunger came upon them. Were
they to be forgotten there? No; a bell rang in the prison, the grating of
the door opened, and an arm held out to the prisoner a pewter porringer
and a piece of bread.

The prisoner greedily seized the bread and the porringer. The bread was
black and sticky; the porringer contained a sort of thick water, warm and
reddish. Nothing can be compared to the smell of this "soup." As for the
bread, it only smelt of mouldiness.

However great their hunger, most of the prisoners during the first moment
threw down their bread on the floor, and emptied the porringer down the
hole with the iron bars.

Nevertheless the stomach craved, the hours passed by, they picked up the
bread, and ended by eating it. One prisoner went so far as to pick up the
porringer and to attempt to wipe out the bottom with his bread, which he
afterwards devoured. Subsequently, this prisoner, a Representative set at
liberty in exile, described to me this dietary, and said to me, "A hungry
stomach has no nose."

Meanwhile there was absolute solitude and profound silence. However, in
the course of a few hours, M. Emile Leroux--he himself has told the fact
to M. Versigny--heard on the other side of the wall on his right a sort
of curious knocking, spaced out and intermittent at irregular intervals.
He listened, and almost at the same moment on the other side of the wall
to his left a similar rapping responded. M. Emile Leroux,
enraptured--what a pleasure it was to hear a noise of some kind!--thought
of his colleagues, prisoners like himself, and cried out in a tremendous
voice, "Oh, oh! you are there also, you fellows!" He had scarcely uttered
this sentence when the door of his cell was opened with a creaking of
hinges and bolts; a man--the jailer--appeared in a great rage, and said
to him,--

"Hold your tongue!"

The Representative of the People, somewhat bewildered, asked for an
explanation.

"Hold your tongue," replied the jailer, "or I will pitch you into a
dungeon."

This jailer spoke to the prisoner as the _coup d'état_ spoke to the
nation.

M. Emile Leroux, with his persistent parliamentary habits, nevertheless
attempted to insist.

"What!" said he, "can I not answer the signals which two of my colleagues
are making to me?"

"Two of your colleagues, indeed," answered the jailer, "they are two
thieves." And he shut the door, shouting with laughter.

They were, in fact, two thieves, between whom M. Emile Leroux was, not
crucified, but locked up.

The Mazas prison is so ingeniously built that the least word can be
heard from one cell to another. Consequently there is no isolation,
notwithstanding the cellular system. Thence this rigorous silence imposed
by the perfect and cruel logic of the rules. What do the thieves do? They
have invented a telegraphic system of raps, and the rules gain nothing by
their stringency. M. Emile Leroux had simply interrupted a conversation
which had been begun.

"Don't interfere with our friendly patter," cried out his thief neighbor,
who for this exclamation was thrown into the dungeon.

Such was the life of the Representatives at Mazas. Moreover, as they were
in secret confinement, not a book, not a sheet of paper, not a pen, not
even an hour's exercise in the courtyard was allowed to them.

The thieves also go to Mazas, as we have seen.

But those who know a trade are permitted to work; those who know how to
read are supplied with books; those who know how to write are granted a
desk and paper; all are permitted the hour's exercise required by the
laws of health and authorized by the rules.

The Representatives were allowed nothing whatever. Isolation, close
confinement, silence, darkness, cold, "the amount of _ennui_ which
engenders madness," as Linguet has said when speaking of the Bastille.

To remain seated on a chair all day long, with arms and legs crossed:
such was the situation. But the bed! Could they lie down?

No.

There was no bed.

At eight o'clock in the evening the jailer came into the cell, and
reached down, and removed something which was rolled up on a plank near
the ceiling. This "something" was a hammock.

The hammock having been fixed, hooked up, and spread out, the jailer
wished his prisoner "Good-night."

There was a blanket on the hammock, sometimes a mattress some two inches
thick. The prisoner, wrapt in this covering, tried to sleep, and only
succeeded in shivering.

But on the morrow he could at least remain lying down all day in his
hammock?

Not at all.

At seven o'clock in the morning the jailer came in, wished the
Representative "Good-morning," made him get up, and rolled up the hammock
on its shelf near the ceiling.

But in this case could not the prisoner take down the authorized hammock,
unroll it, hook it up, and lie down again?

Yes, he could. But then there was the dungeon.

This was the routine. The hammock for the night, the chair for the day.

Let us be just, however. Some obtained beds, amongst others MM. Thiers
and Roger (du Nord). M. Grévy did not have one.

Mazas is a model prison of progress; it is certain that Mazas is
preferable to the _piombi_ of Venice, and to the under-water dungeon of
the Châtelet. Theoretical philanthropy has built Mazas. Nevertheless, as
has been seen, Mazas leaves plenty to be desired. Let us acknowledge that
from a certain point of view the temporary solitary confinement of the
law-makers at Mazas does not displease us. There was perhaps something of
Providence in the _coup d'état_. Providence, in placing the Legislators
at Mazas, has performed an act of good education. Eat of your own
cooking; it is not a bad thing that those who own prisons should try them.




CHAPTER XVI.


THE EPISODE OF THE BOULEVARD ST. MARTIN

When Charamaule and I reached No. 70, Rue Blanche, a steep lonely street,
a man in a sort of naval sub-officer's uniform, was walking up and down
before the door. The portress, who recognized us, called our attention to
him. "Nonsense," said Charamaule, "a man walking about in that manner,
and dressed after that fashion, is assuredly not a police spy."

"My dear colleague," said I, "Bedeau has proved that the police are
blockheads."

We went upstairs. The drawing-room and a little ante-chamber which led to
it were full of Representatives, with whom were mingled a good many
persons who did not belong to the Assembly. Some ex-members of the
Constituent Assembly were there, amongst others, Bastide and several
Democratic journalists. The _Nationale_ was represented by Alexander Rey
and Léopold Duras, the _Révolution_ by Xavier Durrieu, Vasbenter, and
Watripon, the _Avénement du Peuple_ by H. Coste, nearly all the other
editors of the _Avénement_ being in prison. About sixty members of the
Left were there, and among others Edgar Quinet, Schoelcher, Madier de
Montjau, Carnot, Noël Parfait, Pierre Lefranc, Bancel, de Flotte,
Bruckner, Chaix, Cassal, Esquiros, Durand-Savoyat, Yvan, Carlos Forel,
Etchegoyen, Labrousse, Barthélemy (Eure-et-Loire), Huguenin, Aubrey (du
Nord), Malardier, Victor Chauffour, Belin, Renaud, Bac, Versigny, Sain,
Joigneaux, Brives, Guilgot, Pelletier, Doutre, Gindrier, Arnauld (de
l'Ariége), Raymond (de l'Isère), Brillier, Maigne, Sartin, Raynaud, Léon
Vidal, Lafon, Lamargue, Bourzat, and General Rey.

All were standing. They were talking without order. Léopold Duras had
just described the investment of the Café Bonvalet. Jules Favre and
Baudin, seated at a little table between the two windows, were writing.
Baudin had a copy of the Constitution open before him, and was copying
Article 68.

When we entered there was silence, and they asked us, "Well, what news?"

Charamaule told them what had just taken place on the Boulevard du
Temple, and the advice which he had thought right to give me. They
approved his action.

"What is to be done?" was asked on every side. I began to speak.

"Let us go straight to the fact and to the point," said I. "Louis
Bonaparte is gaining ground, and we are losing ground, or rather, we
should say, he has as yet everything, and we have as yet nothing.
Charamaule and I have been obliged to separate ourselves from Colonel
Forestier. I doubt if he will succeed. Louis Bonaparte is doing all he
can to suppress us, we must no longer keep in the background. We must
make our presence felt. We must fan this beginning of the flame of which
we have seen the spark on the Boulevard du Temple. A proclamation must be
made, no matter by whom it is printed, or how it is placarded, but it is
absolutely necessary, and that immediately. Something brief, rapid, and
energetic. No set phrases. Ten lines--an appeal to arms! We are the Law,
and there are occasions when the Law should utter a war-cry. The Law,
outlawing the traitor, is a great and terrible thing. Let us do it."

They interrupted me with "Yes, that is right, a proclamation!"

"Dictate! dictate!"

"Dictate," said Baudin to me, "I will write."

I dictated:-

  "TO THE PEOPLE.

  "Louis Napoléon Bonaparte is a traitor.

  "He has violated the Constitution.

  "He is forsworn.

  "He is an outlaw--"

They cried out to me on every side,--

"That is right! Outlaw him."

"Go on."

I resumed the dictation. Baudin wrote,--

  "The Republican Representatives refer the People and the Army to Article
  68--"

They interrupted me: "Quote it in full."

"No," said I, "it would be too long. Something is needed which can be
placarded on a card, stuck with a wafer, and which can be read in a
minute. I will quote Article 110. It is short and contains the appeal to
arms."

I resumed,--

  "The Republican Representatives refer the People and the Army to Article
  68 and to Article 110, which runs thus--'The Constituent Assembly
  confides the existing Constitution and the Laws which it consecrates to
  the keeping and the patriotism of all Frenchmen.'

  "The People henceforward and for ever in possession of universal
  suffrages and who need no Prince for its restitution, will know how to
  chastise the rebel.

  "Let the People do its duty. The Republican Representatives are marching
  at its head.

  "Vive la République! To Arms!"

They applauded.

"Let us all sign," said Pelletier.

"Let us try to find a printing-office without delay," said Schoelcher,
"and let the proclamation be posted up immediately."

"Before nightfall--the days are short," added Joigneaux.

"Immediately, immediately, several copies!" called out the
Representatives.

Baudin, silent and rapid, had already made a second copy of the
proclamation.

A young man, editor of the provincial Republican journal, came out of the
crowd, and declared that, if they would give him a copy at once, before
two hours should elapse the Proclamation should be posted at all the
street corners in Paris.

I asked him,--

"What is your name?"

He answered me,--

"Millière."

Millière. It is in this manner that this name made its first appearance
in the gloomy days of our History. I can still see that pale young man,
that eye at the same time piercing and half closed, that gentle and
forbidding profile. Assassination and the Pantheon awaited him. He was
too obscure to enter into the Temple, he was sufficiently deserving to
die on its threshold. Baudin showed him the copy which he had just made.

Millière went up to him.

"You do not know me," said he; "my name is Millière; but I know you, you
are Baudin."

Baudin held out his hand to him.

I was present at the handshaking between these two spectres.

Xavier Durrieu, who was editor of the _Révolution_ made the same offer as
Millière.

A dozen Representatives took their pens and sat down, some around a
table, others with a sheet of paper on their knees, and called out to
me,--

"Dictate the Proclamation to us."

I had dictated to Baudin, "Louis Napoléon Bonaparte is a traitor." Jules
Favre requested the erasure of the word Napoléon, that name of glory
fatally powerful with the People and with the Army, and that there should
be written, "Louis Bonaparte is a traitor."

"You are right," said I to him.

A discussion followed. Some wished to strike out the word "Prince." But
the Assembly was impatient. "Quick! quick!" they cried out. "We are in
December, the days are short," repeated Joigneaux.

Twelve copies were made at the same time in a few minutes. Schoelcher,
Rey, Xavier Durrieu, and Millière each took one, and set out in search of
a printing office.

As they went out a man whom I did not know, but who was greeted by
several Representatives, entered and said, "Citizens, this house is
marked. Troops are on the way to surround you. You have not a second to
lose."

Numerous voices were raised,--

"Very well! Let them arrest us!"

"What does it matter to us?"

"Let them complete their crime."

"Colleagues," said I, "let us not allow ourselves to be arrested. After
the struggle, as God pleases; but before the combat,--No! It is from us
that the people are awaiting the initiative. If we are taken, all is at
an end. Our duty is to bring on the battle, our right is to cross swords
with the _coup d'état_. It must not be allowed to capture us, it must
seek us and not find us. We must deceive the arm which it stretches out
against us, we must remain concealed from Bonaparte, we must harass him,
weary him, astonish him, exhaust him, disappear and reappear unceasingly,
change our hiding-place, and always fight him, be always before him, and
never beneath his hand. Let us not leave the field. We have not numbers,
let us have daring."

They approved of this. "It is right," said they, "but where shall we go?"

Labrousse said,--

"Our former colleague of the Constituent Assembly, Beslay, offers us his
house."

"Where does he live?"

"No. 33, Rue de la Cérisaie, in the Marais."

"Very well," answered I, "let us separate. We will meet again in two
hours at Beslay's, No. 33, Rue de la Cérisaie."

All left; one after another, and in different directions. I begged
Charamaule to go to my house and wait for me there, and I walked out with
Noël Parfait and Lafon.

We reached the then still uninhabited district which skirts the ramparts.
As we came to the corner of the Rue Pigalle, we saw at a hundred paces
from us, in the deserted streets which cross it, soldiers gliding all
along the houses, bending their steps towards the Rue Blanche.

At three o'clock the members of the Left rejoined each other in the Rue
de la Cérisaie. But the alarm had been given, and the inhabitants of
these lonely streets stationed themselves at the windows to see the
Representatives pass. The place of meeting, situated and hemmed in at the
bottom of a back yard, was badly chosen in the event of being surrounded:
all these disadvantages were at once perceived, and the meeting only
lasted a few seconds. It was presided over by Joly; Xavier Durrieu and
Jules Gouache, who were editors of the _Révolution_, also took part, as
well as several Italian exiles, amongst others Colonel Carini and
Montanelli, ex-Minister of the Grand Duke of Tuscany. I liked Montanelli,
a gentle and dauntless spirit.

Madier de Montjau brought news from the outskirts. Colonel Forestier,
without losing and without taking away hope, told them of the obstacles
which he had encountered in his attempts to call together the 6th Legion.
He pressed me to sign his appointment as Colonel, as well as Michel de
Bourges; but Michel de Bourges was absent, and besides, neither Michel de
Bourges nor I had yet at drat time the authority from the Left.
Nevertheless, under this reservation I signed his appointment. The
perplexities were becoming more and more numerous. The Proclamation was
not yet printed, and the evening was closing in. Schoelcher explained the
difficulties: all the printing offices closed and guarded; an order
placarded that whoever should print an appeal to arms world be
immediately shot; the workmen terrified; no money. A hat was sent round,
and each threw into it what money he had about him. They collected in
this manner a few hundred francs.

Xavier Durrieu, whose fiery courage never flagged for a single moment,
reiterated that he would undertake the printing, and promised that by
eight o'clock that evening there should be 40,000 copies of the
Proclamation. Time pressed. They separated, after fixing as a rendezvous
the premises of the Society of Cabinet-makers in the Rue de Charonne, at
eight o'clock in the evening, so as to allow time for the situation to
reveal itself. As we went out and crossed the Rue Beautreillis I saw
Pierre Leroux coming up to me. He had taken no part in our meetings. He
said to me,--

"I believe this struggle to be useless. Although my point of view is
different from yours, I am your friend. Beware. There is yet time to
stop. You are entering into the catacombs. The catacombs are Death."

"They are also Life," answered I.

All the same, I thought with joy that my two sons were in prison, and
that this gloomy duty of street fighting was imposed upon me alone.

There yet remained five hours until the time fixed for the rendezvous. I
wished to go home, and once more embrace my wife and daughter before
precipitating myself into that abyss of the "unknown" which was there,
yawning and gloomy, and which several of us were about to enter, never to
return.

Arnauld (de l'Ariége) gave me his arm. The two Italian exiles, Carini
aril Montanelli, accompanied me.

Montanelli took my hands and said to me, "Right will conquer. You will
conquer. Oh! that this time France may not be selfish as in 1848, and
that she may deliver Italy." I answered him, "She will deliver Europe."

Those were our illusions at that moment, but this, however, does not
prevent them from being our hopes to-day. Faith is thus constituted;
shadows demonstrate to it the light.

There is a cabstand before the front gate of St. Paul. We went there. The
Rue St. Antoine was alive with that indescribable uneasy swarming which
precedes those strange battles of ideas against deeds which are called
Revolutions. I seemed to catch, in this great working-class district, a
glimpse of a gleam of light which, alas, died out speedily. The cabstand
before St. Paul was deserted. The drivers had foreseen the possibility of
barricades, and had fled.

Three miles separated Arnauld and myself from our houses. It was
impossible to walk there through the middle of Paris, without being
recognized at each step. Two passers-by extricated us from our
difficulty. One of them said to the other, "The omnibuses are still
running on the Boulevards."

We profited by this information, and went to look for a Bastille omnibus.
All four of us got in.

I entertained at heart, I repeat, wrongly or rightly, a bitter reproach
for the opportunity lost during the morning. I said to myself that on
critical days such moments come, but do not return. There are two
theories of Revolution: to arouse the people, or to let them come of
themselves. The first theory was mine, but, through force of discipline,
I had obeyed the second. I reproached myself with this. I said to myself,
"The People offered themselves, and we did not accept them. It is for us
now not to offer ourselves, but to do more, to give ourselves."

Meanwhile the omnibus had started. It was full. I had taken my place at
the bottom on the left; Arnauld (de l'Ariége) sat next to me, Carini
opposite, Montanelli next to Arnauld. We did not speak; Arnauld and
myself silently exchanged that pressure of hands which is a means of
exchanging thoughts.

As the omnibus proceeded towards the centre of Paris the crowd became
denser on the Boulevard. As the omnibus entered into the cutting of the
Porte St. Martin a regiment of heavy cavalry arrived in the opposite
direction. In a few seconds this regiment passed by the side of us. They
were cuirassiers. They filed by at a sharp trot and with drawn swords.
The people leaned over from the height of the pavements to see them pass.
Not a single cry. On the one side the people dejected, on the other the
soldiers triumphant. All this stirred me.

Suddenly the regiment halted. I do not know what obstruction momentarily
impeded its advance in this narrow cutting of the Boulevard in which we
were hemmed in. By its halt it stopped the omnibus. There were the
soldiers. We had them under our eyes, before us, at two paces distance,
their horses touching the horses of our vehicle, these Frenchmen who had
become Mamelukes, these citizen soldiers of the Great Republic
transformed into supporters of the degraded Empire. From the place where
I sat I almost touched them; I could no longer restrain myself.

I lowered the window of the omnibus. I put out my head, and, looking
fixedly at the dense line of soldiers which faced me, I called out, "Down
with Louis Bonaparte. Those who serve traitors are traitors!"

Those nearest to me turned their heads towards me and looked at me with a
tipsy air; the others did not stir, and remained at "shoulder arms," the
peaks of their helmets over their eyes, their eyes fixed upon the ears of
their horses.

In great affairs there is the immobility of statues; in petty mean
affairs there is the immobility of puppets.

At the shout which I raised Arnauld turned sharply round. He also had
lowered his window, and he was leaning half out of the omnibus, with his
arms extended towards the soldiers, and he shouted, "Down with the
traitors!"

To see him thus with his dauntless gesture, his handsome head, pale and
calm, his fervent expression, his beard and his long chestnut hair, one
seemed to behold the radiant and fulminating face of an angry Christ.

The example was contagious and electrical.

"Down with the traitors!" shouted Carini and Montanelli.

"Down with the Dictator! Down with the traitors!" repeated a gallant
young man with whom we were not acquainted, and who was sitting next to
Carini.

With the exception of this young man, the whole omnibus seemed seized
with terror!

"Hold your tongues!" exclaimed these poor frightened people; "you will
cause us all to be massacred." One, still more terrified, lowered the
window, and began to shout to the soldiers, "Long live Prince Napoléon!
Long live the Emperor!"

There were five of us, and we overpowered this cry by our persistent
protest, "Down with Louis Bonaparte! Down with the traitors!"

The soldiers listened in gloomy silence. A corporal turned with a
threatening air towards us, and shook his sword. The crowd looked on in
bewilderment.

What passed within me at that moment? I cannot tell! I was in a
whirlwind. I had at the same time yielded to a calculation, finding the
opportunity good, and to a burst of rage, finding the encounter insolent.

A woman cried out to us from the pavement, "You will get yourselves cut
to pieces." I vaguely imagined that some collision was about to ensue,
and that, either from the crowd or from the Army, the spark would fly
out. I hoped for a sword-cut from the soldiers or a shout of anger from
the people. In short I had obeyed rather an instinct than an idea.

But nothing came of it, neither the sword-cut nor the shout of anger. The
soldiers did not bestir themselves and the people maintained silence. Was
it too late? Was it too soon?

The mysterious man of the Elysée had not foreseen the event of an insult
to his name being thrown in the very face of the soldiers. The soldiers
had no orders. They received them that evening. This was seen on the
morrow.

In another moment the regiment broke into a gallop, and the omnibus
resumed its journey. As the cuirassiers filed past us Arnauld (de
l'Ariége), still leaning out of the vehicle, continued to shout in their
ears, for as I have just said, their horses touched us, "Down with the
Dictator! Down with the traitors!"

We alighted in the Rue Lafitte. Carini, Montanelli, and Arnauld left me,
and I went on alone towards the Rue de la Tour d'Auvergne. Night was
coming on. As I turned the corner of the street a man passed close by me.
By the light of a street lamp I recognized a workman at a neighboring
tannery, and he said to me in a low tone, and quickly, "Do not return
home. The police surround your house."

I went back again towards the Boulevard, through the streets laid out,
but not then built, which make a Y under my windows behind my house. Not
being able to embrace my wife and daughter, I thought over what I could
do during the moments which remained to me. A remembrance came into my
mind.




CHAPTER XVII.


THE REBOUND OF THE 24TH JUNE, 1848, ON THE 2D DECEMBER, 1851

On Sunday, 26th June, 1848, that four days' combat, that gigantic combat
so formidable and so heroic on both sides, still continued, but the
insurrection had been overcome nearly everywhere, and was restricted to
the Faubourg St. Antoine. Four men who had been amongst the most
dauntless defenders of the barricades of the Rue Pont-aux-Choux, of the
Rue St. Claude, and of the Rue St. Louis in the Marais, escaped after the
barricades had been taken, and found safe refuge in a house, No. 12, Rue
St. Anastase. They were concealed in an attic. The National Guards and
the Mobile Guards were hunting for them, in order to shoot them. I was
told of this. I was one of the sixty Representatives sent by the
Constituent Assembly into the middle of the conflict, charged with the
task of everywhere preceding the attacking column, of carrying, even at
the peril of their lives, words of peace to the barricades, to prevent
the shedding of blood, and to stop the civil war. I went into the Rue St.
Anastase, and I saved the lives of those four men.

Amongst those men there was a poor workman of the Rue de Charonne, whose
wife was being confined at that very moment, and who was weeping. One
could understand, when hearing his sobs and seeing his rags, how he had
cleared with a single bound these three steps--poverty, despair,
rebellion. Their chief was a young man, pale and fair, with high cheek
bones, intelligent brow, and an earnest and resolute countenance. As soon
as I set him free, and told him my name, he also wept. He said to me,
"When I think that an hour ago I knew that you were facing us, and that I
wished that the barrel of my gun had eyes to see and kill you!" He added,
"In the times in which we live we do not know what may happen. If ever
you need me, for whatever purpose, come." His name was Auguste, and he
was a wine-seller in the Rue de la Roquette.

Since that time I had only seen him once, on the 26th August, 1819, on
the day when I held the corner of Balzac's pall. The funeral possession
was going to Père la Chaise. Auguste's shop was on the way. All the
streets through which the procession passed were crowded. Auguste was at
his door with his young wife and two or three workmen. As I passed he
greeted me.

It was this remembrance which came back to my mind as I descended the
lonely streets behind my house; in the presence of the 2d of December I
thought of him. I thought that he might give me information about the
Faubourg St. Antoine, and help us in rousing the people. This young man
had at once given me the impression of a soldier and a leader. I
remembered the words which he had spoken to me, and I considered it might
be useful to see him. I began by going to find in the Rue St. Anastase
the courageous woman who had hidden Auguste and his three companions, to
whom she had several times since rendered assistance. I begged her to
accompany me. She consented.

On the way I dined upon a cake of chocolate which Charamaule had given
me.

The aspects of the boulevards, in coming down the Italiens towards the
Marais, had impressed rue. The shops were open everywhere as usual. There
was little military display. In the wealthy quarters there was much
agitation and concentration of troops; but on advancing towards the
working-class neighborhoods solitude reigned paramount. Before the Café
Turc a regiment was drawn up. A band of young men in blouses passed
before the regiment singing the "Marseillaise." I answered them by crying
out "To Arms!" The regiment did not stir. The light shone upon the
playbills on an adjacent wall; the theatres were open. I looked at the
trees as I passed. They were playing _Hernani_ at the Theatre des
Italiens, with a new tenor named Guasco.

The Place de la Bastille was frequented, as usual, by goers and comers,
the most peaceable folk in the world. A few workmen grouped round the
July Column, and, chatting in a low voice, were scarcely noticeable.
Through the windows of a wine shop could be seen two men who were
disputing for and against the _coup d'état_. He who favored it wore a
blouse, he who attacked it wore a cloth coat. A few steps further on a
juggler had placed between four candles his X-shaped table, and was
displaying his conjuring tricks in the midst of a crowd, who were
evidently thinking only of the juggler. On looking towards the gloomy
loneliness of the Quai Mazas several harnessed artillery batteries were
dimly visible in the darkness. Some lighted torches here and there showed
up the black outline of the cannons.

I had some trouble in finding Auguste's door in the Rue de la Roquette.
Nearly all the shops were shut, thus making the street very dark. At
length, through a glass shop-front I noticed a light which gleamed on a
pewter counter. Beyond the counter, through a partition also of glass and
ornamented with white curtains, another light, and the shadows of two or
three men at table could be vaguely distinguished. This was the place.

I entered. The door on opening rang a bell. At the sound, the door of the
glazed partition which separated the shop from the parlor opened, and
Auguste appeared.

He knew me at once, and came up to me.

"Ah, Sir," said he, "it is you!"

"Do you know what is going on?" I asked him.

"Yes, sir."

This "Yes, sir," uttered with calmness, and even with a certain
embarrassment, told me all. Where I expected an indignant outcry I found
this peaceable answer. It seemed to me that I was speaking to the
Faubourg St. Antoine itself. I understood that all was at an end in this
district, and that we had nothing to expect from it. The people, this
wonderful people, had resigned themselves. Nevertheless, I made an
effort.

"Louis Bonaparte betrays the Republic," said I, without noticing that I
raised my voice.

He touched my arm, and pointing with his finger to the shadows which were
pictured on the glazed partition of the parlor, "Take care, sir; do not
talk so loudly."

"What!" I exclaimed, "you have come to this--you dare not speak, you dare
not utter the name of 'Bonaparte' aloud; you barely mumble a few words in
a whisper here, in this street, in the Faubourg St. Antoine, where, from
all the doors, from all the windows, from all the pavements, from all the
very stones, ought to be heard the cry, 'To arms.'"

Auguste demonstrated to me what I already saw too clearly, and what
Girard had shadowed forth in the morning--the moral situation of the
Faubourg--that the people were "dazed"--that it seemed to all of them
that universal suffrage was restored; that the downfall of the law of the
31st of May was a good thing.

Here I interrupted him.

"But this law of the 31st of May, it was Louis Bonaparte who instigated
it, it was Rouher who made it, it was Baroche who proposed it, and the
Bonapartists who voted it. You are dazzled by a thief who has taken your
purse, and who restores it to you!"

"Not I," said Auguste, "but the others."

And he continued, "To tell the whole truth, people did not care much for
the Constitution, they liked the Republic, but the Republic was
maintained too much by force for their taste. In all this they could only
see one thing clearly, the cannons ready to slaughter them--they
remembered June, 1848--there were some poor people who had suffered
greatly--Cavaignac had done much evil--women clung to the men's blouses
to prevent them from going to the barricades--nevertheless, with all
this, when seeing men like ourselves at their head, they would perhaps
fight, but this hindered them, they did not know for what." He concluded
by saying, "The upper part of the Faubourg is doing nothing, the lower
end will do better. Round about here they will fight. The Rue de la
Roquette is good, the Rue de Charonne is good; but on the side of Père la
Chaise they ask, 'What good will that do us?' They only recognize the
forty sous of their day's work. They will not bestir themselves; do not
reckon upon the masons." He added, with a smile, "Here we do not say
'cold as a stone,' but 'cold as a mason'"--and he resumed, "As for me, if
I am alive, it is to you that I owe my life. Dispose of me. I will lay
down my life, and will do what you wish."

While he was speaking I saw the white curtain of the glazed partition
behind him move a little. His young wife, uneasy, was peeping through at
us.

"Ah! my God," said I to him, "what we want is not the life of one man but
the efforts of all."

He was silent. I continued,--

"Listen to me, Auguste, you who are good and intelligent. So, then, the
Faubourgs of Paris--which are heroes even when they err--the Faubourgs
of Paris, for a misunderstanding, for a question of salary wrongly
construed, for a bad definition of socialism, rose in June, 1848, against
the Assembly elected by themselves, against universal suffrage, against
their own vote; and yet they will not rise in December, 1851, for Right,
for the Law, for the People, for Liberty, for the Republic. You say that
there is perplexity, and that you do not understand; but, on the
contrary, it was in June that all was obscure, and it is to-day that
everything is clear!"

While I was saying these last words the door of the parlor was softly
opened, and some one came in. It was a young man, fair as Auguste, in an
overcoat, and wearing a workman's cap. I started. Auguste turned round
and said to me, "You can trust him."

The young man took off his cap, came close up to me, carefully turning
his back on the glazed partition, and said to me in a low voice, "I know
you well. I was on the Boulevard du Temple to-day. We asked you what we
were to do; you said, 'We must take up arms.' Well, here they are!"

He thrust his hands into the pockets of his overcoat and drew out two
pistols.

Almost at the same moment the bell of the street door sounded. He
hurriedly put his pistols back into his pockets. A man in a blouse came
in, a workman of some fifty years. This man, without looking at any one,
without saying anything, threw down a piece of money on the counter.
Auguste took a small glass and filled it with brandy, the man drank it
off, put down the glass upon the counter and went away.

When the door was shut: "You see," said Auguste to me, "they drink, they
eat, they sleep, they think of nothing. Such are they all!"

The other interrupted him impetuously: "One man is not the People!"

And turning towards me,--

"Citizen Victor Hugo, they will march forward. If all do not march, some
will march. To tell the truth, it is perhaps not here that a beginning
should be made, it is on the other side of the water."

And suddenly checking himself,--"After all, you probably do not know my
name."

He took a little pocket-book from his pocket, tore out a piece of paper,
wrote on it his name, and gave it to me. I regret having forgotten that
name. He was a working engineer. In order not to compromise him, I burnt
this paper with many others on the Saturday morning, when I was on the
point of being arrested.

"It is true, sir," said Auguste, "you must not judge badly of the
Faubourg. As my friend has said, it will perhaps not be the first to
begin; but if there is a rising it will rise."

I exclaimed, "And who would you have erect if the Faubourg St. Antoine be
prostrate! Who will be alive if the people be dead!"

The engineer went to the street door, made certain that it was well shut,
then came back, and said,--

"There are many men ready and willing. It is the leaders who are wanting.
Listen, Citizen Victor Hugo, I can say this to you, and," he added,
lowering his voice, "I hope for a movement to-night."

"Where?"

"On the Faubourg St. Marceau."

"At what time?"

"At one o'clock."

"How do you know it?"

"Because I shall be there."

He continued: "Now, Citizen Victor Hugo, if a movement takes place
to-night in the Faubourg St. Marceau, will you head it? Do you consent?"

"Yes."

"Have you your scarf of office?"

I half drew it out of my pocket. His eyes glistened with joy.

"Excellent," said he. "The Citizen has his pistols, the Representative
his scarf. All are armed."

I questioned him. "Are you sure of your movement for to-night?"

He answered me, "We have prepared it, and we reckon to be there."

"In that case," said I, "as soon as the first barricade is constructed I
will be behind it. Come and fetch me."

"Where?"

"Wherever I may be."

He assured me that if the movement should take place during the night he
would know it at half-past ten that evening at the latest, and that I
should be informed of it before eleven o'clock. We settled that in
whatever place I might be at that hour I would send word to Auguste, who
undertook to let him know.

The young woman continued to peep out at us. The conversation was growing
prolonged, and might seem singular to the people in the parlor. "I am
going," said I to Auguste.

I had opened the door, he took my hand, pressed it as a woman might have
done, and said to me in a deeply-moved tone, "You are going: will you
come back?"

"I do not know."

"It is true," said he. "No one knows what is going to happen. Well, you
are perhaps going to be hunted and sought for as I have been. It will
perhaps be your turn to be shot, and mine to save you. You know the mouse
may sometimes prove useful to the lion. Monsieur Victor Hugo, if you need
a refuge, this house is yours. Come here. You will find a bed where you
can sleep, and a man who will lay down his life for you."

I thanked him by a hearty shake of the hand, and I left. Eight o'clock
struck. I hastened towards the Rue de Charonne.




CHAPTER XVIII.


THE REPRESENTATIVES HUNTED DOWN

At the corner of the Rue de Faubourg St. Antoine before the shop of the
grocer Pepin, on the same spot where the immense barricade of June,
1848, was erected as high as the second story, the decrees of the
morning had been placarded. Some men were inspecting them, although it
was pitch dark, and they could not read them, and an old woman said,
"The 'Twenty-five francs' are crushed--so much the better!"

A few steps further I heard my name pronounced. I turned round. It was
Jules Favre, Bourzat, Lafon, Madier de Montjau, and Michel de Bourges,
who were passing by. I took leave of the brave and devoted woman who had
insisted upon accompanying me. A _fiacre_ was passing. I put her in it,
and then rejoined the five Representatives. They had come from the Rue
de Charonne. They had found the premises of the Society of Cabinet
Makers closed. "There was no one there," said Madier de Montjau. "These
worthy people are beginning to get together a little capital, they do
not wish to compromise it, they are afraid of us. They say, '_coups
d'état_ are nothing to us, we shall leave them alone!'"

"That does not surprise me," answered I, "a society is shopkeeper."

"Where are we going?" asked Jules Favre.

Lafon lived two steps from there, at No. 2, Quai Jemmapes. He offered us
the use of his rooms. We accepted, and took the necessary measures to
inform the members of the Left that we had gone there.

A few minutes afterwards we were installed in Lafon's rooms, on the
fourth floor of an old and lofty house. This house had seen the taking
of the Bastille.

This house was entered by a side-door opening from the Quai Jemmapes
upon a narrow courtyard a few steps lower than the Quai itself. Bourzat
remained at this door to warn us in case of any accident, and to point
out the house to those Representatives who might come up.

In a few moments a large number of us had assembled, and we again
met--all those of the morning, with a few added. Lafon gave up his
drawing-room to us, the windows of which overlooked the back yard. We
organized a sort of "bureau," and we took our places, Jules Favre,
Carnot, Michel, and myself, at a large table, lighted by two candles,
and placed before the fire. The Representatives and the other people
present sat around on chairs and sofas. A group stood before the door.

Michel de Bourges, on entering, exclaimed, "We have come to seek out the
people of the Faubourg St. Antoine. Here we are. Here we must remain."

These words were applauded.

They set forth the situation--the torpor of the Faubourgs, no one at the
Society of Cabinet Makers, the doors closed nearly everywhere. I told
them what I had seen and heard in the Rue de la Roquette, the remarks of
the wine-seller, Auguste, on the indifference of the people, the hopes
of the engineer, and the possibility of a movement during the night in
the Faubourg St. Marceau. It was settled that on the first notice that
might be given I should go there.

Nevertheless nothing was yet known of what had taken place during the
day. It was announced that M. Havin, Lieutenant-Colonel of the 5th
Legion of the National Guard, had ordered the officers of his Legion to
attend a meeting.

Some Democratic writers came in, amongst whom were Alexander Rey and
Xavier Durrieu, with Kesler, Villiers, and Amable Lemaître of the
_Révolution_; one of these writers was Millière.

Millière had a large bleeding wound above his eye-brow; that same
morning on leaving us, as he was carrying away one of the copies of the
Proclamation which I had dictated, a man had thrown himself upon him to
snatch it from him. The police had evidently already been informed of
the Proclamation, and lay in wait for it; Millière had a hand-to-hand
struggle with the police agent, and had overthrown him, not without
bearing away this gash. However, the Proclamation was not yet printed.
It was nearly nine o'clock in the evening and nothing had come. Xavier
Durrieu asserted that before another hour elapsed they should have the
promised forty thousand copies. It was hoped to cover the walls of Paris
with them during the night. Each of those present was to serve as a
bill-poster.

There were amongst us--an inevitable circumstance in the stormy
confusion of the first moments--a good many men whom we did not know.
One of these men brought in ten or twelve copies of the appeal to arms.
He asked me to sign them with my own hand, in order, he said, that he
might be able to show my signature to the people--"Or to the police,"
whispered Baudin to me smiling. We were not in a position to take such
precautions as these. I gave this man all the signatures that he wanted.

Madier de Montjau began to speak. It was of consequence to organize the
action of the Left, to impress the unity of impulse upon the movement
which was being prepared; to create a centre for it, to give a pivot to
the insurrection, to the Left a direction, and to the People a
support. He proposed the immediate formation of a committee representing
the entire Left in all its shades, and charged with organizing and
directing the insurrection.

All the Representatives cheered this eloquent and courageous man. Seven
members were proposed. They named at once Carnot, De Flotte, Jules
Favre, Madier de Montjau, Michel de Bourges, and myself; and thus was
unanimously formed this Committee of Insurrection, which at my request
was called a Committee of Resistance; for it was Louis Bonaparte who was
tire insurgent. For ourselves, the were the Republic. It was desired
that one workman-Representative should be admitted into the committee.
Faure (du Rhône) was nominated. But Faure, we learned later on, had been
arrested that morning. The committee then was, it fact, composed of six
members.

The committee organized itself during the sitting. A Committee of
Permanency was formed from amongst it, and invested with the authority
of decreeing "urgency" in the name of all the Left, of concentrating all
news, information, directions, instructions, resources, orders. This
Committee of Permanency was composed of four members, who were Carnot,
Michel de Bourges, Jules Favre, and myself. De Flotte and Madier de
Montjau were specially delegated, De Flotte for the left bank of the
river and the district of the schools, Madier for the Boulevards and the
outskirts.

These preliminary operations being terminated, Lafon took aside Michel
de Bourges and myself, and told us that the ex-Constituent Proudhon had
inquired for one of us two, that he had remained downstairs nearly a
quarter of an hour, and that he had gone away, saying that he would wait
for us in the Place de la Bastille.

Proudhon, who was at that time undergoing a term of three years'
imprisonment at St. Pélagie for an offence against Louis Bonaparte, was
granted leave of absence from tine to time. Chance willed it that one of
these liberty days had fallen on the 2d of December.

This is an incident which one cannot help noting. On the 2d of December
Proudhon was a prisoner by virtue of a lawful sentence, and at the same
moment at which they illegally imprisoned the inviolable
Representatives, Proudhon, whom they could have legitimately detained,
was allowed to go out. Proudhon had profited by his liberty to come and
find us.

I knew Proudhon from having seen him at the Concièrgerie, where my two
sons were shut up, and my two illustrious friends, Auguste Vacquérie and
Paul Meurice, and those gallant writers, Louis Jourdan, Erdan, and
Suchet. I could not help thinking that on that day they would assuredly
not have given leave of absence to these men.

Meanwhile Xavier Durrieu whispered to me, "I have just left Proudhon. He
wishes to see you. He is waiting for you down below, close by, at the
entrance to the Place. You will find him leaning on the parapet of the
canal."

"I am going," said I.

I went downstairs.

I found in truth, at the spot mentioned, Proudhon, thoughtful, leaning
with his two elbows on the parapet. He wore that broad-brimmed hat in
which I had often seen him striding alone up and down the courtyard of
the Concièrgerie.

I went up to him.

"You wish to speak to me."

"Yes," and he shook me by the hand.

The corner where we were standing was lonely. On the left there was the
Place de la Bastille, dark and gloomy; one could see nothing there, but
one could feel a crowd; regiments were there in battle array; they did
not bivouac, they were ready to march; the muffled sound of breathing
could be heard; the square was full of that glistening shower of pale
sparks which bayonets give forth at night time. Above this abyss of
shadows rose up black and stark the Column of July.

Proudhon resumed,--

"Listen. I come to give you a friendly warning. You are entertaining
illusions. The People are ensnared in this affair. They will not stir.
Bonaparte will carry them with him. This rubbish, the restitution of
universal suffrage, entraps the simpletons. Bonaparte passes for a
Socialist. He has said, 'I will be the Emperor of the Rabble.' It is a
piece of insolence. But insolence has a chance of success when it has
this at its service."

And Proudhon pointed with his finger to the sinister gleam of the
bayonets. He continued,--

"Bonaparte has an object in view. The Republic has made the People. He
wishes to restore the Populace. He will succeed and you will fail. He
has on his side force, cannons, the mistake of the people, and the folly
of the Assembly. The few of the Left to which you belong will not
succeed in overthrowing the _coup d'état_. You are honest, and he has
this advantage over you--that he is a rogue. You have scruples, and he
has this advantage over you--that he has none. Believe me. Resist no
longer. The situation is without resources. We must wait; but at this
moment fighting would be madness. What do you hope for?"

"Nothing," said I.

"And what are you going to do?"

"Everything."

By the tone of my voice he understood that further persistence was
useless.

"Good-bye," he said.

We parted. He disappeared in the darkness. I have never seen him since.

I went up again to Lafon's rooms.

In the meantime the copies of the appeal to arms did not come to hand.
The Representatives, becoming uneasy, went up and downstairs. Some of
them went out on the Quai Jemmapes, to wait there and gain information
about them. In the room there was a sound of confused talking the
members of the Committee, Madier de Montjau, Jules Favre, and Carnot,
withdrew, and sent word to me by Charamaule that they were going to No.
10, Rue des Moulins, to the house of the ex-Constituent Landrin, in the
division of the 5th Legion, to deliberate more at their ease, and they
begged me to join them. But I thought I should do better to remain. I
had placed myself at the disposal of the probable movement of the
Faubourg St. Marceau. I awaited the notice of it through Auguste. It was
most important that I should not go too far away; besides, it was
possible that if I went away, the Representatives of the Left, no
longing seeing a member of the committee amongst them, would disperse
without taking any resolution, and I saw in this more than one
disadvantage.

Time passed, no Proclamations. We learned the next day that the packages
had been seized by the police. Cournet, an ex-Republican naval officer
who was present, began to speak. We shall see presently what sort of a
man Cournet was, and of what an energetic and determined nature he was
composed. He represented to us that as we had been there nearly two
hours the police would certainly end by being informed of our
whereabouts, that the members of the Left had an imperative duty--to
keep themselves at all costs at the head of the People, that the
necessity itself of their situation imposed upon them the precaution of
frequently changing their place of retreat, and he ended by offering us,
for our deliberation, his house and his workshops, No. 82, Rue
Popincourt, at the bottom of a blind alley, and also in the neighborhood
of the Faubourg St. Antoine.

This offer was accepted. I sent to inform Auguste of our change of
abode, and of Cournet's address. Lafon remained on the Quai Jemmapes in
order to forward on the Proclamations as soon as they arrived, and we
set out at once.

Charamaule undertook to send to the Rue des Moulins to tell the other
members of the committee that we would wait for them at No. 82, Rue
Popincourt.

We walked, as in the morning, in little separate groups. The Quai
Jemmapes skirts the left bank of the St. Martin Canal; we went up it. We
only met a few solitary workmen, who looked back when we had passed, and
stopped behind us with an air of astonishment. The night was dark. A few
drops of rain were falling.

A little beyond the Rue de Chemin Vert we turned to the right and
reached the Rue Popincourt. There all was deserted, extinguished,
closed, and silent, as in the Faubourg St. Antoine. This street is of
great length. We walked for a long time; we passed by the barracks.
Cournet was no longer with us; he had remained behind to inform some of
his friends, and we were told to take defensive measures in case his
house was attacked. We looked for No. 82. The darkness was such that we
could not distinguish the numbers on the houses. At length, at the end
of the street, on the right, we saw a light; it was a grocer's shop, the
only one open throughout the street. One of us entered, and asked the
grocer, who was sitting behind his counter, to show us M. Cournet's
house. "Opposite," said the grocer, pointing to an old and low carriage
entrance which could be seen on the other side of the street, almost
facing his shop.

We knocked at this door. It was opened. Baudin entered first, tapped at
the window of the porter's lodge, and asked "Monsieur Cournet?"--An old
woman's voice answered, "Here."

The portress was in bed; all in the house sleeping. We went in.

Having entered, and the gate being shut behind us, we found ourselves in
a little square courtyard which formed the centre of a sort of a
two-storied ruin; the silence of a convent prevailed, not a light was to
be seen at the windows; near a shed was seen a low entrance to a narrow,
dark, and winding staircase. "We have made some mistake," said
Charamaule; "it is impossible that it can be here."

Meanwhile the portress, hearing all these trampling steps beneath her
doorway, had become wide awake, had lighted her lamp, and we could see
her in her lodge, her face pressed against the window, gazing with alarm
at sixty dark phantoms, motionless, and standing in her courtyard.

Esquiros addressed her: "Is this really M. Cournet's house?" said he.

"M. Cornet, without doubt," answered the good woman.

All was explained. We had asked for Cournet, the grocer had understood
Cornet, the portress had understood Cornet. It chanced that M. Cornet
lived there.

We shall see by and by what an extraordinary service chance had rendered
us.

We went out, to the great relief of the poor portress, and we resumed
our search. Xavier Durrieu succeeded in ascertaining our whereabouts,
and extricated us from our difficulty.

A few moments afterwards we turned to the left, and we entered into a
blind alley of considerable length and dimly lighted by an old oil
lamp--one of those with which Paris was formerly lighted--then again to
the left, and we entered through a narrow passage into a large courtyard
encumbered with sheds and building materials. This time we had reached
Cournet's.




CHAPTER XIX.


ONE FOOT IN THE TOMB

Cournet was waiting for us. He received us on the ground floor, in a
parlor where there was a fire, a table, and some chairs; but the room
was so small that a quarter of us filled it to overflowing, and the
others remained in the courtyard. "It is impossible to deliberate here,"
said Bancel. "I have a larger room on the first floor," answered
Cournet, "but it is a building in course of construction, which is not
yet furnished, and where there is no fire."--"What does it matter?" they
answered him. "Let us go up to the first floor."

We went up to the first floor by a steep and narrow wooden staircase,
and we took possession of two rooms with very low ceilings, but of which
one was sufficiently large. The walls were whitewashed, and a few
straw-covered stools formed the whole of its furniture.

They called out to me, "Preside."

I sat down on one of the stools in the corner of the first room, with
the fire place on my right and on my left the door opening upon the
staircase. Baudin said to me, "I have a pencil and paper. I will act as
secretary to you." He sat down on a stool next to me.

The Representatives and those present, amongst whom were several men in
blouses, remained standing, forming in front of Baudin and myself a sort
of square, backed by the two walls of the room opposite to us. This
crowd extended as far as the staircase. A lighted candle was placed on
the chimney-piece.

A common spirit animated this meeting. The faces were pale, but in every
eye could be seen the same firm resolution. In all these shadows
glistened the same flame. Several simultaneously asked permission to
speak. I requested them to give their names to Baudin, who wrote them
down, and then passed me the list.

The
first speaker was a workman. He began by apologizing for mingling with
the Representatives, he a stranger to the Assembly. The Representatives
interrupted him. "No, no," they said, "the People and Representatives
are all one! Speak--!" He declared that if he spoke it was in order to
clear from all suspicion the honor of his brethren, the workmen of
Paris; that he had heard some Representatives express doubt about them.
He asserted that this was unjust, that the workmen realized the whole
crime of M. Bonaparte and the whole duty of the People, that they would
not be deaf to the appeal of the Republican Representatives, and that
this would be clearly shown. He said all this, simply, with a sort of
proud shyness and of honest bluntness. He kept his word. I found him the
next day fighting on the Rambuteau barricade.

Mathieu (de la Drôme) came in as the workman concluded. "I bring news,"
he exclaimed. A profound silence ensued.

As I have already said, we vaguely knew since the morning that the Right
were to have assembled, and that a certain number of our friends had
probably taken part in the meeting, and that was all. Mathieu (de la
Drôme) brought us the events of the day, the details of the arrests at
their own houses carried out without any obstacle, of the meeting which
had taken place at M. Daru's house and its rough treatment in the Rue
de Bourgogne, of the Representatives expelled from the Hall of the
Assembly, of the meanness of President Dupin, of the melting away of the
High Court, of the total inaction of the Council of State, of the sad
sitting held at the Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement, of the Oudinot,
_fiasco_, of the decree of the deposition of the President, and of the
two hundred and twenty forcibly arrested and taken to the Quai d'Orsay.
He concluded in a manly style: "The duty of the Left was increasing
hourly. The morrow would probably prove decisive." He implored the
meeting to take this into consideration.

A workman added a fact. He had happened in the morning to be in the Rue
de Grenelle during the passage of the arrested members of the Assembly;
he was there at the moment when one of the commanders of the Chasseurs
de Vincennes had uttered these words, "Now it is the turn of those
gentlemen--the Red Representatives. Let them look out for themselves!"

One of the editors of the _Révolution_, Hennett de Kesler, who
afterwards became an intrepid exile, completed the information of
Mathieu (de la Drôme). He recounted the action taken by two members of
the Assembly with regard to the so-called Minister of the Interior,
Morny, and the answer of the said Morny: "If I find any of the
Representatives behind the barricades, I will have them shot to the last
man," and that other saying of the same witty vagabond respecting the
members taken to the Quai d'Orsay, "These are the last Representatives
who will be made prisoners." He told us that a placard was at that very
moment being printed which declared that "Any one who should be found at
a secret meeting would be immediately shot." The placard, in truth,
appeared the next morning.

Baudin rose up. "The _coup d'état_ redoubles its rage," exclaimed he.
"Citizens, let us redouble our energy!"

Suddenly a man in a blouse entered. He was out of breath. He had run
hard. He told us that he had just seen, and he repeated, had seen with
"his own eyes," in the Rue Popincourt, a regiment marching in silence,
and wending its way towards the blind alley of No. 82, that we were
surrounded, and that we were about to be attacked. He begged us to
disperse immediately.

"Citizen Representatives," called out Cournet, "I have placed scouts in
the blind alley who will fall back and warn us if the regiment penetrates
thither. The door is narrow and will be barricaded in the twinkling of
an eye. We are here, with you, fifty armed and resolute men, and at the
first shot we shall be two hundred. We are provided with ammunition. You
can deliberate calmly."

And as he concluded he raised his right arm, and from his sleeve fell
a large poniard, which he had concealed, and with the other hand he
rattled in his pocket the butts of a pair of pistols.

"Very well," said I, "let us continue."

Three of the youngest and most eloquent orators of the Left, Bancel,
Arnauld (de l'Ariége) and Victor Chauffour delivered their opinions in
succession. All three were imbued with this notion, that our appeal to
arms not having yet been placarded, the different incidents of the
Boulevarde du Temple and of the Café Bonvalet having brought about no
results, none of our decrees, owing to the repressive measures of
Bonaparte, having yet succeeded in appearing, while the events at the
Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement began to be spread abroad through
Paris, it seemed as though the Right had commenced active resistance
before the Left. A generous rivalry for the public safety spurred them
on. It was delightful to them to know that a regiment ready to attack was
close by, within a few steps, and that perhaps in a few moments their
blood would flow.

Moreover, advice abounded, and with advice, uncertainty. Some illusions
were still entertained. A workman, leaning close to me against the
fireplace, said in a low voice to one of his comrades that the People
must not be reckoned upon, and that if we fought "We should perpetrate a
madness."

The incidents and events of the day had in some degree modified my
opinion as to the course to be followed in this grave crisis. The
silence of the crowd at the moment when Arnauld (de l'Ariége) and I had
apostrophized the troops, had destroyed the impression which a few hours
before the enthusiasm of the people on the Boulevard du Temple had left
with me. The hesitation of Auguste had impressed me, the Society of
Cabinet Makers appeared to shun us, the torpor of the Faubourg St.
Antoine was manifest, the inertness of the Faubourg St. Marceau was not
less so. I ought to have received notice from the engineer before eleven
o'clock, and eleven o'clock was past. Our hopes died away one after
another. Nevertheless, all the more reason, in my opinion, to astonish
and awaken Paris by an extraordinary spectacle, by a daring act of life
and collective power on the part of the Representatives of the Left, by
the daring of an immense devotion.

It will be seen later on what a combination of accidental circumstances
prevented this idea from being realized as I then purposed. The
Representatives have done their whole duty. Providence perhaps has not
done all on its side. Be it as it may, supposing that we were not at
once carried off by some nocturnal and immediate combat, and that at the
hour at which I was speaking we had still a "to-morrow," I felt the
necessity of fixing every eye upon the course which should be adopted
on the day which was about to follow.--I spoke.

I began by completely unveiling the situation. I painted the picture in
four words: the Constitution thrown into the gutter; the Assembly driven
to prison with the butt-end of a musket, the Council of State dispersed;
the High Court expelled by a galley-sergeant, a manifest beginning of
victory for Louis Bonaparte, Paris ensnared in the army as though in a
net; bewilderment everywhere, all authority overthrown; all compacts
annulled; two things only remained standing, the _coup d'état_ and
ourselves.

"Ourselves! and who are we?"

"We are," said I, "we are Truth and Justice! We are the supreme and
sovereign power, the People incarnate--Right!"

I continued,--

"Louis Bonaparte at every minute which elapses advances a step further
in his crime. For him nothing is inviolable, nothing is sacred; this
morning he violated the Palace of the Representatives of the Nation, a
few hours later he laid violent hands on their persons; to-morrow,
perhaps in a few moments, he will shed their blood. Well then! he
marches upon us, let us march upon him. The danger grows greater, let us
grow greater with the danger."

A movement of assent passed through the Assembly. I continued,--

"I repeat and insist. Let us show no mercy to this wretched Bonaparte
for any of the enormities which his outrage contains. As he has drawn
the wine--I should say the blood--he must drink it up. We are not
individuals, we are the Nation. Each of us walks forth clothed with the
Sovereignty of the people. He cannot strike our persons without rending
that. Let us compel his volleys to pierce our sashes as well as our
breasts. This man is on a road where logic grasps him and leads him to
parricide. What he is killing in this moment is the country! Well, then!
when the ball of Executive Power pierces the sash of Legislative Power,
it is visible parricide! It is this that must be understood!"

"We are
quite ready!" they cried out. "What measures would you advise us to
adopt?"

"No half measures," answered I; "a deed of grandeur! To-morrow--if we
leave here this night--let us all meet in the Faubourg St. Antoine."

They interposed, "Why the Faubourg St. Antoine?"

"Yes," resumed I, "the Faubourg St. Antoine! I cannot believe that the
heart of the People has ceased to beat there. Let us all meet to-morrow
in the Faubourg St. Antoine. Opposite the Lenoir Market there is a hall
which was used by a club in 1848."

They cried out to me, "The Salle Roysin."

"That is it," said I, "The Salle Roysin. We who remain free number a
hundred and twenty Republican Representatives. Let us install ourselves
in this hall. Let us install ourselves in the fulness and majesty of the
Legislative Power. Henceforward we are the Assembly, the whole of the
Assembly! Let us sit there, deliberate there, in our official sashes,
in the midst of the People. Let us summon the Faubourg St. Antoine to
its duty, let us shelter there the National Representation, let us
shelter there the popular sovereignty. Let us intrust the People to the
keeping of the People. Let us adjure them to protect themselves. If
necessary, let us order them!"

A voice interrupted me: "You cannot give orders to the People!"

"Yes!" I cried, "When it is a question of public safety, of the universal
safety, when it is a question of the future of every European
nationality, when it is a question of defending the Republic, Liberty,
Civilization, the Revolution, we have the right--we, the Representatives
of the entire nation--to give, in the name of the French people, orders
to the people of Paris! Let us, therefore, meet to-morrow at this Salle
Roysin; but at what time? Not too early in the morning. In broad day. It
is necessary that the shops should be open, that people should be coming
and going, that the population should be moving about, that there should
be plenty of people in the streets, that they should see us, that they
should recognize us, that the grandeur of our example should strike every
eye and stir every heart. Let us all be there between nine and ten
o'clock in the morning. If we cannot obtain the Salle Roysin we will take
the first church at hand, a stable, a shed, some enclosure where we can
deliberate; at need, as Michel de Bourges has said, we will hold our
sittings in a square bounded by four barricades. But provisionally I
suggest the Salle Roysin. Do not forget that in such a crisis there must
be no vacuum before the nation. That alarms it. There must be a
government somewhere, and it must be known. The rebellion at the Elysée,
the Government at the Faubourg St. Antoine; the Left the Government, the
Faubourg St. Antoine the citadel; such are the ideas which from to-morrow
we must impress upon the mind of Paris. To the Salle Roysin, then! Thence
in the midst of the dauntless throng of workmen of that great district of
Paris, enclosed in the Faubourg as in a fortress, being both Legislators
and Generals, multiplying and inventing means of defence and of attack,
launching Proclamations and unearthing the pavements, employing the women
in writing out placards while the men are fighting, we will issue a
warrant against Louis Bonaparte, we will issue warrants against his
accomplices, we will declare the military chiefs traitors, we will outlaw
in a body all the crime and all the criminals, we will summon the
citizens to arms, we will recall the army to duty, we will rise up before
Louis Bonaparte, terrible as the living Republic, we will fight on the
one hand with the power of the Law, and on the other with the power of
the People, we will overwhelm this miserable rebel, and will rise up
above his head both as a great Lawful Power and a great Revolutionary
Power!"

While speaking I became intoxicated with my own ideas. My enthusiasm
communicated itself to the meeting. They cheered me. I saw that I was
becoming somewhat too hopeful, that I allowed myself to be carried away,
and that I carried them away, that I presented to them success as
possible, as even easy, at a moment when it was important that no one
should entertain an illusion. The truth was gloomy, and it was my duty
to tell it. I let silence be re-established, and I signed with my hand
that I had a last word to say. I then resumed, lowering my voice,--

"Listen, calculate carefully what you are doing. On one side a hundred
thousand men, seventeen harnessed batteries, six thousand cannon-mouths
in the forts, magazines, arsenals, ammunition sufficient to carry out a
Russian campaign; on the other a hundred and twenty Representatives, a
thousand or twelve hundred patriots, six hundred muskets, two cartridges
per man, not a drum to beat to arms, not a bell to sound the tocsin, not
a printing office to print a Proclamation; barely here and there a
lithographic press, and a cellar where a hand-bill can be hurriedly and
furtively printed with the brush; the penalty of death against any one
who unearths a paving stone, penalty of death against any one who would
enlist in our ranks, penalty of death against any one who is found in a
secret meeting, penalty of death against any one who shall post up an
appeal to arms; if you are taken during the combat, death; if you are
taken after the combat, transportation or exile; on the one side an army
and a Crime; on the other a handful of men and Right. Such is this
struggle. Do you accept it?"

A unanimous shout answered me, "Yes! yes!"

This shout did not come from the mouths, it came from the souls. Baudin,
still seated next to me, pressed my hand in silence.

It was settled therefore at once that they should meet again on the next
day, Wednesday, between nine and ten in the morning, at the Salle Roysin,
that they should arrive singly or by little separate groups, and that
they should let those who were absent know of this rendezvous. This
done, there remained nothing more but to separate. It was about
midnight.

One of Cournet's scouts entered. "Citizen Representatives," he said,
"the regiment is no longer there. The street is free."

The regiment, which had probably come from the Popincourt barracks close
at hand, had occupied the street opposite the blind alley for more than
half an hour, and then had returned to the barracks. Had they judged the
attack inopportune or dangerous at night in that narrow blind alley, and
in the centre of this formidable Popincourt district, where the
insurrection had so long held its own in June, 1848? It appeared certain
that the soldiers had searched several houses in the neighborhood.
According to details which we learned subsequently, we were followed
after leaving No. 2, Quai Jemmapes, by an agent of police, who saw us
enter the house where a M. Cornet was lodging, and who at once proceeded
to the Prefecture to denounce our place of refuge to his chiefs. The
regiment sent to arrest us surrounded the house, ransacked it from attic
to cellar, found nothing, and went away.

This quasi-synonym of Cornet and Cournet lead misled the bloodhounds of
the _coup d'état_. Chance, we see, had interposed usefully in our
affairs.

I was talking at the door with Baudin, and we were making some last
arrangements, when a young man with a chestnut beard, dressed like a man
of fashion, and possessing all the manners of one, and whom I had
noticed while speaking, came up to me.

"Monsieur Victor Hugo," said he, "where are you going to sleep?"

Up to that moment I had not thought of this.

It was far from prudent to go home.

"In truth," I answered, "I have not the least idea."

"Will you come to my house?"

"I shall be very happy."

He told me his mane. It was M. de la R----. He knew my brother Abel's
wife and family, the Montferriers, relations of the Chambacères, and he
lived in the Rue Caumartin. He had been a Prefect under the Provisional
Government. There was a carriage in waiting. We got in, and as Baudin
told me that he would pass the night at Cournet's, I gave him the
address of M. do la R----, so that he could send for me if any notice of
the movement came from the Faubourg St. Marceau or elsewhere. But I
hoped for nothing more that night, and I was right.

About a quarter of an hour after the separation of the Representatives,
and after we had left the Rue Popincourt, Jules Favre, Madier de
Montajau, de Flotte, and Carnot, to whom we had sent word to the Rue des
Moulins, arrived at Cournet's, accompanied by Schoelcher, by Charamaule,
by Aubry (du Nord), and by Bastide. Some Representatives were still
remaining at Cournet's. Several, like Baudin, were going to pass the
night there. They told our colleagues what had been settled respecting
my proposition, and of the rendezvous at the Salle Roysin; only it
appears that there was some doubt regarding the hour agreed upon, and
that Baudin in particular did not exactly remember it, and that our
colleagues believed that the rendezvous, which had been fixed for nine
o'clock in the morning, was fixed for eight.

This alteration in the hour, due to the treachery of memory for which no
one can be blamed, prevented the realization of the plan which I had
conceived of an Assembly holding its sittings in the Faubourg, and
giving battle to Louis Bonaparte, but gave us as a compensation the
heroic exploits of the Ste. Marguerite barricade.




CHAPTER XX.


THE BURIAL OF A GREAT ANNIVERSARY

Such was the first day. Let us look at it steadfastly. It deserves it.
It is the anniversary of Austerlitz; the Nephew commemorates the Uncle.
Austerlitz is the most brilliant battle of history; the Nephew set
himself this problem--how to commit a baseness equal to this
magnificence. He succeeded.

This first day, which will be followed by others, is already complete.
Everything is there. It is the most terrible attempt at a thrust
backwards that has ever been essayed. Never has such a crumbling of
civilization been seen. All that formed the edifice is now in ruin; the
soil is strewn with the fragments. In one night the inviolability of the
Law, the Right of the Citizen, the Dignity of the Judge, and the Honor
of the Soldier have disappeared. Terrible substitutions have taken
place; there was the oath, there is pergury; there was the flag, there
is a rag; there was the Army, there is a band of brigands; there was
Justice, there is treason; there was a code of laws, there is the sabre;
there was a Government, there is a crew of swindlers; there was France,
there is a den of thieves. This called itself Society Saved.

It is the rescue of the traveller by the highwayman.

France was passing by, Bonaparte cried, "Stand and deliver!"

The hypocrisy which has preceded the Crime, equals in deformity the
impudence which has followed it. The nation was trustful and calm. There
was a sudden and cynical shock. History has recorded nothing equal to the
Second of December. Here there was no glory, nothing but meanness. No
deceptive picture. He could have declared himself honest; He declares
himself infamous; nothing more simple. This day, almost unintelligible in
its success, has proved that Politics possess their obscene side. Louis
Bonaparte has shown himself unmasked.

Yesterday President of the Republic, to-day a scavenger. He has sworn,
he still swears: but the tone has changed. The oath has become an
imprecation. Yesterday he called himself a maiden, to-day he becomes a
brazen woman, and laughs at his dupes. Picture to yourself Joan of Arc
confessing herself to be Messalina. Such is the Second of December.

Women are mixed up in this treason. It is an outrage which savors both
of the boudoir and of the galleys. There wafts across the fetidness of
blood an undefined scent of patchouli. The accomplices of this act of
brigandage are most agreeable men--Romieu, Morny. Getting into debt
leads one to commit crimes.

Europe was astounded. It was a thunder bolt from a thief. It must be
acknowledged that thunder can fall into bad hands, Palmerston, that
traitor, approved of it. Old Metternich, a dreamer in his villa at
Rennweg, shook his head. As to Soult, the man of Austerlitz after
Napoleon, he did what he ought to do, on the very day of the Crime he
died, Alas! and Austerlitz also.




THE SECOND DAY--THE STRUGGLE.




CHAPTER I.


THEY COME TO ARREST ME

In order to reach the Rue Caumartin from the Rue Popincourt, all Paris
has to be crossed. We found a great apparent calm everywhere. It was one
o'clock in the morning when we reached M. de la R----'s house. The
_fiacre_ stopped near a grated door, which M. de la R---- opened with a
latch-key; on the right, under the archway, a staircase ascended to the
first floor of a solitary detached building which M. de la R----
inhabited, and into which he led me.

We entered a little drawing-room very richly furnished, lighted with a
night-lamp, and separated from the bedroom by a tapestry curtain
two-thirds drown. M. de la R---- went into the bedroom, and a few minutes
afterwards came back again, accompanied by a charming woman, pale and
fair, in a dressing-gown, her hair down, handsome, fresh, bewildered,
gentle nevertheless, and looking at me with that alarm which in a young
face confers an additional grace. Madame de la R---- had just been
awakened by her husband. She remained a moment on the threshold of her
chamber, smiling, half asleep, greatly astonished, somewhat frightened,
looking by turns at her husband and at me, never having dreamed perhaps
what civil war really meant, and seeing it enter abruptly into her rooms
in the middle of the night under this disquieting form of an unknown
person who asks for a refuge.

I made Madame de la R---- a thousand apologies, which she received with
perfect kindness, and the charming woman profited by the incident to go
and caress a pretty little girl of two years old who was sleeping at the
end of the room in her cot, and the child whom she kissed caused her to
forgive the refugee who had awakened her.

While chatting M. de la R---- lighted a capital fire in the grate, and
his wife, with a pillow and cushions, a hooded cloak belonging to him,
and a pelisse belonging to herself, improvised opposite the fire a bed
on a sofa, somewhat short, and which we lengthened by means of an
arm-chair.

During the deliberation in the Rue Popincourt, at which I had just
presided, Baudin had lent me his pencil to jot down some names. I still
had this pencil with me. I made use of it to write a letter to my wife,
which Madame de la R---- undertook to convey herself to Madame Victor
Hugo the next day. While emptying my pockets I found a box for the
"Italiens," which I offered to Madame de la R----. On that evening
(Tuesday, December 2d) they were to play _Hernani_.

I looked at that cot, these two handsome, happy young people, and at
myself, my disordered hair and clothes, my boots covered with mud,
gloomy thoughts in my mind, and I felt like an owl in a nest of
nightingales.

A few moments afterwards M. and Madame de la R---- had disappeared into
their bedroom, and the half-opened curtain was closed. I stretched
myself, fully dressed as I was, upon the sofa, and this gentle nest
disturbed by me subsided into its graceful silence.

One can sleep on the eve of a battle between two armies, but on the eve
of a battle between citizens there can be no sleep. I counted each hour
as it sounded from a neighboring church; throughout the night there
passed down the street, which was beneath the windows of the room where I
was lying, carriages which were fleeing from Paris. They succeeded each
other rapidly and hurriedly, one might have imagined it was the exit from
a ball. Not being able to sleep, I got up. I had slightly parted the
muslin curtains of a window, and I tried to look outside; the darkness
was complete. No stars, clouds were flying by with the turbulent violence
of a winter night. A melancholy wind howled. This wind of clouds
resembled the wind of events.

I watched the sleeping baby. I waited for dawn. It came. M. de la R----
had explained at my request in what manner I could go out without
disturbing any one. I kissed the child's forehead, and left the room. I
went downstairs, closing the doors behind me as gently as I could, so
not to wake Madame de la R----. I opened the iron door and went out into
the street. It was deserted, the shops were still shut, and a milkwoman,
with her donkey by her side, was quietly arranging her cans on the
pavement.

I have not seen M. de la R---- again. I learned since that he wrote to
me in my exile, and that his letter was intercepted. He has, I believe,
quitted France. May this touching page convey to him my kind
remembrances.

The Rue Caumartin leads into the Rue St. Lazare. I went towards it. It
was broad daylight. At every moment I was overtaken and passed by
_fiacres_ laden with trunks and packages, which were hastening towards
the Havre railway station. Passers-by began to appear. Some baggage
trains were mounting the Rue St. Lazare at the same time as myself.
Opposite No. 42, formerly inhabited by Mdlle. Mars, I saw a new bill
posted on the wall. I went up to it, I recognized the type of the
National Printing Office, and I read,

  "COMPOSITION OF THE NEW MINISTRY.

  "_Interior_           --M. de Morny.
  "_War_                --The General of Division St. Arnaud.
  "_Foreign Affairs_    --M. de Turgot.
  "_Justice_            --M. Rouher.
  "_Finance_            --M. Fould.
  "_Marine_             --M. Ducos.
  "_Public Works_       --M. Magne.
  "_Public Instruction_ --M.H. Fortuol.
  "_Commerce_           --M. Lefebre-Duruflé."

I tore down the bill, and threw it into the gutter! The soldiers of the
party who were leading the wagons watched me do it, and went their way.

In the Rue St. Georges, near a side-door, there was another bill. It was
the "Appeal to the People." Some persons were reading it. I tore it
down, notwithstanding the resistance of the porter, who appeared to me
to be entrusted with the duty of protecting it.

As I passed by the Place Bréda some _fiacres_ had already arrived there.
I took one. I was near home, the temptation was too great, I went there.
On seeing me cross the courtyard the porter looked at me with a
stupefied air. I rang the bell. My servant, Isidore, opened the door,
and exclaimed with a great cry, "Ah! it is you, sir! They came during
the night to arrest you." I went into my wife's room. She was in bed,
but not asleep, and she told me what had happened.

She had gone to bed at eleven o'clock. Towards half-past twelve, during
that species of drowsiness which resembles sleeplessness, she heard
men's voices. It seemed to her that Isidore was speaking to some one in
the antechamber. At first she did not take any notice, and tried to go
to sleep again, but the noise of voices continued. She sat up, and rang
the bell.

Isidore came in. She asked him,

"Is any one there?"

"Yes, madame."

"Who is it?"

"A man who wishes to speak to master."

"Your master is out."

"That is what I have told him, madame."

"Well, is not the gentleman going?"

"No, madame, he says that he urgently needs to speak to Monsieur Victor
Hugo, and that he will wait for him."

Isidore had stopped on the threshold of the bedroom. While he spoke a
fat, fresh-looking man in an overcoat, under which could be seen a black
coat, appeared at the door behind him.

Madame Victor Hugo noticed this man, who was silently listening.

"Is it you, sir, who wish to speak to Monsieur Victor Hugo?"

"Yes, madame."

"But what is it about? Is it regarding politics?"

The man did not answer.

"As to politics," continued my wife, "what is happening?"

"I believe, madame, that all is at an end."

"In what sense?"

"In the sense of the President."

My wife looked fixedly at the man, and said to him,--

"You have come to arrest my husband, sir."

"It is true, madame," answered the man, opening his overcoat, which
revealed the sash of a Commissary of Police.

He added after a pause, "I am a Commissary of Police, and I am the
bearer of a warrant to arrest M. Victor Hugo. I must institute a search
and look through the house."

"What is your name, sir?" asked Madame Victor Hugo.

"My name is Hivert."

"You know the terms of the Constitution?"

"Yes, madam."

"You know that the Representatives of the People are inviolable!"

"Yes, madame."

"Very well, sir," she said coldly, "you know that you are committing a
crime. Days like this have a to-morrow; proceed."

The Sieur Hivert attempted a few words of explanation, or we should
rather say justification; he muttered the word "conscience," he
stammered the word "honor." Madame Victor Hugo, who had been calm until
then, could not help interrupting him with some abruptness.

"Do your business, sir, and do not argue; you know that every official
who lays a hand on a Representative of the People commits an act of
treason. You know that in presence of the Representatives the President
is only an official like the others, the chief charged with carrying out
their orders. You dare to come to arrest a Representative in his own
home like a criminal! There is in truth a criminal here who ought to be
arrested--yourself!"

The Sieur Hivert looked sheepish and left the room, and through the
half-open door my wife could see, behind the well-fed, well-clothed,
and bald Commissary, seven or eight poor raw-boned devils, wearing dirty
coats which reached to their feet, and shocking old hats jammed down over
their eyes--wolves led by a dog. They examined the room, opened here and
there a few cupboards, and went away--with a sorrowful air--as Isidore
said to me.

The Commissary Hivert, above all, hung his head; he raised it, however,
for one moment. Isidore, indignant at seeing these men thus hunt for his
master in every corner, ventured to defy them. He opened a drawer and
said, "Look and see if he is not in here!" The Commissary of Police
darted a furious glance at him: "Lackey, take care!" The lackey was
himself.

These men having gone, it was noticed that several of my papers were
missing. Fragments of manuscripts had been stolen, amongst others one
dated July, 1848, and directed against the military dictatorship of
Cavaignac, and in which there were verses written respecting the
Censorship, the councils of war, and the suppression of the newspapers,
and in particular respecting the imprisonment of a great journalist--Emile
de Girardin:--

    "... O honte, un lansquenet
    Gauche, et parodiant César dont il hérite,
    Gouverne les esprits du fond de sa guérite!"

These manuscripts are lost.

The police might come back at any moment, in fact they did come back a
few minutes after I had left. I kissed my wife; I would not wake my
daughter, who had just fallen asleep, and I went downstairs again. Some
affrighted neighbors were waiting for me in the courtyard. I cried out
to them laughingly, "Not caught yet!"

A quarter of an hour afterwards I reached No. 10, Rue des Moulins. It
was not then eight o'clock in the morning, and thinking that my
colleagues of the Committee of Insurrection had passed the night there,
I thought it might be useful to go and fetch them, so that we might
proceed all together to the Salle Roysin.

I found only Madame Landrin in the Rue des Moulins. It was thought that
the house was denounced and watched, and my colleagues had changed their
quarters to No. 7, Rue Villedo, the house of the ex-Constituent Leblond,
legal adviser to the Workmen's Association. Jules Favre had passed the
night there. Madame Landrin was breakfasting. She offered me a place by
her side, but time pressed. I carried off a morsel of bread, and left.

At No. 7, Rue Villedo, the maid-servant who opened the door to me
ushered me into a room where were Carnot, Michel de Bourges, Jules
Favre, and the master of the house, our former colleague, Constituent
Leblond.

"I have a carriage downstairs," I said to them; "the rendezvous is at
the Salle Roysin in the Faubourg St. Antoine; let us go."

This, however, was not their opinion. According to them the attempts
made on the previous evening in the Faubourg St. Antoine had revealed
this portion of the situation; they sufficed; it was useless to persist;
it was obvious that the working-class districts would not rise; we must
turn to the side of the tradesmen's districts, renounce our attempt to
rouse the extremities of the city, and agitate the centre. We were the
Committee of Resistance, the soul of the insurrection; if we were to go
to the Faubourg St. Antoine, which was occupied by a considerable force,
we should give ourselves up to Louis Bonaparte. They reminded me of what
I myself had said on the subject the previous evening in the Rue
Blanche. We must immediately organize the insurrection against the _coup
d'état_ and organize it in practicable districts, that is to say, in the
old labyrinths of the streets St. Denis and St. Martin; we must draw up
proclamations, prepare decrees, create some method of publicity; they
were waiting for important communications from Workmen's Associations
and Secret Societies. The great blow which I wished to strike by our
solemn meeting at the Salle Roysin would prove a failure; they thought
it their duty to remain where they were; and the Committee being few in
number, and the work to be done being enormous, they begged me not to
leave them.

They were men of great hearts and great courage who spoke to me; they
were evidently right; but for myself I could not fail to go to the
rendezvous which I myself had fixed. All the reasons which they had
given me were good, nevertheless I could have opposed some doubts, but
the discussion would have taken too much time, and the hour drew nigh.
I did not make any objections, and I went out of the room, making some
excuse. My hat was in the antechamber, my _fiacre_ was waiting for me,
and I drove off to the Faubourg St. Antoine.

The centre of Paris seemed to have retained its everyday appearance.
People came and went, bought and sold, chatted and laughed as usual. In
the Rue Montorgueil I heard a street organ. Only on nearing the Faubourg
St. Antoine the phenomenon which I had already noticed on the previous
evening became more and more apparent; solitude reigned, and a certain
dreary peacefulness.

We reached the Place de la Bastille.

My driver stopped.

"Go on," I said to him.




CHAPTER II.


FROM THE BASTILLE TO THE RUE DE COTTE

The Place de la Bastille was at the same time empty and filled. Three
regiments in battle array were there; not one passer-by.

Four harnessed batteries were drawn up at the foot of the column. Here
and there knots of officers talked together in a low voice,--sinister
men.

One of these groups, the principal, attracted my attention. That one
was silent, there was no talking. There were several men on horseback;
one in front of the others, in a general's uniform, with a hat
surmounted with black feathers, behind this man were two colonels, and
behind the colonels a party of _aides-de-camp_ and staff officers.
This lace-trimmed company remained immovable, and as though pointing
like a dog between the column and the entrance to the Faubourg. At a
short distance from this group, spread out, and occupying the whole of
the square, were the regiments drawn up and the cannon in their
batteries.

"My driver again stopped.

"Go on," I said; "drive into the Faubourg."

"But they will prevent us, sir."

"We shall see."

The truth was that they did not prevent us.

The driver continued on his way, but hesitatingly, and at a walking
pace. The appearance of a _fiacre_ in the square had caused some
surprise, and the inhabitants began to come out of their houses. Several
came up to my carriage.

We passed by a group of men with huge epaulets. These men, whose tactics
we understood later on, did not even appear to see us.

The emotion which I had felt on the previous day before a regiment of
cuirassiers again seized me. To see before me the assassins of the
country, at a few steps, standing upright, in the insolence of a
peaceful triumph, was beyond my strength: I could not contain myself. I
drew out my sash. I held it in my hand, and putting my arm and head out
of the window of the _fiacre_, and shaking the sash, I shouted,--

"Soldiers! Look at this sash. It is the symbol of Law, it is the
National Assembly visible. Where there this sash is there is Right.
Well, then, this is what Right commands you. You are being deceived. Go
back to your duty. It is a Representative of the People who is speaking
to you, and he who represents the People represents the army. Soldiers,
before becoming soldiers you have been peasants, you have been workmen,
you have been and you are still citizens. Citizens, listen to me when I
speak to you. The Law alone has the right to command you. Well, to-day
the law is violated. By whom? By you. Louis Bonaparte draws you into a
crime. Soldiers, you who are Honor, listen to me, for I am Duty.
Soldiers, Louis Bonaparte assassinates the Republic. Defend it. Louis
Bonaparte is a bandit; all his accomplices will follow him to the
galleys. They are there already. He who is worthy of the galleys is in
the galleys. To merit fetters is to wear them. Look at that man who is
at your head, and who dares to command you. You take him for a general,
he is a convict."

The soldiers seemed petrified.

Some one who was there (I thank his generous, devoted spirit) touched my
arm, and whispered in my ear, "You will get yourself shot."

But I did not heed, and I listened to nothing. I continued, still waving
my sash,--"You, who are there, dressed up like a general, it is you to
whom I speak, sir. You know who I am, I am a Representative of the
People, and I know who you are. I have told you you are a criminal.
Now, do you wish to know my name? This is it."

And I called out my name to him.

And I added,--

"Now tell me yours."

He did not answer.

I continued,--

"Very well, I do not want to know your name as a general, I shall know
your number as a galley slave."

The man in the general's uniform hung his head, the others were silent.
I could read all their looks, however, although they did not raise their
eyes. I saw them cast down, and I felt that they were furious. I had an
overwhelming contempt for them, and I passed on.

What was the name of this general? I did not know then, and I do not
know now.

One of the apologies for the _coup d'état_ in relating this incident,
and characterizing it as "an insensate and culpable provocation," states
that "the moderation shown by the military leaders on this occasion did
honor to General ----:" We leave to the author of this panegyric the
responsibility of that name and of this eulogium.

I entered the Rue de Faubourg St. Antoine.

My driver, who now knew my name, hesitated no longer, and whipped up his
horse. These Paris coachmen are a brave and intelligent race.

As I passed the first shops of the main street nine o'clock sounded from
the Church St. Paul.

"Good," I said to myself, "I am in time."

The Faubourg presented an extraordinary aspect. The entrance was
guarded, but not closed, by two companies of infantry. Two other
companies were drawn up in echelons farther on, at short distances,
occupying the street, but leaving a free passage. The shops, which were
open at the end of the Faubourg, were half closed a hundred yards
farther up. The inhabitants, amongst whom I noticed numerous workmen in
blouses, were talking together at their doors, and watching the
proceedings. I noticed at each step the placards of the _coup d'état_
untouched.

Beyond the fountain which stands at the corner of the Rue de
Charonne the shops were closed. Two lines of soldiers extended on
either side of the street of the Faubourg on the kerb of the pavement;
the soldiers were stationed at every five paces, with the butts of their
muskets resting on their hips, their chests drawn in, their right hand
on the trigger, ready to bring to the present, keeping silence in the
attitude of expectation. From that point a piece of cannon was stationed
at the mouth of each of the side streets which open out of the main road
of the Faubourg. Occasionally there was a mortar. To obtain a clear idea
of this military arrangement one must imagine two rosaries, extending
along the two sides of the Faubourg St. Antoine, of which the soldiers
should form the links and the cannon the beads.

Meanwhile my driver became uneasy. He turned round to me and said, "It
looks as though we should find barricades out there, sir; shall we turn
back?"

"Keep on," I replied.

He continued to drive straight on.

Suddenly it became impossible to do so. A company of infantry ranged
three deep occupied the whole of the street from one pavement to the
other. On the right there was a small street. I said to the driver,--

"Take that turning."

He turned to the right and then to the left. We turned into a labyrinth
of streets.

Suddenly I heard a shot.

The driver asked me,--

"Which way are we to go, sir?"

"In the direction in which you hear the shots."

We were in a narrow street; on my left I saw the inscription above a
door, "Grand Lavoir," and on my right a square with a central building,
which looked like a market. The square and the street were deserted. I
asked the driver,--

"What street are we in?"

"In the Rue de Cotte."

"Where is the Café Roysin?"

"Straight before us."

"Drive there."

He drove on, but slowly. There was another explosion, this time close by
us, the end of the street became filled with smoke; at the moment we
were passing No. 22, which has a side-door above which I
read, "Petit Lavoir."

Suddenly a voice called out to the driver, "Stop!"

The driver pulled up, and the window of the _fiacre_ being down, a hand
was stretched towards mine. I recognized Alexander Rey.

This daring man was pale.

"Go no further," said he; "all is at an end."

"What do you mean, all at an end?"

"Yes, they must have anticipated the time appointed; the barricade is
taken: I have just come from it. It is a few steps from here straight
before us."

And he added,--

"Baudin is killed."

The smoke rolled away from the end of the street.

"Look," said Alexander Rey to me.

I saw, a hundred steps before us, at the junction of the Rue de Cotte
and the Rue Ste. Marguerite, a low barricade which the soldiers were
pulling down. A corpse was being borne away.

It was Baudin.




CHAPTER III.


THE ST. ANTOINE BARRICADE

This is what had happened.

During that same night, and as early as four o'clock in the morning, De
Flotte was in the Faubourg St. Antoine. He was anxious, in case any
movement took place before daylight, that a Representative of the People
should be present, and he was one of those who, when the glorious
insurrection of Right should burst forth, wished to unearth the
paving-stones for the first barricade.

But nothing was stirring. De Flotte, alone in the midst of this deserted
and sleeping Faubourg, wandered from street to street throughout the
night.

Day breaks late in December. Before the first streaks of dawn De Flotte
was at the rendezvous opposite the Lenoir Market.

This spot was only weakly guarded. The only troops in the neighborhood
were the post itself of the Lenoir Market, and another post at a short
distance which occupied the guard-house at the corner of the Faubourg and
the Rue de Montreuil, close to the old Tree of Liberty planted in 1793 by
Santerre. Neither of these posts were commanded by officers.

De Flotte reconnoitred the position. He walked some time up and down the
pavement, and then seeing no one coming as yet, and fearing to excite
attention, he went away, and returned to the side-streets of the
Faubourg.

For his part Aubry (du Nord) got up at five o'clock. Having gone home in
the middle of the night, on his return from the Rue Popincourt, he had
only taken three hours' rest. His porter told him that some suspicious
persons had inquired for him during the evening of the 2d, and that they
had been to the house opposite, No. 12 of the same street, Rue Racine,
to arrest Huguenin. This determined Aubry to leave his house before
daylight.

He walked to the Faubourg St. Antoine. As he reached the place of
rendezvous he met Cournet and the others from the Rue Popincourt. They
were almost immediately joined by Malardier.

It was dawn. The Faubourg was solitary. They walked along wrapt in
thought and speaking in a low voice. Suddenly an impetuous and singular
procession passed them.

They looked round. It was a detachment of Lancers which surrounded
something which in the dim light they recognized to be a police-van. The
vehicle rolled noiselessly along the macadamized road.

They were debating what this could mean, when a second and similar group
appeared, then a third, and then a fourth. Ten police vans passed in
this manner, following each other very closely, and almost touching.

"Those are our colleagues!" exclaimed Aubry (du Nord).

In truth the last batch of the Representatives, prisoners of the Quai
d'Orsay, the batch destined for Vincennes, was passing through the
Faubourg. It was about seven o'clock in the morning. Some shops were
being opened and were lighted inside, and a few passers-by came out of
the houses.

Three carriages defiled one after the other, closed, guarded, dreary,
dumb; no voice came out, no cry, no whisper. They were carrying off in
the midst of swords, of sabres, and of lances, with the rapidity and
fury of the whirlwind, something which kept silence; and that something
which they were carrying off, and which maintained this sinister
silence, was the broken Tribune, the Sovereignty of the Assemblies, the
supreme initiative whence all civilization is derived; it was the word
which contains the future of the world, it was the speech of France!

A last carriage arrived, which by some chance had been delayed. It was
about two or three hundred yards behind the principal convoy, and was
only escorted by three Lancers. It was not a police-van, it was an
omnibus, the only one in the convoy. Behind the conductor, who was a
police agent, there could distinctly be seen the Representatives heaped
up in the interior. It seemed easy to rescue them.

Cournet appealed to the passers-by; "Citizens," he cried, "these are
your Representatives, who are being carried off! You have just seen
them pass in the vans of convicts! Bonaparte arrests them contrary to
every law. Let us rescue them! To arms!"

A knot formed of men in blouses and of workmen going to work. A shout
came from the knot, "Long live the Republic!" and some men rushed
towards the vehicle. The carriage and the Lancers broke into a gallop.

"To arms!" repeated Cournet.

"To arms!" repeated the men of the people.

There was a moment of impulse. Who knows what might have happened? It
would have been a singular accident if the first barricade against the
_coup d'état_ had been made with this omnibus, which, after having aided
in the crime, would this have aided in the punishment. But at the moment
when the people threw themselves on the vehicle they saw several of the
Representative-prisoners which it contained sign to them with both hands
to refrain. "Eh!" said a workman, "they do not wish it!"

A second repeated, "They do not wish for liberty!"

Another added, "They did not wish us to have it, they do not wish it for
themselves."

All was said, and the omnibus was allowed to pass on. A moment
afterwards the rear-guard of the escort came up and passed by at a sharp
trots and the group which surrounded Aubry (du Nord), Malardier, and
Cournet dispersed.

The Café Roysin had just opened. It may be remembered that the large
hall of this _café_ had served for the meeting of a famous club in 1848.
It was there, it may also be remembered, that the rendezvous had been
settled.

The Café Roysin is entered by a passage opening out upon the street, a
lobby of some yards in length is next crossed, and then comes a large
hall, with high windows, and looking-glasses on the walls, containing in
the centre several billiard-tables, some small marble-topped tables,
chairs, and velvet-covered benches. It was this hall, badly arranged,
however, for a meeting where we could have deliberated, which had been
the hall of the Roysin Club. Cournet, Aubry, and Malardier installed
themselves there. On entering they did not disguise who they were; they
were welcomed, and shown an exit through the garden in case of
necessity.

De Flotte had just joined them.

Eight o'clock was striking when the Representatives began to arrive.
Bruckner, Maigne, and Brillier first, and then successively Charamaule,
Cassal, Dulac, Bourzat, Madier de Montjau, and Baudin. Bourzat, on
account of the mud, as was his custom, wore wooden shoes. Whoever
thought Bourzat a peasant would be mistaken. He rather resembled a
Benedictine monk. Bourzat, with his southern imagination, his quick
intelligence, keen, lettered, refined, possesses an encyclopedia in his
head, and wooden shoes on his feet. Why not? He is Mind and People. The
ex-Constituent Bastide came in with Madier de Montjau. Baudin shook the
hands of all with warmth, but he did not speak. He was pensive. "What is
the matter with you, Baudin?" asked Aubry (du Nord). "Are you mournful?"
"I?" said Baudin, raising his head, "I have never been more happy."

Did he feel himself already chosen? When we are so near death, all
radiant with glory, which smiles upon us through the gloom, perhaps we
are conscious of it.

A certain number of men, strangers to the Assembly, all as determined as
the Representatives themselves, accompanied them and surrounded them.

Cournet was the leader. Amongst them there were workmen, but no blouses.
In order not to alarm the middle classes the workmen had been
requested, notably those employed by Derosne and Cail, to come in coats.

Baudin had with him a copy of the Proclamation which I had dictated to
him on the previous day. Cournet unfolded it and read it. "Let us at
once post it up in the Faubourg," said he. "The People must know that
Louis Bonaparte is outlawed." A lithographic workman who was there
offered to print it without delay. All the Representatives present
signed it, and they added my name to their signatures. Aubry (du Nord)
headed it with these words, "National Assembly." The workman carried off
the Proclamation, and kept his word. Some hours afterwards Aubry (du
Nord), and later on a friend of Cournet's named Gay, met him in the
Faubourg du Temple paste-pot in hand, posting the Proclamation at every
street corner, even next to the Maupas placard, which threatened the
penalty of death to any one who should be found posting an appeal to
arms. Groups read the two bills at the same time. We may mention an
incident which ought to be noted, a sergeant of the line, in uniform, in
red trousers, accompanied him and protected him. He was doubtless a
soldier who had lately left the service.

The time fixed on the preceding evening for the general rendezvous was
from nine to ten in the morning. This hour had been chosen so that there
should be time to give notice to all the members of the Left; it was
expedient to wait until the Representatives should arrive, so that the
group should the more resemble an Assembly, and that its manifestation
should have more authority on the Faubourg.

Several of the Representatives who had already arrived had no sash of
office. Some were made hastily in a neighboring house with strips of
red, white, and blue calico, and were brought to them. Baudin and De
Flotte were amongst those who girded on these improvised sashes.

Meanwhile it was not yet nine o'clock, when impatience already began to
be manifested around them.[9]

Many shared this glorious impatience.

Baudin wished to wait.

"Do not anticipate the hour," said he; "let us allow our colleagues time
to arrive."

But they murmured round Baudin, "No, begin, give the signal, go outside.
The Faubourg only waits to see your sashes to rise. You are few in
number, but they know that your friends will rejoin you. That is
sufficient. Begin."

The result proved that this undue haste could only produce a failure.
Meanwhile they considered that the first example which the
Representatives of the People ought to set was personal courage. The
spark must not be allowed to die out. To march the first, to march at
the head, such was their duty. The semblance of any hesitation would
have been in truth more disastrous than any degree of rashness.

Schoelcher is of an heroic nature, he has the grand impatience of
danger.

"Let us go," he cried; "our friends will join us, let us go outside."

They had no arms.

"Let us disarm the post which is over there," said Schoelcher.

They left the Salle Roysin in order, two by two, arm in arm. Fifteen or
twenty men of the people escorted them. They went before them, crying,
"Long live the Republic! To arms!"

Some children preceded and followed them, shouting, "Long live the
Mountain!"

The entrances of the closed shops were half opened. A few men appeared
at the doors, a few women showed themselves at the windows. Knots of
workmen going to their work watched them pass. They cried, "Long live
our Representatives! Long live the Republic!"

Sympathy was everywhere, but insurrection nowhere. The procession
gathered few adherents on the way.

A man who was leading a saddled horse joined them. They did not know
this man, nor whence this horse came. It seemed as if the man offered
his services to any one who wished to fly. Representative Dulac ordered
this man to be off.

In this manner they reached the guard-house of the Rue de Montrenil. At
their approach the sentry gave the alarm, and the soldiers came out of
the guard-house in disorder.

Schoelcher, calm, impassive, in ruffles and a white tie, clothed, as
usual, in black, buttoned to the neck in his tight frock coat, with the
intrepid and brotherly air of a Quaker, walked straight up to them.

"Comrades," he said to them, "we are the Representatives of the People,
and come in the name of the people to demand your arms for the defence
of the Constitution and of the Laws!"

The post allowed itself to be disarmed. The sergeant alone made any show
of resistance, but they said to him, "You are alone," and he yielded.
The Representatives distributed the guns and the cartridges to the
resolute band which surrounded them.

Some soldiers exclaimed, "Why do you take away our muskets! We would
fight for you and with you!"

The Representatives consulted whether they should accept this offer.
Schoelcher was inclined to do so. But one of them remarked that some
Mobile Guards had made the same overtures to the insurgents of June, and
had turned against the Insurrection the arms which the Insurrection had
left them.

The muskets therefore were not restored.

The disarming having been accomplished, the muskets were counted; there
were fifteen of them.

"We are a hundred and fifty," said Cournet, "we have not enough
muskets."

"Well, then," said Schoelcher, "where is there a post?"

"At the Lenoir Market."

"Let us disarm it."

With Schoelcher at their head and escorted by fifteen armed men the
Representatives proceeded to the Lenoir Market. The post of the Lenoir
Market allowed themselves to be disarmed even more willingly than the
post in the Rue de Montreuil. The soldiers turned themselves round so
that the cartridges might be taken from their pouches.

The muskets were immediately loaded.

"Now," exclaimed De Flotte, "we have thirty guns, let us look for a
street corner, and raise a barricade."

There were at that time about two hundred combatants.

They went up the Rue de Montreuil.

After some fifty steps Schoelcher said, "Where are we going? We are
turning our backs on the Bastille. We are turning our backs upon the
conflict."

They returned towards the Faubourg.

They shouted, "To arms!" They Where answered by "Long live our
Representatives!" But only a few young men joined them. It was evident
that the breeze of insurrection was not blowing.

"Never mind," said De Flotte, "let us begin the battle. Let us achieve
the glory of being the first killed."

As they reached the point where the Streets Ste. Marguerite and de Cotte
open out and divide the Faubourg, a peasant's cart laden with dung
entered the Rue Ste. Marguerite.

"Here," exclaimed De Flotte.

They stopped the dung-cart, and overturned it in the middle of the
Faubourg St. Antoine.

A milkwoman came up.

They overturned the milk-cart.

A baker was passing in his bread-cart. He saw what was being done,
attempted to escape, and urged his horse to a gallop. Two or three
street Arabs--those children of Paris brave as lions and agile as
cats--sped after the baker, ran past his horse, which was still
galloping, stopped it, and brought back the cart to the barricade which
had been begun.

They overturned the bread-cart.

An omnibus came up on the road from the Bastille.

"Very well!" said the conductor, "I see what is going on."

He descended with a good grace, and told his passengers to get
down, while the coachman unharnessed his horses and went away shaking
his cloak.

They overturned the omnibus.

The four vehicles placed end to end barely barred the street of the
Faubourg, which in this part is very wide. While putting them in line
the men of the barricade said,--

"Let us not injure the carts more than we can help."

This formed an indifferent barricade, very low, too short, and which
left the pavements free on either side.

At this moment a staff officer passed by followed by an orderly, saw the
barricade, and fled at a gallop.

Schoelcher calmly inspected the overturned vehicles. When he reached the
peasant's cart, which made a higher heap than the others, he said, "that
is the only good one."

The barricade grew larger. They threw a few empty baskets upon it, which
made it thicker and larger without strengthening it.

They were still working when a child came up to them shouting, "The
soldiers!"

In truth two companies arrived from the Bastille, at the double, through
the Faubourg, told off in squads at short distances apart, and barring
the whole of the street.

The doors and the windows were hastily closed.

During this time, at a corner of the barricade, Bastide, impassive, was
gravely telling a story to Madier de Montjau. "Madier," said he, "nearly
two hundred years ago the Prince de Condé, ready to give battle in this
very Faubourg St. Antoine, where we now are, asked an officer who was
accompanying him, 'Have you ever seen a battle lost?'--'No, sire.'
'Well, then, you will see one now.'--Madier, I tell you to-day,--you
will speedily see a barricade taken."

In the meanwhile those who were armed had assumed their places for the
conflict behind the barricade.

The critical moment drew nigh.

"Citizens," cried Schoelcher, "do not fire a shot. When the Army and the
Faubourgs fight, the blood of the People is shed on both sides. Let us
speak to the soldiers first."

He mounted on one of the baskets which heightened the barricade. The
other Representatives arranged themselves near him on the omnibus.
Malardier and Dulac were on his right. Dulac said to him, "You scarcely
know me, Citizen Schoelcher, but I love you. Let me have the charge of
remaining by your side. I only belong to the second rank in the
Assembly, but I want to be in the first rank of the battle."

At this moment some men in blouses, those whom the Second of December
had enlisted, appeared at the corner of the Rue Ste. Marguerite, close
to the barricade, and shouted, "Down with the 'Twenty-five francs!'"

Baudin who had already selected his post for the combat, and who was
standing on the barricade, looked fixedly at these men, and said to
them,--

"You shall see how one can die for 'twenty-five francs!'"

There was a noise in the street. Some few doors which had remained half
opened were closed. The two attacking columns had arrived in sight of
the barricade. Further on could be seen confusedly other lines of
bayonets. They were those which had barred my passage.

Schoelcher, raising his arm with authority, signed to the captain, who
commanded the first squad, to halt.

The captain made a negative sign with his sword. The whole of the Second
of December was in these two gestures. The Law said, "Halt!" The Sabre
answered, "No!"

The two companies continued to advance, but slowly, and keeping at the
same distance from each other.

Schoelcher came down from the barricade into the street. De Flotte,
Dulac, Malardier, Brillier, Maigne, and Bruckner followed him.

Then was seen a grand spectacle.

Seven Representatives of the People, armed only with their sashes, that
is to say, majestically clothed with Law and Right, advanced in the
street beyond the barricade, and marched straight to the soldiers, who
awaited them with their guns pointed at them.

The other Representatives who had remained at the barricade made their
last preparations for resistance. The combatants maintained an intrepid
bearing. The Naval Lieutenant Cournet towered above them all with his
tall stature. Baudin, still standing on the overturned omnibus, leaned
half over the barricade.

On seeing the Representatives approach, the soldiers and their officers
were for the moment bewildered. Meanwhile the captain signed to the
Representatives to stop.

They stopped, and Schoelcher said in an impressive voice,--

"Soldiers! we are the Representatives of the Sovereign People, we are
your Representatives, we are the Elect of Universal Suffrage. In the
name of the Constitution, in the name of Universal Suffrage, in the name
of the Republic, we, who are the National Assembly, we, who are the Law,
order you to join us, we summon you to obey. We ourselves are your
leaders. The Army belongs to the People, and the Representatives of the
People are the Chiefs of the Army. Soldiers! Louis Bonaparte violates
the Constitution, we have outlawed him. Obey us."

The officer who was in command, a captain named Petit, did not allow him
to finish.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I have my orders. I belong to the People. I am a
Republican as you are, but I am only an instrument."

"You know the Constitution?" said Schoelcher.

"I only know my instructions."

"There is an instruction above all other instructions," continued
Schoelcher, "obligatory upon the Soldier as upon the Citizen--the Law."

He turned again towards the soldiers to harangue them, but the captain
cried out to him,--

"Not another word! You shall not go on! If you add one word, I shall
give the order to fire."

"What does that matter to us?" said Schoelcher.

At this moment an officer arrived on horseback. It was the major of the
regiment. He whispered for a moment to the captain.

"Gentlemen! Representatives!" continued the captain, waving his sword,
"withdraw, or I shall fire."

"Fire!" shouted De Flotte.

The Representatives--strange and heroic copy of Fontenoy--took off their
hats, and faced the muskets.

Schoelcher alone kept his hat on his head, and waited with his arms
crossed.

"Fix bayonets," said the captain. And turning towards the squads,
"Charge!"

"Vive la République!" cried out the Representatives.

The
bayonets were lowered, the companies moved forward, the soldiers came on
at the double upon the motionless Representatives.

It was a terrible and superb moment.

The seven Representatives saw the bayonets at their breasts without a
word, without a gesture, without one step backwards. But the hesitation
which was not in their soul was in the heart of the soldiers.

The soldiers felt distinctly that this was a double stain upon their
uniform--the outrage upon the Representatives of the People--which was
treason, and the slaughter of unarmed men, which was cowardice. Now
treason and cowardice are two epaulets to which a general sometimes
becomes reconciled, the soldier--never.

When the bayonets were so close to the Representatives that they touched
their breasts, they turned aside of their own accord, and the soldier's
by an unanimous movement passed between the Representatives without
doing them any harm. Schoelcher alone had his coat pierced in two
places, and in his opinion this was awkwardness instead of intention.
One of the soldiers who faced him wished to push him away from the
captain, and touched him with his bayonet. The point encountered the
book of the addresses of the Representatives, which Schoelcher had in
his pocket, and only pierced his clothing.

A soldier said to De Flotte, "Citizen, we do not wish to hurt you."

Nevertheless a soldier came up to Bruckner and pointed his gun at him.

"Well," said Bruckner, "fire."

The soldier, touched, lowered his arm, and shook Bruckner's hand.

It was singular that, notwithstanding the order given by the officers,
the two companies successively came up to the Representatives, charged
with the bayonet, and turned aside. Instructions may order, but instinct
prevails; instructions may be crime, but instinct is honor. Major P----
said afterwards, "They had told us that we should have to deal with
brigands, we had to deal with heroes."

Meanwhile those on the barricade were growing uneasy, and seeing their
colleagues surrounded, and wishing to succor them, they fired a musket
shot. This unfortunate shot killed a soldier between De Flotte and
Schoelcher.

The officer who commanded the second attacking squad passed close to
Schoelcher as the poor soldier fell. Schoelcher pointed out the fallen
man to the officer, and said to him, "Lieutenant, look!"

The officer answered by a gesture of despair,--

"What would you have us do?"

The two companies replied to the shot by a general volley, and rushed to
the assault of the barricade, leaving behind them the seven
Representatives astounded at being still alive.

The barricade replied by a volley, but it could not hold out. It was
carried.

Baudin was killed.

He had remained standing in his position on the omnibus. Three balls
reached him. One struck him in the right eye and penetrated into the
brain. He fell. He never regained consciousness. Half-an-hour afterwards
he was dead. His body was taken to the Ste. Marguerite Hospital.

Bourzat, who was close to Baudin, with Aubry (du Nord), had his coat
pierced by a ball.

We must again remark a curious incident,--the soldiers made no prisoner
on this barricade. Those who defended it dispersed through the streets
of the Faubourg, or took refuge in the neighboring houses. Representative
Maigne, pushed by some affrighted women behind a door, was shut in with
one of the soldiers who had just taken the barricade. A moment afterwards
the soldier and the Representative went out together. The Representatives
could freely leave this first field of battle.

At this solemn moment of the struggle a last glimmer of Justice and of
Right still flickered, and military honesty recoiled with a sort of
dread anxiety before the outrage upon which they were entering. There is
the intoxication of good, and there is an intoxication of evil: this
intoxication later on drowned the conscience of the Army.

The French Army is not made to commit crimes. When the struggle became
prolonged, and ferocious orders of the day had to be executed, the
soldiers must have been maddened. They obeyed not coldly, which would
have been monstrous, but with anger, and this History will invoke as
their excuse; and with many, perhaps, despair was at the root of their
anger.

The fallen soldier had remained on the ground. It was Schoelcher who
raised him. A few women, weeping, but brave, came out of a house. Some
soldiers came up. They carried him, Schoelcher holding his head, first
to a fruiterer's shop, then to the Ste. Marguerite Hospital, where they
had already taken Baudin.

He was a conscript. The ball had entered his side. Through his gray
overcoat buttoned to the collar, could be seen a hole stained with
blood. His head had sunk on his shoulder, his pale countenance,
encircled by the chinstrap of his shako, had no longer any expression,
the blood oozed out of his mouth. He seemed barely eighteen years old.
Already a soldier and still a boy. He was dead.

This poor soldier was the first victim of the _coup d'état_. Baudin was
the second.

Before being a Republican Baudin had been a tutor. He came from that
intelligent and brave race of schoolmasters ever persecuted, who have
fallen from the Guizot Law into the Falloux Law, and from the Falloux
Law into the Dupanloup Law. The crime of the schoolmaster is to hold a
book open; that suffices, the Church condemns him. There is now, in
France, in each village, a lighted torch--the schoolmaster--and a mouth
which blows upon it--the curé. The schoolmasters of France, who knew how
to die of hunger for Truth and for Science, were worthy that one of
their race should be killed for Liberty.

The first time that I saw Baudin was at the Assembly on January 13,
1850. I wished to speak against the Law of Instruction. I had not put my
name down; Baudin's name stood second. He offered me his turn. I
accepted, and I was able to speak two days afterwards, on the 15th.

Baudin was one of the targets of Sieur Dupin, for calls to order and
official annoyances. He shared this honor with the Representatives Miot
and Valentin.

Baudin ascended the Tribune several times. His mode of speaking,
outwardly hesitating, was energetic in the main. He sat on the crest of
the Mountain. He had a firm spirit and timid manners. Thence there was in
his constitution an indescribable embarrassment, mingled with decision.
He was a man of middle height. His face ruddy and full, his broad chest,
his wide shoulders announced the robust man, the laborer-schoolmaster,
the peasant-thinker. In this he resembled Bourzat. Baudin leaned his head
on his shoulder, listened with intelligence, and spoke with a gentle and
grave voice. He had the melancholy air and the bitter smile of the
doomed.

On the evening of the Second of December I had asked him, "How old are
you?" He had answered me, "Not quite thirty-three years."

"And you?" said he.

"Forty-nine."

And he replied,--

"To-day we are of the same age."

He thought in truth of that to-morrow which awaited us, and in which was
hidden that "perhaps" which is the great leveller.

The first shots had been fired, a Representative had fallen, and the
people did not rise! What bandage had they on their eyes, what weight
had they on their hearts? Alas! the gloom which Louis Bonaparte had
known how to cast over his crime, far from lifting, grew denser. For the
first time in the sixty years, that the Providential era of Revolutions
had been open, Paris, the city of intelligence, seemed not to
understand!

On leaving the barricade of the Rue Ste. Marguerite, De Flotte went to
the Faubourg St. Marceau, Madier de Montjau went to Belleville,
Charamaule and Maigne proceeded to the Boulevards. Schoelcher, Dulac,
Malardier, and Brillier again went up the Faubourg St. Antoine by the
side streets which the soldiers had not yet occupied. They shouted,
"Vive la République!" They harangued the people on the doorsteps: "Is it
the Empire that you want?" exclaimed Schoelcher. They even went as far
as to sing the "Marseillaise." People took off their hats as they passed
and shouted "Long live the Representatives!" But that was all.

They were thirsty and weary. In the Rue de Reuilly a man came out of a
door with a bottle in his hand, and offered them drink.

Sartin joined them on the way. In the Rue de Charonne they entered the
meeting-place of the Association of Cabinet Makers, hoping to find there
the committee of the association in session. There was no
one there. But nothing discouraged them.

As they reached the Place de la Bastille, Dulac said to Schoelcher, "I
will ask permission to leave you for an hour or two, for this reason: I
am alone in Paris with my little daughter, who is seven years old. For
the past week she has had scarlet fever. Yesterday, when the _coup
d'état_ burst forth, she was at death's door. I have no one but this
child in the world. I left her this morning to come with you, and she
said to me, 'Papa, where are you going?' As I am not killed, I will go
and see if she is not dead."

Two hours afterwards the child was still living, and we were holding a
permanent sitting at No. 15, Rue Richelieu, Jules Favre, Carnot, Michel
de Bourges, and myself, when Dulac entered, and said to us, "I have come
to place myself at your disposal."


[9] "There was also a misunderstanding respecting the appointed time.
Some made a mistake, and thought it was nine o'clock. The first arrivals
impatiently awaited their colleagues. They were, as we have said, some
twelve or fifteen in number at half-past eight. 'Time is being lost,'
exclaimed one of them who had hardly entered; 'let us gird on our sashes;
let us show the Representatives to the People, let us join it in raising
barricades.' We shall perhaps save the country, at all events we shall
save the honor of our party. 'Come, let us to the barricades!' This
advice was immediately and unanimously acclaimed: one alone, Citizen
Baudin, interposed the forcible objection, 'we are not sufficiently
numerous to adopt such a resolution.' But he spiritedly joined in the
general enthusiasm, and with a calm conscience, after having reserved
the principle, he was not the last to gird on his sash."--SCHOELCHER,
_Histoire des Crimes du 2d Decembre_, pp. 130-131.




CHAPTER IV.


THE WORKMEN'S SOCIETIES ASK US FOR THE ORDER TO FIGHT

In presence of the fact of the barricade of the Faubourg St. Antoine so
heroically constructed by the Representatives, so sadly neglected by the
populace, the last illusions, even mine, should have been dispersed.
Baudin killed, the Faubourg cold. Such things spoke aloud. It was a
supreme, manifest, absolute demonstration of that fact, the inaction of
the people, to which I could not resign myself--a deplorable inaction,
if they understood, a self-treason, if they did not understand, a fatal
neutrality in every case, a calamity of which all the responsibility, we
repeat, recoiled not upon the people but upon those who in June, 1848,
after having promised them amnesty, had refused it, and who had unhinged
the great soul of the people of Paris by breaking faith with them. What
the Constituent Assembly had sown the Legislative Assembly harvested.
We, innocent of the fault, had to submit to the consequence.

The spark which we had seen flash for an instant through the
crowd--Michel de Bourges from the height of Bonvalet's balcony, myself
from the Boulevard du Temple--this spark seemed extinguished. Maigne
firstly, then Brillier, then Bruckner, later on Charmaule, Madier de
Montjau, Bastide, and Dulac came to report to us what had passed at the
barricade of St. Antoine, the motives which had decided the
Representatives present not to await the hour appointed for the
rendezvous, and Baudin's death. The report which I made myself of what I
had seen, and which Cassal and Alexander Rey completed by adding new
circumstances, enabled us to ascertain the situation. The Committee could
no longer hesitate: I myself renounced the hopes which I had based upon a
grand manifestation, upon a powerful reply to the _coup d'état_, upon a
sort of pitched battle waged by the guardians of the Republic against the
banditti of the Elysée. The Faubourgs failed us; we possessed the
lever--Right, but the mass to be raised, the People, we did not possess.
There was nothing more to hope for, as those two great orators, Michel de
Bourges and Jules Favre, with their keen political perception, had
declared from the first, save a slow long struggle, avoiding decisive
engagements, changing quarters, keeping Paris on the alert, saying to
each, It is not at an end; leaving time for the departments to prepare
their resistance, wearying the troops out, and in which struggle the
Parisian people, who do not long smell powder with impunity, would
perhaps ultimately take fire. Barricades raised everywhere, barely
defended, re-made immediately, disappearing and multiplying themselves at
the same time, such was the strategy indicated by the situation. The
Committee adopted it, and sent orders in every direction to this effect.
At that moment we were sitting at No. 15, Rue Richelieu, at the house of
our colleague Grévy, who had been arrested in the Tenth Arrondissement on
the preceding day, who was at Mazas. His brother had offered us his house
for our deliberations. The Representatives, our natural emissaries,
flocked around us, and scattered themselves throughout Paris, with our
instructions to organize resistance at every point. They were the arms
and the Committee was the soul. A certain number of ex-Constituents,
intrepid men, Garnier-Pagès, Marie, Martin (de Strasbourg), Senart,
formerly President of the Constituent Assembly, Bastide, Laissac,
Landrin, had joined the Representatives on the preceding day. They
established, therefore, in all the districts where it was possible
Committees of Permanence in connection with us, the Central Committee,
and composed either of Representatives or of faithful citizens. For our
watchword we chose "Baudin."

Towards noon the centre of Paris began to grow agitated.

Our appeal to arms was first seen placarded on the Place de la Bourse
and the Rue Montmartre. Groups pressed round to read it, and battled
with the police, who endeavored to tear down the bills. Other
lithographic placards contained in two parallel columns the decree of
deposition drawn up by the Right at the Mairie of the Tenth
Arrondissement, and the decree of outlawry voted by the Left. There were
distributed, printed on gray paper in large type, the judgment of the
High Court of Justice, declaring Louis Bonaparte attainted with the
Crime of High Treason, and signed "Hardouin" (President), "Delapalme,"
"Moreau" (of the Seine), "Cauchy," "Bataille" (Judges). This last name
was thus mis-spelt by mistake, it should read "Pataille."

At that moment people generally believed, and we ourselves believed, in
this judgment, which, as we have seen, was not the genuine judgment.

At the same time they posted in the populous quarters, at the corner of
every street, two Proclamations. The first ran thus:--

  "TO THE PEOPLE.

  "ARTICLE III.[10]

  "The Constitution is confided to the keeping and to the patriotism of
  French citizens. Louis NAPOLEON is outlawed.

  "The State of Siege is abolished.

  "Universal suffrage is re-established.

  "LONG LIVE THE REPUBLIC.

  "To ARMS!

  "For the United Mountain.

  "The Delegate, VICTOR HUGO."

The second ran thus:--

  "INHABITANTS OF PARIS.

  "The National Guards and the People of the Departments are marching on
  Paris to aid you in seizing the TRAITOR, Louis Napoléon BONAPARTE.

  "For the Representatives of the People,

  "VICTOR HUGO, President.

  "SCHOELCHER, Secretary."

This last placard, printed on little squares of paper, was distributed
abroad, says an historian of the _coup d'état_, by thousands of copies.

For their part the criminals installed in the Government offices replied
by threats: the great white placards, that is to say, the official
bills, were largely multiplied. On one could be read:--

  "WE, PREFECT OF THE POLICE,

  "Decree as follows:--

  "ARTICLE I. All meetings are rigorously prohibited. They will be
  immediately dispersed by force.

  "ARTICLE II. All seditious shouts, all reading in public, all posting
  of political documents not emanating from a regularly constituted
  authority, are equally prohibited.

  "ARTICLE III. The agents of the Public Police will enforce the execution
  of the present decree.

  "Given at the Prefecture of Police, December 3, 1851.

  "DE MAUPAS, Prefect of Police.

  "Seen and approved,

  "DE MORNY, Minister of the Interior."

On another could be read,--

  "THE MINISTER OF WAR,

  "By virtue of the Law on the State of Siege,

  "Decrees:--

  "Every person taken constructing or defending a barricade, or carrying
  arms, WILL BE SHOT.

  "General of Division,

  "Minister of war,

  "DE SAINT-ARNAUD."

We reproduce this Proclamation exactly, even to the punctuation. The
words "Will be shot" were in capital letters in the placards signed "De
Saint-Arnaud."

The Boulevards were thronged with an excited crowd. The agitation
increasing in the centre reached three Arrondissements, the 6th, 7th,
and the 12th. The district of the schools began to disorderly. The
Students of Law and of Medicine cheered De Flotte on the Place de
Panthéon. Madier de Montjau, ardent and eloquent, went through and
aroused Belleville. The troops, growing more numerous every moment,
took possession of all the strategical points of Paris.

At one o'clock, a young man was brought to us by the legal adviser of
the Workmen's Societies, the ex-Constituent Leblond, at whose house the
Committee had deliberated that morning. We were sitting in permanence,
Carnot, Jules Favre, Michel de Bourges, and myself. This young man, who
had an earnest mode of speaking and an intelligent countenance, was
named King. He had been sent to us by the Committee of the Workmen's
Society, from whom he was delegated. "The Workmen's Societies," he said
to us, "place themselves at the disposal of the Committee of Legal
Insurrection appointed by the Left. They can throw into the struggle
five or six thousand resolute men. They will manufacture powder; as for
guns, they will be found." The Workmen's Society requested from us an
order to fight signed by us. Jules Favre took a pen and wrote,--"The
undersigned Representatives authorize Citizen King and his friends to
defend with them, and with arms in their hands, Universal Suffrage, the
Republic, the Laws." He dated it, and we all four signed it. "That is
enough," said the delegate to us, "you will hear of us."

Two hours afterwards it was reported to us that the conflict had begun.
They were fighting in the Rue Aumaire.


[10] A typographical error--it should read "Article LXVIII." On the
subject of this placard the author of this book received the following
letter. It does honor to those who wrote it:--

  "CITIZEN VICTOR HUGO,--We know that you have made an appeal to arms. We
  have not been able to obtain it. We replace it by these bills which we
  sign with your name. You will not disown us. When France is in danger
  your name belongs to all; your name is a Public Power.

  "FELIX BONY.

  "DABAT."




CHAPTER V.


BAUDINS'S CORPSE

With regard to the Faubourg St. Antoine, we had, as I said, lost nearly
all hope, but the men of the _coup d'état_ had not lost all uneasiness.
Since the attempts at rising and the barricades of the morning a rigorous
supervision had been organized. Any one who entered the Faubourg ran the
risk of being examined, followed, and upon the slightest suspicion,
arrested. The supervision was nevertheless sometimes at fault. About two
o'clock a short man, with an earnest and attentive air, crossed the
Faubourg. A _sergent de ville_ and a police agent in plain clothes barred
his passage. "Who are you?" "You seem a passenger." "Where are you going?"
"Over there, close by, to Bartholomé's, the overseer of the sugar
manufactory.--" They search him. He himself opened his pocket-book; the
police agents turned out the pockets of his waistcoat and unbuttoned
his shirt over his breast; finally the _sergent de ville_ said gruffly,
"Yet I seem to have seen you here before this morning. Be off!" It was
the Representative Gindrier. If they had not stopped at the pockets of
his waistcoat--and if they had searched his great-coat, they would have
found his sash there--Gindrier would have been shot.

Not to allow themselves to be arrested, to keep their freedom for the
combat--such was the watchword of the members of the Left. That is why
we had our sashes upon us, but not outwardly visible.

Gindrier had had no food that day; he thought he would go home, and
returned to the new district of the Havre Railway Station, where he
resided. In the Rue de Calais, which is a lonely street running from Rue
Blanche to the Rue de Clichy, a _fiacre_ passed him. Gindrier heard his
name called out. He turned round and saw two persons in a _fiacre_,
relations of Baudin, and a man whom he did not know. One of the
relations of Baudin, Madame L----, said to him, "Baudin is
wounded!" She added, "They have taken him to the St. Antoine Hospital.
We are going to fetch him. Come with us." Gindrier got into the
_fiacre_. The stranger, however, was an emissary of the Commissary of
Police of the Rue Ste. Marguerite St. Antoine. He had been charged by
the commissary of Police to go to Baudin's house, No, 88, Rue de Clichy,
to inform the family. Having only found the women at home he had
confined himself to telling them that Representative Baudin was wounded.
He offered to accompany them, and went with them in the _fiacre_. They
had uttered the name of Gindrier before him. This might have been
imprudent. They spoke to him; he declared that he would not betray the
Representative, and it was settled that before the Commissary of Police
Gindrier should assume to be a relation, and be called Baudin.

The poor women still hoped. Perhaps the wound was serious, but Baudin
was young, and had a good constitution. "They will save him," said they.
Gindrier was silent. At the office of the Commissary of Police the truth
was revealed.--"How is he?" asked Madame L---- on entering. "Why?" said
the Commissary, "he is dead." "What do you mean? Dead!" "Yes; killed on
the spot."

This was a painful moment. The despair of these two women who had been
so abruptly struck to the heart burst forth in sobs. "Ah, infamous
Bonaparte!" cried Madame L----. "He has killed Baudin. Well, then, I will
kill him. I will be the Charlotte Corday of this Marat."

Gindrier claimed the body of Baudin. The Commissary of Police only
consented to restore it to the family on exacting a promise that they
would bury it at once, and without any ostentation, and that they would
not exhibit it to the people. "You understand," he said, "that the sight
of a Representative killed and bleeding might raise Paris." The _coup
d'état_ made corpses, but did not wish that they should be utilized.

On these conditions the Commissary of Police gave Gindrier two men and a
safe conduct to fetch the body of Baudin from the hospital where he had
been carried.

Meanwhile Baudin's brother, a young man of four-and-twenty, a medical
student, came up. This young man has since been arrested and imprisoned.
His crime is his brother. Let us continue. They proceeded to the
hospital. At the sight of the safe conduct the director ushered Gindrier
and young Baudin into the parlor. There were three pallets there covered
with white sheets, under which could be traced the motionless forms of
three human bodies. The one which occupied the centre bed was Baudin. On
his right lay the young soldier killed a minute before him by the side of
Schoelcher, and on the left an old woman who had been struck down by a
spent ball in the Rue de Cotte, and whom the executioners of the _coup
d'état_ had gathered up later on; in the first moment one cannot find out
all one's riches.

The three corpses were naked under their winding sheets.

They had left to Baudin alone his shirt and his flannel vest. They had
found on him seven francs, his gold watch and chain, his Representative's
medal, and a gold pencil-case which he had used in the Rue de Popincourt,
after having passed me the other pencil, which I still preserve. Gindrier
and young Baudin, bare-headed, approached the centre bed. They raised the
shroud, and Baudin's dead face became visible. He was calm, and seemed
asleep. No feature appeared contracted. A livid tint began to mottle his
face.

They drew up an official report. It is customary. It is not sufficient
to kill people. An official report must also be drawn up. Young Baudin
had to sign it, upon which, on the demand of the Commissary of Police,
they "made over" to him the body of his brother. During these
signatures, Gindrier in the courtyard of the hospital, attempted if not
to console, at least to calm the two despairing women.

Suddenly a man who had entered the courtyard, and who had attentively
watched him for some moments, came abruptly up to him,--

"What are you doing there?"

"What is that to you?" said Gindrier.

"You have come to fetch Baudin's body?"

"Yes."

"Is this your carriage?"

"Yes."

"Get in at once, and pull down the blinds."

"What do you mean?"

"You are the Representative Gindrier. I know you. You were this morning
on the barricade. If any other than myself should see you, you are
lost."

Gindrier followed his advice and got into the _fiacre_. While getting in
he asked the man:

"Do you belong to the Police?"

The man did not answer. A moment after he came and said in a low voice,
near the door of the _fiacre_ in which Gindrier was enclosed,--

"Yes, I eat the bread, but I do not do the work."

The two men sent by the Commissary of Police took Baudin on his wooden
bed and carried him to the _fiacre_. They placed him at the bottom of
the _fiacre_ with his face covered, and enveloped from head to foot in a
shroud. A workman who was there lent his cloak, which was thrown over
the corpse in order not to attract the notice of passers-by. Madame L----
took her place by the side of the body, Gindrier opposite, young Baudin
next to Gindrier. A _fiacre_ followed, in which were the other relative
of Baudin and a medical student named Dutèche. They set off. During the
journey the head of the corpse, shaken by the carriage, rolled from
shoulder to shoulder; the blood began to flow from the wound and
appeared in large red patches through the white sheet. Gindrier with
his arms stretched out and his hand placed on its breast, prevented it
from falling forwards; Madame L---- held it up by the side.

They had told the coachman to drive slowly; the journey lasted more than
an hour.

When they reached No. 88, Rue de Clichy, the bringing out of the body
attracted a curious crowd before the door. The neighbors flocked
thither. Baudin's brother, assisted by Gindrier and Dutèche, carried up
the corpse to the fourth floor, where Baudin resided. It was a new
house, and he had only lived there a few months.

They carried him into his room, which was in order, and just as he had
left it on the morning of the 2d. The bed, on which he had not slept the
preceding night, had not been disturbed. A book which he had been
reading had remained on the table, open at the page where he had left
off. They unrolled the shroud, and Gindrier cut off his shirt and his
flannel vest with a pair of scissors. They washed the body. The ball had
entered through the corner of the arch of the right eye, and had gone out
at the back of the head. The wound of the eye had not bled. A sort of
swelling had formed there; the blood had flowed copiously through the
hole at the back of the head. They put clean linen on him, and clean
sheets on the bed, and laid him down with his head on the pillow, and
his face uncovered. The women were weeping in the next room.

Gindrier had already rendered the same service to the ex-Constituent
James Demontry. In 1850 James Demontry died in exile at Cologne.
Gindrier started for Cologne, went to the cemetery, and had James
Demontry exhumed. He had the heart extracted, embalmed it, and enclosed
it in a silver vase, which he took to Paris. The party of the Mountain
delegated him, with Chollet and Joigneux, to convey this heart to Dijon,
Demontry's native place, and to give him a solemn funeral. This funeral
was prohibited by an order of Louis Bonaparte, then President of the
Republic. The burial of brave and faithful men was unpleasing to Louis
Bonaparte--not so their death.

When Baudin had been laid out on the bed, the women came in, and all
this family, seated round the corpse, wept. Gindrier, whom other duties
called elsewhere, went downstairs with Dutèche. A crowd had formed
before the door.

A man in a blouse, with his hat on his head, mounted on a kerbstone, was
speechifying and glorifying the _coup d'état_. Universal Suffrage
re-established, the Law of the 31st May abolished, the "Twenty-five
francs" suppressed; Louis Bonaparte has done well, etc.--Gindrier,
standing on the threshold of the door, raised his voice: "Citizens!
above lies Baudin, a Representative of the People, killed while
defending the People; Baudin the Representative of you all, mark that
well! You are before his house; he is there bleeding on his bed, and
here is a man who dares in this place to applaud his assassin! Citizens!
shall I tell you the name of this man? He is called the Police! Shame
and infamy to traitors and to cowards! Respect to the corpse of him who
has died for you!"

And pushing aside the crowd, Gindrier took the man who had
been speaking by the collar, and knocking his hat on to the ground with
the back of his hand, he cried, "Hats off!"




CHAPTER VI.


THE DECREES OF THE REPRESENTATIVES WHO REMAINED FREE

The text of the judgment which was believed to have been dawn up by the
High Court of Justice had been brought to us by the ex-Constituent
Martin (of Strasbourg), a lawyer at the Court of Cassation. At the same
time we learned what was happening in the Rue Aumaire. The battle was
beginning, it was important to sustain it, and to feed it; it was
important ever to place the legal resistance by the side of the armed
resistance. The members who had met together on the preceding day at the
Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement had decreed the deposition of Louis
Bonaparte; but this decree, drawn up by a meeting almost exclusively
composed of the unpopular members of the majority, might have no effect
on the masses; it was necessary that the Left should take it up, should
adopt it, should imprint upon it a more energetic and more revolutionary
accent, and also take possession of the judgment of the High Court,
which was believed to be genuine, to lend assistance to this judgment,
and put it into execution.

In our appeal to arms we had outlawed Louis Bonaparte. The decree of
deposition taken up and counter-signed by us added weight to this
outlawry, and completed the revolutionary act by the legal act.

The Committee of Resistance called together the Republican
Representatives.

The apartments of M. Grévy, where we had been sitting, being too small,
we appointed for our meeting-place No. 10. Rue des Moulins, although
warned that the police had already made a raid upon this house. But we
had no choice; in time of Revolution prudence is impossible, and it is
speedily seen that it is useless. Confidence, always confidence; such is
the law of those grand actions which at times determine great events.
The perpetual improvisation of means, of policy, of expedients, of
resources, nothing step by step, everything on the impulse of the moment,
the ground never sounded, all risks taken as a whole, the good with the
bad, everything chanced on all sides at the same time, the hour, the
place, the opportunity, friends, family, liberty, fortune, life,--such
is the revolutionary conflict.

Towards three o'clock about sixty Representatives were meeting at No.
10, Rue des Moulins, in the large drawing-room, out of which opened a
little room where the Committee of Resistance was in session.

It was a gloomy December day, and darkness seemed already to have almost
set in. The publisher Hetzel, who might also be called the poet Hetzel,
is of a noble mind and of great courage. He has, as is known, shown
unusual political qualities as Secretary-General of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs under Bastide; he came to offer himself to us, as the
brave and patriotic Hingray had already done in the morning. Hetzel knew
that we needed a printing-office above everything; we had not the
faculty of speech, and Louis Bonaparte spoke alone. Hetzel had found a
printer who had said to him, "_Force me, put a pistol to my throat, and
I will print whatever you wish_." It was only a question, therefore, of
getting a few friends together, of seizing this printing-office by main
force, of barricading it, and, if necessary, of sustaining a siege,
while our Proclamations and our decrees were being printed. Hetzel
offered this to us. One incident of his arrival at our meeting-place
deserves to be noted. As he drew near the doorway he saw in the twilight
of this dreary December day a man standing motionless at a short
distance, and who seemed to be lying in wait. He went up to this man,
and recognized M. Yon, the former Commissary of Police of the Assembly.

"What are you doing there?" said Hetzel abruptly. "Are you there to
arrest us? In that case, here is what I have got for you," and he took
out two pistols from his pocket.

M. Yon answered smiling,--

"I am in truth watching, not against you, but for you; I am guarding
you."

M. Yon, aware of our meeting at Landrin's house and fearing that we
should be arrested, was, of his own accord, acting as police for us.

Hetzel had already revealed his scheme to Representative Labrousse, who
was to accompany him and give him the moral support of the Assembly in
his perilous expedition. A first rendezvous which had been agreed upon
between them at the Café Cardinal having failed, Labrousse had left with
the owner of the _café_ for Hetzel a note couched in these terms:--

"Madame Elizabeth awaits M. Hetzel at No. 10, Rue des Moulins."

In accordance with this note Hetzel had come.

We accepted Hetzel's offer, and it was agreed that at nightfall
Representative Versigny, who performed the duties of Secretary to the
Committee, should take him our decrees, our Proclamation, such items of
news as may have reached us, and all that we should judge proper to
publish. It was settled that Hetzel should await Versigny on the
pavement at the end of the Rue de Richelieu which runs alongside the
Café Cardinal.

Meanwhile Jules Favre, Michel de Bourges and myself had drawn up a final
decree, which was to combine the deposition voted by the Right with the
outlawry voted by us. We came back into the large room to read it to the
assembled Representatives, and for them to sign it.

At this moment the door opened, and Emile de Girardin appeared. We had
not seen him since the previous evening.

Emile de Girardin--after dispersing from around him that mist which
envelopes every combatant in party warfare, and which at a distance
changes or obscures the appearance of a man--Emile de Girardin is an
extraordinary thinker, an accurate writer, energetic, logical, skilful,
hearty; a journalist in whom, as in all great journalists, can be seen
the statesman. We owe to Emile de Girardin this great work of progress,
the cheap Press. Emile de Girardin has this great gift, a clearheaded
stubbornness. Emile de Girardin is a public watchman; his journal is his
sentry-box; he waits, he watches, he spies out, he enlightens, he lies
in wait, he cries "Who goes there?" at the slightest alarm, he fires
volleys with his pen. He is ready for every form of combat, a sentinel
to-day, a General to-morrow. Like all earnest minds he understands, he
sees, he recognizes, he handles, so to speak, the great and magnificent
identity embraced under these three words, "Revolution, Progress,
Liberty;" he wishes for the Revolution, but above all through Progress;
he wishes for progress, but solely through Liberty. One can, and
according to our opinion sometimes rightly, differ from him as to the
road to be taken, as to the attitude to be assumed, and the position to
be maintained, but no one can deny his courage, which he has proved in
every form, nor reject his object, which is the moral and physical
amelioration of the lot of all. Emile de Girardin is more Democratic
than Republican, more Socialist than Democratic; on the day when these
three ideas, Democracy, Republicanism, Socialism, that is to say, the
principle, the form, and the application, are balanced in his mind the
oscillations which still exist in him will cease. He has already Power,
he will have Stability.

In the course of this sitting, as we shall see, I did not always agree
with Emile de Girardin. All the more reason that I should record here
how greatly I appreciate the mind formed of light and of courage. Emile
de Girardin, whatever his failings may be, is one of those men who do
honor to the Press of to-day; he unites in the highest degree the
dexterity of the combatant with the serenity of the thinker.

I went up to him, and I asked him,--

"Have you any workmen of the _Presse_ still remaining?"

He answered me,--

"Our presses are under seal, and guarded by the _Gendarmerie Mobile_,
but I have five or six willing workmen, they can produce a few placards
with the brush."

"Well then," said I, "print our decrees and our Proclamation." "I will
print anything," answered he, "as long as it is not an appeal to arms."

He added, addressing himself to me, "I know your Proclamation. It is a
war-cry, I cannot print that."

They remonstrated at this. He then declared that he for his part made
Proclamations, but in a different sense from ours. That according to him
Louis Bonaparte should not be combated by force of arms, but by creating
a vacuum. By an armed conflict he would be the conqueror, by a vacuum he
would be conquered. He urged us to aid him in isolating the "deposed of
the Second December." "Let us bring about a vacuum around him!" cried
Emile de Girardin, "let us proclaim an universal strike. Let the merchant
cease to sell, let the consumer cease from buying, let the workman cease
from working, let the butcher cease from killing, let the baker cease
from baking, let everything keep holiday, even to the National Printing
Office, so that Louis Bonaparte may not find a compositor to compose the
_Moniteur_, not a pressman to machine it, not a bill-sticker to placard
it! Isolation, solitude, a void space round this man! Let the nation
withdraw from him. Every power from which the nation withdraws falls like
a tree from which the roots are divided. Louis Bonaparte abandoned by all
in his crime will vanish away. By simply folding our arms as we stand
around him he will fall. On the other hand, fire on him and you will
consolidate him. The army is intoxicated, the people are dazed and do not
interfere, the middle classes are afraid of the President, of the people,
of you, of every one! No victory is possible. You will go straight before
you, like brave men, you risk your heads, very good; you will carry with
you two or three thousand daring men, whose blood mingled with yours,
already flows. It is heroic, I grant you. It is not politic. As for me,
I will not print an appeal to arms, and I reject the combat. Let us
organize an universal strike."

This point of view was haughty and superb, but unfortunately I felt it
to be unattainable. Two aspects of the truth seized Girardin, the
logical side and the practical side. Here, in my opinion, the practical
side was wanting.

Michel de Bourges answered him. Michel de Bourges with his sound logic
and quick reasoning put his finger on what was for us the immediate
question; the crime of Louis Bonaparte, the necessity to rise up erect
before this crime. It was rather a conversation than a debate, but
Michel de Bourges and Jules Favre, who spoke next, raised it to the
highest eloquence. Jules Favre, worthy to understand the powerful mind
of Girardin would willingly have adopted this idea, if it had seemed
practicable, of the universal strike, of the void around the man; he
found it great, but impossible. A nation does not pull up short. Even
when struck to the heart, it still moves on. Social movement, which is
the animal life of society, survives all political movement. Whatever
Emile de Girardin might hope, there would always be a butcher who would
kill, a baker who would bake, men must eat! "To make universal labor
fold its arms is a chimera!" said Jules Favre, "a dream! The People
fight for three days, for four days, for a week; society will not wait
indefinitely." As to the situation, it was doubtless terrible, it was
doubtless tragical, and blood flowed, but who had brought about this
situation? Louis Bonaparte. For ourselves we would accept it, such as it
was, and nothing more.

Emile de Girardin, steadfast, logical, absolute in his idea, persisted.
Some might be shaken. Arguments, which were so abundant in this vigorous
and inexhaustible mind, crowded upon him. As for me, I saw Duty before
me like a torch.

I interrupted him. I cried out, "It is too late to deliberate what we
are to do. We have not got to do it. It is done. The gauntlet of the
_coup d'état_ is thrown down, the Left takes it up. The matter is as
simple as this. The outrage of the Second December is an infamous,
insolent, unprecedented defiance to Democracy, to Civilization, to
Liberty, to the People, to France. I repeat that we have taken up this
gauntlet, we are the Law, but the living Law which at need can arm
itself and fight. A gun in our hands is a protest. I do not know whether
we shall conquer, but it is our duty to protest. To protest first in
Parliament; when Parliament is closed, to protest in the street; when
the street is closed, to protest in exile; when exile is fulfilled, to
protest in the tomb. Such is our part, our office, our mission. The
authority of the Representatives is elastic; the People bestow it,
events extend it."

While we were deliberating, our colleague, Napoleon Bonaparte, son
of the ex-King of Westphalia, came in. He listened. He spoke. He
energetically blamed, in a tone of sincere and generous indignation, his
cousin's crime, but he declared that in his opinion a written protest
would suffice. A protest of the Representatives, a protest of the
Council of State, a protest of the Magistracy, a protest of the Press,
that this protest would be unanimous and would enlighten France, but
that no other form of resistance would obtain unanimity. That as for
himself, having always considered the Constitution worthless, having
contended against it from the first in the Constituent Assembly, he
would not defend it at the last, that he assuredly would not give one
drop of blood for it. That the Constitution was dead, but that the
Republic was living, and that we must save, not the Constitution, a
corpse, but the Republic, the principle!

Remonstrances burst forth. Bancel, young, glowing, eloquent, impetuous,
overflowing with self-confidence, cried out that we ought not to look at
the shortcomings of the Constitution, but at the enormity of the crime
which had been committed, the flagrant treason, the violated oath; he
declared that we might have voted against the Constitution in the
Constituent Assembly, and yet defend it to-day in the presence of an
usurper; that this was logical, and that many amongst us were in this
position. He cited me as an example. Victor Hugo, said he, is a proof of
this. He concluded thus: "You have been present at the construction of a
vessel, you have considered it badly built, you have given advice which
has not been listened to. Nevertheless, you have been obliged to embark
on board this vessel, your children and your brothers are there with
you, your mother is on board. A pirate ranges up, axe in one hand, to
scuttle the vessel, a torch in the other to fire it. The crew are
resolved to defend themselves and run to arms. Would you say to this
crew, 'For my part I consider this vessel badly built, and I will let it
be destroyed'?"

"In such a case," added Edgar Quinet, "whoever is not on the side of the
vessel is on the side of the pirates."

They shouted on all sides, "The decree! Read the decree!"

I was standing leaning against the fire place. Napoleon Bonaparte came
up to me, and whispered in my ear,--

"You are undertaking," said he, "a battle which is lost beforehand."

I answered him, "I do not look at success, I look at duty."

He replied, "You are a politician, consequently you ought to look
forward to success. I repeat, before you go any further, that the battle
is lost beforehand."

I resumed, "If we enter upon the conflict the battle is lost. You say
so, I believe it; but if we do not enter upon it, honor is lost. I would
rather lose the battle than honor."

He remained silent for a moment, then he took my hand.

"Be it so," continued he, "but listen to me. You run, you yourself
personally, great dancer. Of all the men in the Assembly you are the one
whom the President hates the most. You have from the height of the
Tribune nicknamed him, 'Napoleon the Little.' You understand that will
never be forgotten. Besides, it was you who dictated the appeal to arms,
and that is known. If you are taken, you are lost. You will be shot on
the spot, or at least transported. Have you a safe place where you can
sleep to-night?"

I had not as yet thought of this. "In truth, no," answered I.

He continued, "Well, then, come to my house. There is perhaps only one
house in Paris where you would be in safety. That is mine. They will not
come to look for you there. Come, day or night, at what hour you please,
I will await you, and I will open the door to you myself. I live at No.
5, Rue d'Alger."

I thanked him. It was a noble and cordial offer. I was touched by it. I
did not make use of it, but I have not forgotten it.

They cried out anew, "Read the decree! Sit down! sit down!"

There was a round table before the fire place; a lamp, pens,
blotting-books, and paper were brought there; the members of the
Committee sat down at this table, the Representatives took their places
around them on sofas, on arm-chairs, and on all the chairs which could
be found in the adjoining rooms. Some looked about for Napoleon
Bonaparte. He had withdrawn.

A member requested that in the first place the meeting should declare
itself to be the National Assembly, and constitute itself by immediately
appointing a President and Secretaries. I remarked that there was no
need to declare ourselves the Assembly, that we were the Assembly by
right as well as in fact, and the whole Assembly, our absent colleagues
being detained by force; that the National Assembly, although mutilated
by the _coup d'état_, ought to preserve its entity and remain constituted
afterwards in the same manner as before; that to appoint another
President and another staff of Secretaries would be to give Louis
Bonaparte an advantage over us, and to acknowledge in some manner the
Dissolution; that we ought to do nothing of the sort; that our decrees
should be published, not with the signature of a President, whoever he
might be, but with the signature of all the members of the Left who had
not been arrested, that they would thus carry with them full authority
over the People, and full effect. They relinquished the idea of appointing
a President. Noël Parfait proposed that our decrees and our resolutions
should be drawn up, not with the formula: "The National Assembly
decrees," etc.; but with the formula: "The Representatives of the People
remaining at liberty decree," etc. In this manner we should preserve all
the authority attached to the office of the Representatives of the People
without associating the arrested Representatives with the responsibility
of our actions. This formula had the additional advantage of separating
us from the Right. The people knew that the only Representatives
remaining free were the members of the Left. They adopted Noël Parfait's
advice.

I read aloud the decree of deposition. It was couched in these words:--

  "DECLARATION.

  "The Representatives of the people remaining at liberty, by virtue of
  Article 68 of the Constitution, which runs as follows:--

    "'Article 68.--Every measure by which the President of the Republic
    dissolves the Assembly, prorogues it, or obstructs the exercise of
    its authority, is a crime of High Treason.

    "'By this action alone the President is deposed from his office; the
    citizens are bound to refuse him obedience; the executive power
    passes by right to the National Assembly; the judges of the High
    Court of Justice should meet together immediately under penalty of
    treason, and convoke the juries in a place which they shall appoint
    to proceed to the judgment of the President and his accomplices.'

  "Decree:--

  "ARTICLE I.--Louis Bonaparte is deposed from his office of President
  of the Republic.

  "ARTICLE II.--All citizens and public officials are bound to refuse
  him obedience under penalty of complicity.

  "ARTICLE III.--The judgment drawn up on December 2d by the High Court
  of Justice, and which declares Louis Bonaparte attainted with the
  Crime of High Treason, shall be published and executed. Consequently
  the civil and military authorities are summoned under penalty of
  Treason to lend their active assistance to the execution of the said
  judgment.

  "Given at Paris, in permanent session, December 3d, 1851."

The decree having been read, and voted unanimously, we signed it, and
the Representatives crowded round the table to add their signatures to
ours. Sain remarked that this signing took time, that in addition we
numbered barely more than sixty, a large number of the members of the
Left being at work in the streets in insurrection. He asked if the
Committee, who had full powers from the whole of the Left, had any
objection to attach to the decree the names of all the Republican
Representatives remaining at liberty, the absent as well as those
present. We answered that the decree signed by all would assuredly
better answer its purpose. Besides, it was the counsel which I had
already given. Bancel had in his pocket on old number of the _Moniteur_
containing the result of a division.

They cut out a list of the names of the members of the Left, the names
of those who were arrested were erased, and the list was added to the
decree.[11]

The name of Emile de Girardin upon this list caught my eye. He was still
present.

"Do you sign this decree?" I asked him.

"Unhesitatingly."

"In that case will you consent to print it?"

"Immediately."

He continued,--

"Having no longer any presses, as I have told you, I can only print it
as a handbill, and with the brush. It takes a long time, but by eight
o'clock this evening you shall have five hundred copies."

"And," continued I, "you persist in refusing to print the appeal to
arms?"

"I do persist."

A second copy was made of the decree, which Emile de Girardin took away
with him. The deliberation was resumed. At each moment Representatives
came in and brought items of news: Amiens in insurrection--Rheims and
Rouen in motion, and marching on Paris--General Canrobert resisting the
_coup d'état_--General Castellane hesitating--the Minister of the United
States demanding his passports. We placed little faith in these rumors,
and facts proved that we were right.

Meanwhile Jules Favre had drawn up the following decree, which he
proposed, and which was immediately adopted:--

  "DECREE.

  "FRENCH REPUBLIC.

  "Liberty,--Equality,--Fraternity.

  "The undersigned Representatives remaining at liberty, assembled in
  Permanent Session,--

  "Considering the arrest of the majority of our colleagues, and the
  urgency of the moment:

  "Considering that for the accomplishment of his crime Louis Bonaparte
  has not contented himself with multiplying the most formidable means of
  destruction against the lives and property of the citizens of Paris,
  that he has trampled under foot every law, that he has annihilated all
  the guarantees of civilized nations:

  "Considering that these criminal madnesses only serve to augment the
  violent denunciation of every conscience and to hasten the hour of
  national vengeance, but that it is important to proclaim the Right:

  "Decree:

  "ARTICLE I.--The State of Siege is raised in all Departments where it
  has been established, the ordinary laws resume their authority.

  "ARTICLE II.--It is enjoined upon all military leaders under penalty
  of Treason immediately to lay down the extraordinary powers which
  have been conferred upon them.

  "ARTICLE III.--Officials and agents of the public force are charged
  under penalty of treason to put this present decree into execution.

  "Given in Permanent Session, 3d December, 1851."

Madier de Montjau and De Flotte entered. They came from outside. They
had been in all the districts where the conflict was proceeding, they
had seen with their own eyes the hesitation of a part of the population
in the presence of these words, "The Law of the 31st May is abolished,
Universal Suffrage is re-established." The placards of Louis Bonaparte
were manifestly working mischief. It was necessary to oppose effort to
effort, and to neglect nothing which could open the eyes of the people.
I dictated the following Proclamation:-

  "PROCLAMATION.

  "People! you are being deceived.

  "Louis Bonaparte says that he has re-established you in your rights,
  and that he restores to you Universal Suffrage.

  "Louis Bonaparte has lied.

  "Read his placards. He grants you--what infamous mockery!--the right
  of conferring on him, on him _alone_, the Constituent power; that is
  to say, the Supreme power, which belongs to you. He grants you the
  right to appoint him Dictator _for ten years_. In other words, he
  grants you the right of abdicating and of crowning him. A right which
  even you do not possess, O People! for one generation cannot dispose
  of the sovereignty of the generation which shall follow it.

  "Yes, he grants to you, Sovereign, the right of giving yourself a
  master, and that master himself.

  "Hypocrisy and treason!

  "People! we unmask the hypocrite. It is for you to punish the traitor!

  "The Committee of Resistance:

  "Jules Favre, De Flotte, Carnot, Madier de Montjau, Mathieu (de la
  Drôme), Michel de Bourges, Victor Hugo."

Baudin had fallen heroically. It was necessary to let the People know of
his death, and to honor his memory. The decree below was voted on the
proposition of Michel de Bourges:--

  "DECREE.

  "The Representatives of the People remaining at liberty considering
  that the Representative Baudin has died on the barricade of the
  Faubourg St. Antoine for the Republic and for the laws, and that he
  has deserved well of his country, decree:

  "That the honors of the Panthéon are adjudged to Representative Baudin.

  "Given in Permanent Session, 3d December, 1851."

After honor to the dead and the needs of the conflict it was
necessary in my opinion to enunciate immediately and dictatorially
some great popular benefit. I proposed the abolition of the _octroi_
duties and of the duty on liquors. This objection was raised, "No
caresses to the people! After victory, we will see. In the meantime
let them fight! If they do not fight, if they do not rise, if they do
not understand that it is for them, for their rights that we the
Representatives, that we risk our heads at this moment--if they leave
us alone at the breach, in the presence of the _coup d'état_--it is
because they are not worthy of Liberty!"

Bancel remarked that the abolition of the _octroi_ duties and the duty
on liquors were not caresses to the People, but succor to the poor, a
great economical and reparatory measure, a satisfaction to the public
demand--a satisfaction which the Right had always obstinately refused,
and that the Left, master of the situation, ought hasten to accord. They
voted, with the reservation that it should not be published until after
victory, the two decrees in one; in this form:--

  "DECREE.

  "The Representatives remaining at liberty decree:

  "The _Octroi_ Duties are abolished throughout the extent of the
  territory of the Republic.

  "Given in permanent Session, 3d December, 1851."

Versigny, with a copy of the Proclamations and of the Decree, left in
search of Hetzel. Labrousse also left with the same object. They settled
to meet at eight o'clock in the evening at the house of the former
member of the Provisional Government Marie, Rue Neuve des Petits Champs.

As the members of the Committee and the Representatives withdrew I was
told that some one had asked to speak to me. I went into a sort of
little room attached to the large meeting-room, and I found there a man
in a blouse, with an intelligent and sympathetic air. This man had a
roll of paper in his hand.

"Citizen Victor Hugo," said he to me, "you have no printing office. Here
are the means which will enable you to dispense with one."

He unfolded on the mantel-piece the roll which he had in his hand. It
was a species of blotting-book made of very thin blue paper, and which
seemed to be slightly oiled. Between each leaf of blue paper there was a
sheet of white paper. He took out of his pocket a sort of blunt bodkin,
saying, "The first thing to hand will serve your purpose, a nail or a
match," and he traced with his bodkin on the first leaf of the book the
word "Republic." Then turning over the leaves, he said, "Look at this."

The word "Republic" was reproduced upon the fifteen or twenty white
leaves which the book contained.

He added, "This paper is usually used to trace the designs of
manufactured fabrics. I thought that it might be useful at a moment like
this. I have at home a hundred books like this on which I can make a
hundred copies of what you want--a Proclamation, for instance--in the
same space of time that it takes to write four or five. Write something,
whatever you may think useful at the present moment, and to-morrow
morning five hundred copies shall be posted throughout Paris."

I had none of the documents with me which we had just drawn up. Versigny
had gone away with the copies. I took a sheet of paper, and, leaning on
the corner of the chimney-piece, I wrote the following Proclamation:--

  "TO THE ARMY.

  "Soldiers!

  "A man has just broken the Constitution. He tears up the oath which
  he has sworn to the people; he suppresses the law, stifles Right,
  stains Paris with blood, chokes France, betrays the Republic!

  "Soldiers, this man involves you in his crime.

  "There are two things holy; the flag which represents military honor
  and the law which represents the National Right. Soldiers, the
  greatest of outrages is the flag raised against the Law! Follow no
  longer the wretched man who misleads you. Of such a crime French
  soldiers should be the avengers, not the accomplices.

  "This man says he is named Bonaparte. He lies, for Bonaparte is a
  word which means glory. This man says that he is named Napoléon. He
  lies, for Napoléon is a word which means genius. As for him, he is
  obscure and insignificant. Give this wretch up to the law. Soldiers,
  he is a false Napoléon. A true Napoléon would once more give you a
  Marengo; he will once more give you a Transnonain.

  "Look towards the true function of the French army; to protect the
  country, to propagate the Revolution, to free the people, to sustain
  the nationalities, to emancipate the Continent, to break chains
  everywhere, to protect Right everywhere, this is your part amongst
  the armies of Europe. You are worthy of great battle-fields.

  "Soldiers, the French Army is the advanced guard of humanity.

  "Become yourselves again, reflect; acknowledge your faults; rise up!
  Think of your Generals arrested, taken by the collar by galley
  sergeants and thrown handcuffed into robbers' cells! The malefactor,
  who is at the Elysée, thinks that the Army of France is a band of
  mercenaries; that if they are paid and intoxicated they will obey.
  He sets you an infamous task, he causes you to strangle, in this
  nineteenth century, and in Paris itself, Liberty, Progress, and
  Civilization. He makes you--you, the children of France--destroy all
  that France has so gloriously and laboriously built up during the
  three centuries of light and in sixty years of Revolution! Soldiers!
  you are the 'Grand Army!' respect the 'Grand Nation!'

  "We, citizens; we, Representatives of the People and of yourselves;
  we, your friends, your brothers; we, who are Law and Right; we, who
  rise up before you, holding out our arms to you, and whom you strike
  blindly with your swords--do you know what drives us to despair? It
  is not to see our blood which flows; it is to see your honor which
  vanishes.

  "Soldiers! one step more in the outrage, one day more with Louis
  Bonaparte, and you are lost before universal conscience. The men who
  command you are outlaws. They are not generals--they are criminals.
  The garb of the galley slave awaits them; see it already on their
  shoulders. Soldiers! there is yet time--Stop! Come back to the
  country! Come back to the Republic! If you continue, do you know
  what History will say of you? It will say, They have trampled under
  the feet of their horses and crushed beneath the wheels of their
  cannon all the laws of their country; they, French soldiers, they
  have dishonored the anniversary of Austerlitz, and by their fault,
  by their crime, the name of Napoléon sprinkles as much shame to-day
  upon France as in other times it has showered glory!

  "French soldiers! cease to render assistance to crime!"

My colleagues of the Committee having left, I could not consult them--time
pressed--I signed:

  "For the Representatives of the People remaining at liberty, the
  Representative member of the Committee of Resistance,

  "VICTOR HUGO."

The man in the blouse took away the Proclamation saying, "You will see
it again to-morrow morning." He kept his word. I found it the nest day
placarded in the Rue Rambuteau, at the corner of the Rue de l'Homme-Armé
and the Chapelle-Saint-Denis. To those who were not in the secret of the
process it seemed to be written by hand in blue ink.

I thought of going home. When I reached the Rue de la Tour d'Auvergne,
opposite my door, it happened curiously and by some chance to be half
open. I pushed it, and entered. I crossed the courtyard, and went
upstairs without meeting any one.

My wife and my daughter were in the drawing-room round the fire with
Madame Paul Meurice. I entered noiselessly; they were conversing in a
low tone. They were talking of Pierre Dupont, the popular song-writer,
who had come to me to ask for arms. Isidore, who had been a soldier, had
some pistols by him, and had lent three to Pierre Dupont for the
conflict.

Suddenly these ladies turned their heads and saw me close to them. My
daughter screamed. "Oh, go away," cried my wife, throwing her arms round
my neck, "you are lost if you remain here a moment. You will be arrested
here!" Madame Paul Meurice added, "They are looking for you. The police
were here a quarter of an hour ago." I could not succeed in reassuring
them. They gave me a packet of letters offering me places of refuge for
the night, some of them signed with names unknown to me. After some
moments, seeing them more and more frightened, I went away. My wife said
to me, "What you are doing, you are doing for justice. Go, continue!" I
embraced my wife and my daughter; five months have elapsed at the time
when I am writing these lines. When I went into exile they remained near
my son Victor in prison; I have not seen them since that day.

I left as I had entered. In the porter's lodge there were only two or
three little children seated round a lamp, laughing and looking at
pictures in a book.


[11] This list, which belongs to History, having served as the base of
the proscription list, will be found complete in the sequel to this book
to be published hereafter.




CHAPTER VII.


THE ARCHBISHOP

On this gloomy and tragical day an idea struck one of the people.

He was a workman belonging to the honest but almost imperceptible
minority of Catholic Democrats. The double exaltation of his mind,
revolutionary on one side, mystical on the other, caused him to be
somewhat distrusted by the people, even by his comrades and his friends.
Sufficiently devout to be called a Jesuit by the Socialists,
sufficiently Republican to be called a Red by the Reactionists, he
formed an exception in the workshops of the Faubourg. Now, what is
needed in these supreme crises to seize and govern the masses are men
of exceptional genius, not men of exceptional opinion. There is no
revolutionary originality. In order to be something, in the time of
regeneration and in the days of social combat, one must bathe fully in
those powerful homogeneous mediums which are called parties. Great
currents of men follow great currents of ideas, and the true
revolutionary leader is he who knows how best to drive the former in
accordance with the latter.

Now the Gospel is in accordance with the Revolution, but Catholicism is
not. This is due to the fact that in the main the Papacy is not in
accordance with the Gospel. One can easily understand a Christian
Republican, one cannot understand a Catholic Democrat. It is a
combination of two opposites. It is a mind in which the negative bars
the way to the affirmative. It is a neuter.

Now in time revolution, whoever is neuter of is impotent. Nevertheless,
during the first hours of resistance against the _coup d'état_ the
democratic Catholic workman, whose noble effort we are here relating,
threw himself so resolutely into the cause of Justice and of Truth, that
in a few moments he transformed distrust into confidence, and was hailed
by the people. He showed such gallantry at the rising of the barricade
of the Rue Aumaire that with an unanimous voice they appointed him their
leader. At the moment of the attack he defended it as he had built it,
with ardor. That was a sad but glorious battle-field; most of his
companions were killed, and he escaped only by a miracle.

However, he succeeded in returning home, saying to himself bitterly,
"All is lost."

It seemed evident to him that the great masses of the people would not
rise. Thenceforward it appeared impossible to conquer the _coup d'état_
by a revolution; it could be only combated by legality. What had been
the risk at the beginning became the hope at the end, for he believed
the end to be fatal, and at hand. In his opinion it was necessary, as
the people were defaulters, to try now to arouse the middle classes. Let
one legion of National Guards go out in arms, and the Elysée was lost.
For this a decisive blow must be struck--the heart of the middle classes
must be reached--the "bourgeois" must be inspired by a grand spectacle
which should not be a terrifying spectacle.

It was then that this thought came to this workman, "Write to the
Archbishop of Paris."

The workman took a pen, and from his humble garret he wrote to the
Archbishop of Paris an enthusiastic and earnest letter in which he, a
man of the people and a believer, said this to his Bishop; we give the
substance of his letter:--

"This is a solemn hour, Civil War sets by the ears the Army and People,
blood is being shed. When blood flows the Bishop goes forth. M. Sibour
should follow in the path of M. Affre. The example is great, the
opportunity is still greater.

"Let the Archbishop of Paris, followed by all his clergy, the Pontifical
cross before him, his mitre on his head, go forth in procession through
the streets. Let him summon to him the National Assembly and the High
Court, the Legislators in their sashes, the Judges in their scarlet
robes; let him summon to him the citizens, let him summon to him the
soldiers, let him go straight to the Elysée. Let him raise his hand in
the name of Justice against the man who is violating the laws, and in
the name of Jesus against the man who is shedding blood. Simply with
his raised hand he will crush the _coup d'état_.

"And he will place his statue by the side of M. Affre, and it will be
said that twice two Archbishops of Paris have trampled Civil War beneath
their feet."

"The Church is holy, but the Country is sacred. There are times when the
Church should succor the Country."

The letter being finished, he signed it with his workman's signature.

But now a difficulty arose; how should it be conveyed to its destination?

Take it himself!

But would he, a mere workman in a blouse, be allowed to penetrate to the
Archbishop!

And then, in order to reach the Archiepiscopal Palace, he would have to
cross those very quarters in insurrection, and where, perhaps, the
resistance was still active. He would have to pass through streets
obstructed by troops, he would be arrested and searched; his hands smelt
of powder, he would be shot; and the letter would not reach its
destination.

What was to be done?

At the moment when he had almost despaired of a solution, the name of
Arnauld de l'Ariége came to his mind.

Arnauld de l'Ariége was a Representative after his own heart. Arnauld de
l'Ariége was a noble character. He was a Catholic Democrat like the
workman. At the Assembly he raised aloft, but he bore nearly alone, that
banner so little followed which aspires to ally the Democracy with the
Church. Arnauld de l'Ariége, young, handsome, eloquent, enthusiastic,
gentle, and firm, combined the attributes of the Tribune with the faith
of the knight. His open nature, without wishing to detach itself from
Rome, worshipped Liberty. He had two principles, but he had not two
faces. On the whole the democratic spirit preponderated in him. He said
to me one day, "I give my hand to Victor Hugo. I do not give it to
Montalembert."

The workman knew him. He had often written to him, and had sometimes
seen him.

Arnauld de l'Ariége lived in a district which had remained almost free.

The workman went there without delay.

Like the rest of us, as has been seen, Arnauld de l'Ariége had taken
part in the conflict. Like most of the Representatives of the Left, he
had not returned home since the morning of the 2d. Nevertheless, on the
second day, he thought of his young wife whom he had left without
knowing if he should see her again, of his baby of six months old which
she was suckling, and which he had not kissed for so many hours, of that
beloved hearth, of which at certain moments one feels an absolute need
to obtain a fleeting glimpse, he could no longer resist; arrest, Mazas,
the cell, the hulks, the firing party, all vanished, the idea of danger
was obliterated, he went home.

It was precisely at that moment that the workman arrived there.

Arnauld de l'Ariége received him, read his letter, and approved of it.

Arnauld de l'Ariége knew the Archbishop of Paris personally.

M. Sibour, a Republican priest appointed Archbishop of Paris by General
Cavaignac, was the true chief of the Church dreamed of by the liberal
Catholicism of Arnauld de l'Ariége. On behalf of the Archbishop, Arnauld
de l'Ariége represented in the Assembly that Catholicism which M. de
Montalembert perverted. The democratic Representative and the Republic
Archbishop had at times frequent conferences, in which acted as
intermediatory the Abbé Maret, an intelligent priest, a friend of the
people and of progress, Vicar-General of Paris, who has since been Bishop
_in partibus_ of Surat. Some days previously Arnauld had seen the
Archbishop, and had received his complaints of the encroachment of the
Clerical party upon the episcopal authority, and he even proposed shortly
to interpellate the Ministry on this subject and to take the question
into the Tribune.

Arnauld added to the workman's letter a letter of introduction, signed
by himself, and enclosed the two letters in the same envelope.

But here the same question arose.

How was the letter to be delivered?

Arnauld, for still weightier reasons than those of the workman, could
not take it himself.

And time pressed!

His wife saw his difficulty and quietly said,--

"I will take charge of it."

Madame Arnauld de l'Ariége, handsome and quite young, married scarcely
two years, was the daughter of the Republican ex-Constituent Guichard,
worthy daughter of such a father, and worthy wife of such a husband.

They were fighting in Paris; it was necessary to face the dangers of the
streets, to pass among musket-balls, to risk her life.

Arnauld de l'Ariége hesitated.

"What do you want to do?" he asked.

"I will take this letter."

"You yourself?"

"I myself."

"But there is danger."

She raised her eyes, and answered,--

"Did I make that objection to you when you left me the day before
yesterday?"

He kissed her with tears in his eyes, and answered, "Go."

But the police of the _coup d'état_ were suspicious, many women were
searched while going through the streets; this letter might be found on
Madame Arnauld. Where could this letter be hidden?

"I will take my baby with me," said Madame Arnauld.

She undid the linen of her little girl, hid the letter there, and
refastened the swaddling band.

When this was finished the father kissed his child on the forehead, and
the mother exclaimed laughingly,--

"Oh, the little Red! She is only six months' old, and she is already a
conspirator!"

Madame Arnauld reached the Archbishop's Palace with some difficulty. Her
carriage was obliged to take a long round. Nevertheless she arrived
there. She asked for the Archbishop. A woman with a child in her arms
could not be a very terrible visitor, and she was allowed to enter.

But she lost herself in courtyards and staircases. She was seeking her
way somewhat discouraged, when she met the Abbé Maret. She knew him. She
addressed him. She told him the object of her expedition. The Abbé Maret
read the workman's letter, and was seized with enthusiasm: "This may
save all," said he.

He added, "Follow me, madam, I will introduce you."

The Archbishop of Paris was in the room which adjoins his study. The
Abbé Maret ushered Madame Arnauldé into the study, informed the
Archbishop, and a moment later the Archbishop entered. Besides the Abbé
Maret, the Abbé Deguerry, the Curé of the Madeleine, was with him.

Madame Arnauld handed to M. Sibour the two letters of her husband and
the workman. The Archbishop read them, and remained thoughtful.

"What answer am I to take back to my husband?" asked Madame Arnauld.

"Madame," replied the Archbishop, "it is too late. This should have been
done before the struggle began. Now, it would be only to risk the
shedding of more blood than perhaps has yet been spilled."

The Abbé Deguerry was silent. The Abbé Maret tried respectfully to turn
the mind of his Bishop towards the grand effort unsoiled by the workman.
He spoke eloquently. He laid great stress open this argument, that the
appearance of the Archbishop would bring about a manifestation of the
National Guard, and that a manifestation of the National Guard would
compel the Elysée to draw back.

"No," said the Archbishop, "you hope for the impossible. The Elysée will
not draw back now. You believe that I should stop the bloodshed--not at
all; I should cause it to flow, and that in torrents. The National Guard
has no longer any influence. If the legions appeared, the Elysée could
crush the legions by the regiments. And then, what is an Archbishop in
the presence of the Man of the _coup d'état_? Where is the oath? Where
is the sworn faith? Where is the Respect for Right? A man does not turn
back when he has made three steps in such a crime. No! No! Do not hope.
This man will do all. He has struck the Law in the hand of the
Representatives. He will strike God in mine."

And he dismissed Madame Arnauld with the look of a man overwhelmed with
sorrow.

Let us do the duty of the Historian. Six weeks afterwards, in the Church
of Notre Dame, some one was singing the _Te Deum_ in honor of the
treason of December--thus making God a partner in a crime.

This man was the Archbishop Sibour.




CHAPTER VIII.


MOUNT VALERIEN

Of the two hundred and thirty Representatives prisoners at the barracks
of the Quai d'Orsay fifty-three had been sent to Mount Valérien. They
loaded them in four police vans. Some few remained who were packed in an
omnibus. MM. Benoist d'Azy, Falloux, Piscatory, Vatimesail, were locked
in the wheeled cells, as also Eugène Sue and Esquiros. The worthy M.
Gustave de Beaumont, a great upholder of the cellular system, rode in a
cell vehicle. It is not an undesirable thing, as we have said, that the
legislator should taste of the law.

The Commandant of Mount Valérien appeared under the archway of the fort
to receive the Representative prisoners.

He at first made some show of registering them in the jailer's book.
General Oudinot, under whom he had served, rebuked him severely,--

"Do you know me?"

"Yes, General."

"Well then, let that suffice. Ask no more."

"Yes," said Tamisier. "Ask more and salute. We are more than the Army;
we are France."

The commandant understood. From that moment he was hat in hand before
the generals, and bowed low before the Representatives.

They led them to the barracks of the fort and shut them up promiscuously
in a dormitory, to which they added fresh beds, and which the soldiers
had just quitted. They spent their first night there. The beds touched
each other. The sheets were dirty.

Next morning, owing to a few words which had been heard outside, the
rumor spread amongst them that the fifty-three were to be sorted, and
that the Republicans were to be placed by themselves. Shortly afterwards
the rumor was confirmed. Madame de Luynes gained admission to her
husband, and brought some items of news. It was asserted, amongst other
things, that the Keeper of the Seals of the _coup d'état_, the man who
signed himself Eugène Rouher, "Minister of Justice," had said, "Let them
set the men of the Right at liberty, and send the men of the Left to the
dungeon. If the populace stirs they will answer for everything. As a
guarantee for the submission of the Faubourgs we shall have the head of
the Reds."

We do not believe that M. Rouher uttered these words, in which there is
so much audacity. At that moment M. Rouher did not possess any.
Appointed Minister on the 2d December, he temporized, he exhibited a
vague prudery, he did not venture to install himself in the Place
Vendôme. Was all that was being done quite correct? In certain minds the
doubt of success changes into scruples of conscience. To violate every
law, to perjure oneself, to strangle Right, to assassinate the country,
are all these proceedings wholly honest? While the deed is not
accomplished they hesitate. When the deed has succeeded they throw
themselves upon it. Where there is victory there is no longer treason;
nothing serves like success to cleanse and render acceptable that
unknown thing which is called crime. During the first moments M. Rocher
reserved himself. Later on he has been one of the most violent advisers
of Louis Bonaparte. It is all very simple. His fear beforehand explains
his subsequent zeal.

The truth is, that these threatening words had been spoken not by
Rouher, but by Persigny.

M. de Luynes imparted to his colleagues what was in preparation, and
warned them that they would be asked for their names in order that the
white sheep might be separated from the scarlet goats. A murmur which
seemed to be unanimous arose. These generous manifestations did honor to
the Representatives of the Right.

"No! no! Let us name no one, let us not allow ourselves to be sorted,"
exclaimed M. Gustave de Beaumont.

M. de Vatimesnil added, "We have come in here all together, we ought to
go out all together."

Nevertheless a few moments afterwards Antony Thouret was informed that a
list of names was being secretly prepared, and that the Royalist
Representatives were invited to sign it. They attributed, doubtless
wrongly, this unworthy resolution to the honorable M. de Falloux.

Antony Thouret spoke somewhat warmly in the centre of the group, which
were muttering together in the dormitory.

"Gentlemen," said he, "a list of names is being prepared. This would be
an unworthy action. Yesterday at the Mairie of the Tenth Arrondissement
you said to us, 'There is no longer Left or Right; we are the Assembly.'
You believed in the victory of the People, and you sheltered yourself
behind us Republicans. Today you believe in the victory of the _coup
d'état_, and you would again become Royalists, to deliver us up, us
Democrats! Truly excellent. Very well! Pray do so."

A universal shout arose.

"No! No! No more Right or Left! All are the Assembly. The same lot for
all!"

The list which had been begun was seized and burnt.

"By decision of the Chamber," said M. de Vatimesnil, smiling. A
Legitimist Representative added,--

"Of the Chamber? No, let us say of the Chambered."

A few moments afterwards the Commissary of the fort appeared, and in
polite phrases, which, however, savored somewhat of authority, invited
each of the Representatives of the People to declare his name in order
that each might be allotted to his ultimate destination.

A shout of indignation answered him.

"No one! No one will give his name," said General Oudinot.

Gustave de Beaumont added,--

"We all bear the same name: Representatives of the People."

The Commissary saluted them and went away.

After two hours he came back. He was accompanied this time by the Chief
of the Ushers of the Assembly, a man named Duponceau, a species of
arrogant fellow with a red face and white hair, who on grand days
strutted at the foot of the Tribune with a silvered collar, a chain over
his stomach, and a sword between his legs.

The Commissary said to Duponceau,--"Do your duty."

What the Commissary meant, and what Duponceau understood by this word
_duty_, was that the Usher should denounce the Legislators. Like the
lackey who betrays his masters.

It was done in this manner.

This Duponceau dared to look in the faces of the Representatives by
turn, and he named them one after the other to a policeman, who took
notes of them.

The Sieur Duponceau was sharply castigated while holding this review.

"M. Duponceau," said M. Vatimesnil to him, "I always thought you an
idiot, but I believed you to be an honest man."

The severest rebuke was administered by Antony Thouret. He looked Sieur
Duponceau in the face, and said to him, "You deserve to be named Dupin."

The Usher in truth was worthy of being the President, and the President
was worthy of being the Usher.

The flock having been counted, the classification having been made,
there were found to be thirteen goats: ten Representatives of the Left;
Eugène Sue, Esquires, Antony Thouret, Pascal Duprat, Chanay, Fayolle,
Paulin Durrien, Benoit, Tamisier, Tailard Latérisse, and three members
of the Right, who since the preceding day had suddenly become Red in the
eyes of the _coups d'état_; Oudinot, Piscatory, and Thuriot de la
Rosière.

They confined these separately, and they set at liberty one by one the
forty who remained.




CHAPTER IX.


THE LIGHTNING BEGINS TO FLASH AMONGST THE PEOPLE

The evening wore a threatening aspect.

Groups were formed on the Boulevards. As night advanced they grew larger
and became mobs, which speedily mingled together, and only formed one
crowd. An enormous crowd, reinforced and agitated by tributary currents
from the side-streets, jostling one against another, surging, stormy,
and whence ascended an ominous hum. This hubbub resolved itself into one
word, into one name which issued simultaneously from every mouth, and
which expressed the whole of the situation: "Soulouque!"[12] Throughout
that long line from the Madeleine to the Bastille, the roadway nearly
everywhere, except (was this on purpose?) at the Porte St. Denis and the
Porte St. Martin, was occupied by the soldiers--infantry and cavalry,
ranged in battle-order, the artillery batteries being harnessed; on the
pavements on each side of this motionless and gloomy mass, bristling
with cannon, swords, and bayonets, flowed a torrent of angry people. On
all sides public indignation prevailed. Such was the aspect of the
Boulevards. At the Bastille there was a dead calm.

At the Porte St. Martin the crowd, hemmed together and uneasy, spoke in
low tones. Groups of workmen talked in whispers. The Society of the 10th
December made some efforts there. Men in white blouses, a sort of
uniform which the police assumed during those days, said, "Let us leave
them alone; let the 'Twenty-five francs' settle it amongst themselves!
They deserted us in June, 1848; to-day let them get out of the
difficulty alone! It does not concern us!" Other blouses, blue blouses,
answered them, "We know what we have to do. This is only the beginning,
wait and see."

Others told how the barricades of the Rue Aumaire were being rebuilt,
how a large number of persons had already been killed there, how they
fired without any summons, how the soldiers were drunk, how at various
points in the district there were ambulances already crowded with killed
and wounded. All this was said seriously, without loud speaking, without
gesture, in a confidential tone. From time to time the crowd were silent
and listened, and distant firing was heard.

The groups said, "Now they are beginning to tear down the curtain."

We were holding Permanent Session at Marie's house in the Rue Croix des
Petits Champs. Promises of co-operation poured in upon us from every
side. Several of our colleagues, who had not been able to find us on the
previous day, had joined us, amongst others Emmanuel Arago, gallant son
of an illustrious father; Farconnet and Roussel (de l'Yonne), and some
Parisian celebrities, amongst whom was the young and already well-known
defender of the _Avénement du Peuple_, M. Desmarets.

Two eloquent men, Jules Favre and Alexander Rey, seated at a large table
near the window of the small room, were drawing up a Proclamation to the
National Guard. In the large room Sain, seated in an arm-chair, his feet
on the dog-irons, drying his wet boots before a huge fire, said, with
that calm and courageous smile which he wore in the Tribune, "Things are
looking badly for us, but well for the Republic. Martial law is
proclaimed; it will be carried out with ferocity, above all against us.
We are laid in wait for, followed, tracked, there is little probability
that we shall escape. To-day, to-morrow, perhaps in ten minutes, there
will be a 'miniature massacre' of Representatives. We shall be taken
here or elsewhere, shot down on the spot or killed with bayonet thrusts.
They will parade our corpses, and we must hope that that will at length
raise the people and overthrow Bonaparte. We are dead, but Bonaparte is
lost."

At eight o'clock, as Emile de Girardin had promised, we received from
the printing office of the _Presse_ five hundred copies of the decree of
deposition and of outlawry endorsing the judgment of the High Court, and
with all our signatures attached. It was a placard twice as large as
one's hand, and printed on paper used for proofs. Noël Parfait brought us
the five hundred copies, still damp, between his waistcoat and his shirt.
Thirty Representatives divided the bills amongst them, and we sent them
on the Boulevards to distribute the Decree to the People.

The effect of this Decree falling in the midst of the crowd was
marvellous. Some _cafés_ had remained open, people eagerly snatched the
bills, they pressed round the lighted shop windows, they crowded under
the street lamps. Some mounted on kerbstones or on tables, and read
aloud the Decree.--"That is it! Bravo!" cried the people. "The
signatures!" "The signatures!" they shouted. The signatures were read
out, and at each popular name the crowd applauded. Charamaule, merry and
indignant, wandered through the groups, distributing copies of the
Decree; his great stature, his loud and bold words, the packet of
handbills which he raised, and waved above his head, caused all hands to
be stretched out towards him. "Shout 'Down with Soulouque!'" said he,
"and you shall have some." All this in the presence of the soldiers.
Even a sergeant of the line, noticing Charamaule, stretched out his hand
for one of the bills which Charamaule was distributing. "Sergeant," said
Charamaule to him, "cry, 'Down with Soulouque!'" The sergeant hesitated
for a moment, and answered "No." "Well, then," replied Charamaule,
"Shout, 'Long live Soulouque.'" This time the sergeant did not hesitate,
he raised his sword, and, amid bursts of laughter and of applause, he
resolutely shouted, "Long live Soulouque!"

The reading of the Decree added a gloomy warmth to the popular anger.
They set to work on all sides to tear down the placards of the _coup
d'état_. At the door of the Café des Variétés a young man cried out to
the officers, "You are drunk!" Some workmen on the Boulevard
Bonne-Nouvelle shook their fists at the soldiers and said, "Fire, then,
you cowards, on unarmed men! If we had guns you would throw the butts of
your muskets in the air." Charges of cavalry began to be made in front
of the Café Cardinal.

As there were no troops on the Boulevard St. Martin and the Boulevard du
Temple, the crowd was more compact pact there than elsewhere. All the
shops were shut there; the street lamps alone gave any light. Against
the gloss of the unlighted windows heads might be dimly seen peering
out. Darkness produced silence; this multitude, as we have already said,
was hushed. There was only heard a confused whispering. Suddenly a
light, a noise, an uproar burst forth from the entrance of the Rue St.
Martin. Every eye was turned in that direction; a profound upheaving
agitated the crowd; they rushed forward, they pressed against the
railings of the high pavements which border the cutting between the
theatres of the Porte St. Martin and the Ambigu. A moving mass was seen,
and an approaching light. Voices were singing. This formidable chorus
was recognized,

    "Aux armes, Citoyens; formez vos bataillons!"

Lighted torches were coming, it was the "Marseillaise," that other torch
of Revolution and of warfare which was blazing.

The crowd made way for the mob which carried the torches, and which were
singing. The mob reached the St. Martin cutting, and entered it. It was
then seen what this mournful procession meant. The mob was composed of
two distinct groups. The first carried on its shoulders a plank, on which
could be seen stretched an old man with a white beard, stark, the mouth
open, the eyes fixed, and with a hole in his forehead. The swinging
movement of the bearers shook the corpse, and the dead head rose and fell
in a threatening and pathetic manner. One of the men who carried him,
pale, and wounded in the breast, placed his hand to his wound, leant
against the feet of the old man, and at times himself appeared ready to
fall. The other group bore a second litter, on which a young man was
stretched, his countenance pale and his eyes closed, his shirt stained,
open over his breast, displaying his wounds. While bearing the two
litters the groups sang. They sang the "Marseillaise," and at each chorus
they stopped and raised their torches, crying, "To arms!" Some young men
waved drawn swords. The torches shed a lurid light on the pallid
foreheads of the corpses and on the livid faces of the crowd. A shudder
ran through the people. It appeared as though they again saw the terrible
vision of February, 1848.

This gloomy procession came from the Rue Aumaire. About eight o'clock
some thirty workmen gathered together from the neighborhood of the
markets, the same who on the next day raised the barricade of the
Guérin-Boisseau, reached the Rue Aumaire by the Rue de Petit Lion, the
Rue Neuve-Bourg-l'Abbé, and the Carré St. Martin. They came to fight,
but here the combat was at an end. The infantry had withdrawn after
having pulled down the barricades. Two corpses, an old man of seventy
and a young man of five-and-twenty, lay at the corner of the street on
the ground, with uncovered faces, their bodies in a pool of blood, their
heads on the pavement where they had fallen. Both were dressed in
overcoats, and seemed to belong to the middle class. The old man had his
hat by his side; he was a venerable figure with a white beard, white
hair, and a calm expression. A ball had pierced his skull.

The young man's breast was pierced with buck-shot. One was the father,
the other the son. The son, seeing his father fall, had said, "I also
will die." Both were lying side by side.

Opposite the gateway of the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers there was
a house in course of building. They fetched two planks from it, they
laid the corpses on the planks, the crowd raised them upon their
shoulders, they brought torches, and they began their march. In the Rue
St. Denis a man in a white blouse barred the way. "Where are you going?"
said he to them. "You will bring about disasters! You are helping the
'Twenty-five francs!'" "Down with the police! Down with the white
blouse!" shouted the crowd. The man slunk away.

The mob swelled on its road; the crowd opened out and repeated the
"Marseillaise" in chorus, but with the exception of a few swords no one
was armed. On the boulevard the emotion was intense. Women clasped their
hands in pity. Workmen were heard to exclaim, "And to think that we have
no arms!"

The procession, after having for some time followed the Boulevards,
re-entered the streets, followed by a deeply-affected and angry
multitude. In this manner it reached the Rue de Gravilliers. Then a
squad of twenty _sergents de ville_ suddenly emerging from a narrow
street rushed with drawn swords upon the men who were carrying the
litters, and overturned the corpses into the mud. A regiment of
Chasseurs came up at the double, and put an end to the conflict with
bayonet thrusts. A hundred and two citizen prisoners were conducted to
the Prefecture. The two corpses received several sword-cuts in the
confusion, and were killed a second time. The brigadier Revial, who
commanded the squad of the _sergents de ville_, received the Cross of
Honor for this deed of arms.

At Marie's we were on the point of being surrounded. We decided to leave
the Rue Croix des Petits Champs.

At the Elysée they commenced to tremble. The ex-Commandant Fleury, one
of the aides-de-camp of the Presidency, was summoned into the little
room where M. Bonaparte had remained throughout the day. M. Bonaparte
conferred a few moments alone with M. Fleury, then the aide-de-camp came
out of the room, mounted his horse, and galloped off in the direction of
Mazas.

After this the men of the _coup d'état_ met together in M. Bonaparte's
room, and held council. Matters were visibly going badly; it was
probable that the battle would end by assuming formidable proportions.
Up to that time they had desired this, now they did not feel sure that
they did not fear it. They pushed forward towards it, but they
mistrusted it. There were alarming symptoms in the steadfastness of the
resistance, and others not less serious in the cowardice of adherents.
Not one of the new Ministers appointed during the morning had taken
possession of his Ministry--a significant timidity on the part of people
ordinarily so prompt to throw themselves upon such things. M. Roulier,
in particular, had disappeared, no one knew where--a sign of tempest.
Putting Louis Bonaparte on one side, the _coup d'état_ continued to rest
solely upon three names, Morny, St. Arnaud, and Maupas. St. Arnaud
answered for Magnan. Morny laughed and said in a whisper, "But does
Magnan answer for St. Arnaud?" These men adopted energetic measures,
they sent for new regiments; an order to the garrisons to march upon
Paris was despatched in the one direction as far as Cherbourg, and on
the other as far as Maubeuge. These criminals, in the main deeply
uneasy, sought to deceive each other. They assumed a cheerful
countenance; all spoke of victory; each in the background arranged for
flight; in secret, and saying nothing, in order not to give the alarm to
his compromised colleagues, so as, in case of failure, to leave the
people some men to devour. For this little school of Machiavellian apes
the hopes of a successful escape lie in the abandonment of their
friends. During their flight they throw their accomplices behind them.


[12] A popular nickname for Louis Bonaparte. Faustin Soulouque was the
negro Emperor of Hayti, who, when President of the Republic, had carried
out a somewhat similar _coup d'état_ in 1848, being subsequently elected
Emperor. He treated the Republicans with great cruelty, putting most of
them to death.




CHAPTER X.


WHAT FLEURY WENT TO DO AT MAZAS

During the same night towards four o'clock the approaches of the
Northern Railway Station were silently invested by two regiments; one
of Chasseurs de Vincennes, the other of _Gendarmerie Mobile_. Numerous
squads of _sergents de ville_ installed themselves in the terminus. The
station-master was ordered to prepare a special train and to have an
engine ready. A certain number of stokers and engineers for night
service were retained. No explanation however was vouchsafed to any
one, and absolute secrecy was maintained. A little before six o'clock a
movement was apparent in the troops. Some _sergents de ville_ came
running up, and a few minutes afterwards a squadron of Lancers emerged
at a sharp trot from the Rue du Nord. In the centre of the squadron and
between the two lines of horse-soldiers could be seen two police-vans
drawn by post-horses, behind each vehicle came a little open barouche,
in which there sat one man. At the head of the Lancers galloped the
aide-de-camp Fleury.

The procession entered the courtyard, then the railway station, and the
gates and doors were reclosed.

The two men in the barouches made themselves known to the Special
Commissary of the station, to whom the aide-de-camp Fleury spoke
privately. This mysterious convoy excited the curiosity of the railway
officials; they questioned the policemen, but these knew nothing. All
that they could tell was that these police-vans contained eight places,
that in each van there were four prisoners, each occupying a cell, and
that the four other cells were filled by four _sergents de ville_
placed between the prisoners so as to prevent any communication between
the cells.

After various consultations between the aide-de-camp of the Elysée and
the men of the Prefect Maupas, the two police-vans were placed on
railway trucks, each having behind it the open barouche like a wheeled
sentry-box, where a police agent acted as sentinel. The engine was
ready, the trucks were attached to the tender, and the train started. It
was still pitch dark.

For a long time the train sped on in the most profound silence.
Meanwhile it was freezing, in the second of the two police-vans, the
_sergents de ville_, cramped and chilled, opened their cells, and in
order to warm and stretch themselves walked up and down the narrow
gangway which runs from end to end of the police-vans. Day had broken,
the four _sergents de ville_ inhaled the outside air and gazed at the
passing country through a species of port-hole which borders each side
of the ceiling of the passage. Suddenly a loud voice issued from one of
the cells which had remained closed, and cried out, "Hey! there! it is
very cold, cannot I relight my cigar here?"

Another voice immediately issued from a second cell, and said, "What! it
is you? Good-morning, Lamoricière!"

"Good-morning, Cavaignac!" replied the first voice.

General Cavaignac and General Lamoricière had just recognized each
other.

A third voice was raised from a third cell. "Ah! you are there,
gentlemen. Good-morning and a pleasant journey."

He who spoke then was General Changarnier.

"Generals?" cried out a fourth voice. "I am one of you!"

The three generals recognized M. Baze. A burst of laughter came from the
four cells simultaneously.

This police-van in truth contained, and was carrying away from Paris,
the Questor Baze, and the Generals Lamoricière, Cavaignac, and
Changarnier. In the other vehicle, which was placed foremost on the
trucks, there were Colonel Charras, Generals Bedeau and Le Flô, and
Count Roger (du Nord).

At midnight these eight Representative prisoners were sleeping in their
cells at Mazas, when they heard a sudden knocking at their doors, and a
voice cried out to them, "Dress, they are coming to fetch you." "Is it to
shoot us?" cried Charras from the other side of the door. They did not
answer him. It is worth remarking that this idea came simultaneously to
all. And in truth, if we can believe what has since transpired through
the quarrels of accomplices, it appears that in the event of a sudden
attack being made by us upon Mazas to deliver them, a fusillade had been
resolved upon, and that St. Arnaud had in his pocket the written order,
signed "Louis Bonaparte."

The prisoners got up. Already on the preceding night a similar notice
had been given to them. They had passed the night on their feet, and at
six o'clock in the morning the jailer said to them, "You can go to bed."
The hours passed by; they ended by thinking it would be the same as the
preceding night, and many of them, hearing five o'clock strike from the
clock tower inside the prison, were going to get back into bed, when the
doors of their cells were opened. All the eight were taken downstairs
one by one into the clerk's office in the Rotunda, and were then ushered
into the police-van without having met or seen each other during the
passage. A man dressed in black, with an impertinent bearing, seated at
a table with pen in hand, stopped them on their way, and asked their
names. "I am no more disposed to tell you my name than I am curious to
learn yours," answered General Lamoricière, and he passed outside.

The aide-de-camp Fleury, concealing his uniform under his hooded cloak,
stationed himself in the clerk's office. He was charged, to use his own
words, to "embark" them, and to go and report their "embarkation" at the
Elysée. The aide-de-camp Fleury had passed nearly the whole of his
military career in Africa in General Lamoricière's division; and it was
General Lamoricière who in 1848, then being Minister of War, had
promoted him to the rank of major. While passing through the clerk's
office, General Lamoricière looked fixedly at him.

When they entered the police-vans the generals were smoking cigars. They
took them from them. General Lamoricière had kept his. A voice from
outside cried three separate times, "Stop his smoking!" A _sergent de
ville_ who was standing by the door of the cell hesitated for
some time, but however ended by saying to the general, "Throw away your
cigar."

Thence later on ensued the exclamation which caused General Cavaignac to
recognize General Lamoricière. The vehicles having been loaded they set
off.

They did not know either with whom they were or where they were going.
Each observed for himself in his box the turnings of the streets, and
tried to speculate. Some believed that they were being taken to the
Northern Railway Station; others thought to the Havre Railway Station.
They heard the trot of the escort on the paving-stones.

On the railway the discomfort of the cells greatly increased. General
Lamoricière, encumbered with a parcel and a cloak, was still more jammed
in than the others. He could not move, the cold seized him, and he ended
by the exclamation which put all four of them in communication with each
other.

On hearing the names of the prisoners their keepers, who up to that time
had been rough, became respectful. "I say there," said General
Changarnier, "open our cells, and let us walk up and down the passage
like yourselves." "General," said a _sergent de ville_, "we are forbidden
to do so. The Commissary of Police is behind the carriage in a barouche,
whence he sees everything that is taking place here." Nevertheless, a
few moments afterwards, the keepers, under pretext of cold, pulled up
the ground-glass window which closed the vehicle on the side of the
Commissary, and having thus "blocked the police," as one of them
remarked, they opened the cells of the prisoners.

It was with great delight that the four Representatives met again and
shook hands. Each of these three generals at this demonstrative moment
maintained the character of his temperament. Lamoricière, impetuous and
witty, throwing himself with all his military energy upon "the Bonaparte;"
Cavaignac, calm and cold; Changarnier, silent and looking out through
the port-hole at the landscape. The _sergents de ville_ ventured to put
in a word here and there. One of them related to the prisoners that the
ex-Prefect Carlier had spent the night of the First and Second at the
Prefecture of Police. "As for me," said he, "I left the Prefecture at
midnight, but I saw him up to that hour, and I can affirm that at
midnight he was there still."

They reached Creil, and then Noyon. At Noyon they gave them some
breakfast, without letting them get out, a hurried morsel and a glass of
wine. The Commissaries of Police did not open their lips to them. Then
the carriages were reclosed, and they felt they were being taken off the
trucks and being replaced on the wheels. Post horses arrived, and the
vehicles set out, but slowly; they were now escorted by a company of
infantry _Gendarmerie Mobile_.

When they left Noyon they had been ten hours in the police-van. Meanwhile
the infantry halted. They asked permission to get out for a moment "We
consent," said one of the Commissaries of the Police, "but only for a
minute, and on condition that you will give your word of honor not to
escape." "We will give our word of honor," replied the prisoners.
"Gentlemen," continued the Commissary, "give it to me only for one
minute, the time to drink a glass of water." "No," said General
Lamoricière, "but the time to do the contrary," and he added, "To Louis
Bonaparte's health." They allowed them to get out, one by one, and they
were, able to inhale for a moment the fresh air in the open country by
the side of the road.

Then the convoy resumed its march.

As the day waned they saw through their port-hole a mass of high walls,
somewhat overtopped by a great round tower. A moment afterwards the
carriages entered beneath a low archway, and then stopped in the centre
of a long courtyard, steeply embanked, surrounded by high walls, and
commanded by two buildings, of which one had the appearance of a
barrack, and the other, with bars at all the windows, had the appearance
of a prison. The doors of the carriages were opened. An officer who wore
a captain's epaulets was standing by the steps. General Changarnier came
down first. "Where are we?" said he. The officer answered, "You are at
Ham."

This officer was the Commandant of the Fort. He had been appointed to
this post by General Cavaignac.

The journey from Noyon to Ham had lasted three hours and a half. They
had spent thirteen hours in the police van, of which ten were on the
railway.

They led them separately into the
prison, each to the room that was allotted to him. However, General
Lamoricière having been taken by mistake into Cavaignac's room, the two
generals could again exchange a shake of the hand. General Lamoricière
wished to write to his wife; the only letter which the Commissaries of
Police consented to take charge of was a note containing this line: "I
am well."

The principal building of the prison of Ham is composed of a story above
the ground floor. The ground floor is traversed by a dark and low
archway, which leads from the principal courtyard into a back yard, and
contains three rooms separated by a passage; the first floor contains
five rooms. One of the three rooms on the ground floor is only a little
ante-room, almost uninhabitable; there they lodged M. Baze. In the
remaining lower chambers they installed General Lamoricière and General
Changarnier. The five other prisoners were distributed in the five rooms
of the first floor.

The room allotted to General Lamoricière had been occupied in the time
of the captivity of the Ministers of Charles X. by the ex-Minister of
Marine, M. d'Haussez. It was a low, damp room, long uninhabited, and
which had served as a chapel, adjoining the dreary archway which led
from one courtyard to the other, floored with great planks slimy and
mouldy, to which the foot adhered, papered with a gray paper which had
turned green, and which hung in rags, exuding saltpetre from the floor
to the ceiling, lighted by two barred windows looking on to the
courtyard, which had always to be left open on account of the smoky
chimney. At the bottom of the room was the bed, and between the windows
a table and two straw-bottomed chairs. The damp ran down the walls. When
General Lamoricière left this room he carried away rheumatism with him;
M. de Haussez went out crippled.

When the eight prisoners had entered their rooms, the doors were shut
upon them; they heard the bolts shot from outside, and they were told:
"You are in close confinement."

General Cavaignac occupied on the first floor the former room of M. Louis
Bonaparte, the best in the prison. The first thing which struck the eye
of the General was an inscription traced on the well, and stating the day
when Louis Bonaparte had entered this fortress, and the day when he had
left it, as is well known, disguised as a mason, and with a plank on his
shoulder. Moreover, the choice of this building was an attention on the
part of M. Louis Bonaparte, who having in 1848 taken the place of General
Cavaignac in power; wished that in 1851 General Cavaignac should take his
place in prison.

"Turn and turn about!" Morny had said, smiling.

The prisoners were guarded by the 48th of the Line, who formed the
garrison at Ham. The old Bastilles are quite impartial. They obey those
who make _coups d'état_ until the day when they clutch them. What do
these words matter to them, Equity, Truth, Conscience, which moreover in
certain circles do not move men any more than stones? They are the cold
and gloomy servants of the just and of the unjust. They take whatever is
given them. All is good to them. Are they guilty? Good! Are they
innocent? Excellent! This man is the organizer of an ambush. To prison!
This man is the victim of an ambush! Enter him in the prison register!
In the same room. To the dungeon with all the vanquished!

These hideous Bastilles resemble that old human justice which possessed
precisely as much conscience as they have, which condemned Socrates and
Jesus, and which also takes and leaves, seizes and releases, absolves
and condemns, liberates and incarcerates, opens and shuts, at the will
of whatever hand manipulates the bolt from outside.




CHAPTER XI.


THE END OF THE SECOND DAY

We left Marie's house just in time. The regiment charged to track us and
to arrest us was approaching. We heard the measured steps of soldiers in
the gloom. The streets were dark. We dispersed. I will not speak of a
refuge which was refused to us.

Less than ten minutes after our departure M. Marie's house was invested.
A swarm of guns and swords poured in, and overran it from cellar to
attic. "Everywhere! everywhere!" cried the chiefs. The soldiers sought
us with considerable energy. Without taking the trouble to lean down and
look, they ransacked under the beds with bayonet thrusts. Sometimes they
had difficulty in withdrawing the bayonets which they had driven into the
wall. Unfortunately for this zeal, we were not there.

This zeal came frown higher sources. The poor soldiers obeyed. "Kill
the Representatives," such were their instructions. It was at that
moment when Morny sent this despatch to Maupas: "If you take Victor
Hugo, do what you like with him." These were their politest phrases.
Later on the _coup d'état_ in its decree of banishment, called us
"those individuals," which caused Schoelcher to say these haughty
words: "These people do not even know how to exile politely."

Dr. Véron who publishes in his "Mémoires" the Morny-Maupas despatch,
adds: "M. du Maupas sent to look for Victor Hugo at the house of his
brother-in-law, M. Victor Foucher, Councillor to the Court of Cassation.
He did not find him."

An old friend, a man of heart and of talent, M. Henry d'E----, had
offered me a refuge in rooms which he occupied in the Rue Richelieu;
these rooms adjoining the Théâtre Français, were on the first floor of a
house which, like M. Grévy's residence, had an exit into the Rue
Fontaine Molière.

I went there. M. Henry d'E---- being from home, his porter was awaiting
me, and handed me the key.

A candle lighted the room which I entered. There was a table near the
fire, a blotting-book, and some paper. It was past midnight, and I was
somewhat tired; but before going to bed, foreseeing that if I should
survive this adventure I should write its history, I resolved immediately
to note down some details of the state of affairs in Paris at the end of
this day, the second of the _coup d'état_. I wrote this page, which I
reproduce here, because it is a life-like portrayal--a sort of direct
photograph:--

"Louis Bonaparte has invented something which he calls a 'Consultative
Committee,' and which he commissions to draw up the postscript of his
crimes.

"Léon Foucher refuses to be in it; Montalember hesitates; Baroche
accepts.

"Falloux despises Dupin.

"The first shots were fired at the Record Office. In the Markets in the
Rue Rambuteau, in the Rue Beaubourg I heard firing.

"Fleury, the aide-de-camp, ventured to pass down the Rue Montmartre. A
musket ball pierced his képi. He galloped quickly off. At one o'clock
the regiments were summoned to vote on the _coup d'état_. All gave their
adhesion. The students of law and medicine assembled together at the
Ecole de Droit to protest. The Municipal Guards dispersed them. There
were a great many arrests. This evening, patrols are everywhere.
Sometimes an entire regiment forms a patrol.

"Representative Hespel, who is six feet high, was not able to find a
cell long enough for him at Mazas, and he has been obliged to remain in
the porter's lodge, where he is carefully watched.

"Mesdames Odilon Barrot and de Tocqueville do not know where their
husbands are. They go from Mazas to Mont Valérien. The jailers are dumb.
It is the 19th Light Infantry which attacked the barricade when Baudin
was killed. Fifty men of the _Gendarmerie Mobile_ have carried at the
double the barricade of the Oratoire in the Rue St. Honoré. Moreover, the
conflict reveals itself. They sound the tocsin at the Chapelle Bréa. One
barricade overturned sets twenty barricades on their feet. There is the
barricade of the Schools in the Rue St. André des Arts, the barricade of
the Rue du Temple, the barricade of the Carrefour Phélippeaux defended by
twenty young men who have all been killed; they are reconstructing it;
the barricade of the Rue de Bretagne, which at this moment Courtigis is
bombarding. There is the barricade of the Invalides, the barricade of the
Barrière des Martyres, the barricade of the Chapelle St. Denis. The
councils of war are sitting in permanence, and order all prisoners to be
shot. The 30th of the Line have shot a woman. Oil upon fire.

"The colonel of the 49th of the Line has resigned. Louis Bonaparte has
appointed in his place Lieutenant Colonel Négrier. M. Brun, Officer of
the Police of the Assembly, was arrested at the same time as the
Questors.

"It is said that fifty members of the majority have signed a protest at
M. Odilon Barrot's house.

"This evening there is an increasing uneasiness at the Elysée.
Incendiarism is feared. Two battalions of engineer-sappers have
reinforced the Fire Brigade. Maupas has placed guards over the
gasometers.

"Here are the military talons by which Paris has been grasped:--Bivouacs
at all the strategical points. At the Pont Neuf and the Quai aux Fleurs,
the Municipal Guards; at the Place de la Bastille twelve pieces of
cannon, three mortars, lighted matches; at the corner of the Faubourg the
six-storied houses are occupied by soldiers from top to bottom; the
Marulaz brigade at the Hôtel de Ville; the Sauboul brigade at the
Panthéon; the Courtigis brigade at the Faubourg St. Antoine; the Renaud
division at the Faubourg St. Marceau. At the Legislative Palace the
Chasseurs de Vincennes, and a battalion of the 15th Light Infantry; in
the Champs Elysées infantry and cavalry; in the Avenue Marigny artillery.
Inside the circus is an entire regiment; it has bivouacked there all
night. A squadron of the Municipal Guard is bivouacking in the Place
Dauphine. A bivouac in the Council of State. A bivouac in the courtyard
of the Tuileries. In addition, the garrisons of St. Germain and of
Courbevoie. Two colonels killed, Loubeau, of the 75th, and Quilio. On all
sides hospital attendants are passing, bearing litters. Ambulances are
everywhere; in the Bazar de l'Industry (Boulevard Poissionière); in the
Salle St. Jean at the Hôtel de Ville; in the Rue du Petit Carreau. In
this gloomy battle nine brigades are engaged. All have a battery of
artillery; a squadron of cavalry maintains the communications between the
brigades; forty thousand men are taking part in the struggle; with a
reserve of sixty thousand men; a hundred thousand soldiers upon Paris.
Such is the Army of the Crime. The Reibell brigade, the first and second
Lancers, protect the Elysée. The Ministers are all sleeping at the
Ministry of the Interior, close by Morny. Morny watches, Magnan commands.
To-morrow will be a terrible day."

This page written, I went to bed, and fell asleep.




THE THIRD DAY--THE MASSACRE.




CHAPTER I.


THOSE WHO SLEEP AND HE WHO DOES NOT SLEEP

During this night of the 3d and 4th of December, while we who were
overcome with fatigue and betrothed to calamity slept an honest slumber,
not an eye was closed at the Elysée. An infamous sleeplessness reigned
there. Towards two o'clock in the morning the Comte Roguet, after Morny
the most intimate of the confidants of the Elysée, an ex-peer of France
and a lieutenant-general, came out of Louis Bonaparte's private room;
Roguet was accompanied by Saint-Arnaud. Saint-Arnaud, it may be
remembered, was at that time Minister of War.

Two colonels were waiting in the little ante-room.

Saint-Arnaud was a general who had been a supernumerary at the Ambigu
Theatre. He had made his first appearance as a comedian in the suburbs.
A tragedian later on. He may be described as follows:--tall, bony, thin,
angular, with gray moustaches, lank air, a mean countenance. He was a
cut-throat, and badly educated. Morny laughed at him for his pronunciation
of the "Sovereign People." "He pronounces the word no better than he
understands the thing," said he. The Elysée, which prides itself upon its
refinement, only half-accepted Saint-Arnaud. His bloody side had caused
his vulgar side to be condoned. Saint-Arnaud was brave, violent, and yet
timid; he had the audacity of a gold-laced veteran and the awkwardness of
a man who had formerly been "down upon his luck." We saw him one day in
the tribune, pale, stammering, but daring. He had a long bony face, and
a distrust-inspiring jaw. His theatrical name was Florivan. He was a
strolling player transformed into a trooper. He died Marshal of France.
An ill-omened figure.

The two colonels who awaited Saint-Arnaud in the anteroom were two
business-like men, both leaders of those decisive regiments which at
critical times carry the other regiments with them, according to their
instructions, into glory, as at Austerlitz, or into crime, as on the
Eighteenth Brumaire. These two officers belonged to what Morny called
"the cream of indebted and free-living colonels." We will not mention
their names here; one is dead, the other is still living; he will
recognize himself. Besides, we have caught a glimpse of them in the
first pages of this book.

One, a man of thirty-eight, was cunning, dauntless, ungrateful, three
qualifications for success. The Duc d'Aumale had saved his life in the
Aurés. He was then a young captain. A ball had pierced his body; he fell
into a thicket; the Kabyles rushed up to cut off and carry away his
head, when the Duc d'Aumale arriving with two officers, a soldier, and a
bugler, charged the Kabyles and saved this captain. Having saved him, he
loved him. One was grateful, the other was not. The one who was grateful
was the deliverer. The Duc d'Aumale was pleased with this young captain
for having given him an opportunity for a deed of gallantry. He made
him a major; in 1849 this major became lieutenant-colonel, and commanded
a storming column at the siege of Rome; he then came back to Africa,
where Fleury bought him over at the same time as Saint-Arnaud. Louis
Bonaparte made him colonel in July, 1851, and reckoned upon him. In
November this colonel of Louis Bonaparte wrote to the Duc d'Aumale,
"Nothing need be apprehended from this miserable adventurer." In
December he commanded one of the massacring regiments. Later on, in the
Dobrudscha, an ill-used horse turned upon him and bit off his cheek, so
that there was only room on his face for one slap.

The other man was growing gray, and was about forty-eight. He also was
a man of pleasure and of murder. Despicable as a citizen; brave as a
soldier. He was one of the first who had sprung into the breach at
Constantine. Plenty of bravery and plenty of baseness. No chivalry but
that of the green cloth. Louis Bonaparte had made him colonel in 1851.
His debts had been twice paid by two Princes; the first time by the Duc
d'Orléans, the second time by the Duc de Némours.

Such were these colonels.

Saint-Arnaud spoke to them for some time in a low tone.




CHAPTER II.


THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE

As soon as it was daylight we had assembled in the house of our
imprisoned colleague, M. Grévy. We had been installed in his private
room. Michel de Bourges and myself were seated near the fireplace; Jules
Favre and Carnot were writing, the one at a table near the window, the
other at a high desk. The Left had invested us with discretionary
powers. It became more and more impossible at every moment to meet
together again in session. We drew up in its name and remitted to
Hingray, so that he might print it immediately, the following decree,
compiled on the spur of the moment by Jules Favre:--

  "FRENCH REPUBLIC.

  "_Liberty, Equality, Fraternity_.

  "The undersigned Representatives of the People who still remain at
  liberty, having met together in an Extraordinary Permanent Session,
  considering the arrest of the majority of their colleagues, considering
  the urgency of the moment;

  "Seeing that the crime of Louis Napoleon Bonaparte in violently
  abolishing the operations of the Public Powers has reinstated the
  Nation in the direct exercise of its sovereignty, and that all which
  fetters that sovereignty at the present time should he annulled;

  "Seeing that all the prosecutions commenced, all the sentences
  pronounced, by what right soever, on account of political crimes or
  offences are quashed by the imprescriptible right of the People;

  "DECREE:

  "ARTICLE I. All prosecutions which have begun, and all sentences which
  have been pronounced, for political crimes or offences are annulled as
  regards all their civil or criminal effects.

  "ARTICLE II. Consequently, all directors of jails or of houses of
  detention are enjoined immediately to set at liberty all persons
  detained in prison for the reasons above indicated.

  "ARTICLE III. All magistrates' officers and officers of the judiciary
  police are similarly enjoined, under penalty of treason, to annul all
  the prosecutions which have been begun for the same causes.

  "ARTICLE IV. The police functionaries and agents are charged with the
  execution of the present decree.

  "Given at Paris, in Permanent Session, on the 4th December, 1851."

Jules Favre, as he passed me the decree for my signature, said to me,
smiling, "Let us set your sons and your friends at liberty." "Yes," said
I, "four combatants the more on the barricades." The Representative
Duputz, a few hours later, received from our hands a duplicate of the
decree, with the charge to take it himself to the Concièrgerie as soon
as the surprise which we premeditated upon the Prefecture of Police and
the Hôtel de Ville should have succeeded. Unhappily this surprise
failed.

Landrin came in. His duties in Paris in 1848 had enabled him to know the
whole body of the political and municipal police. He warned us that he
had seen suspicious figures roving about the neighborhood. We were in the
Rue Richelieu, almost opposite the Théâtre Français, one of the points
where passers-by are most numerous, and in consequence one of the points
most carefully watched. The goings and comings of the Representatives
who were communicating with the Committee, and who came in and out
unceasingly, would be inevitably noticed, and would bring about a visit
from the Police. The porters and the neighbors already manifested an
evil-boding surprise. We ran, so Landrin declared and assured us, the
greatest danger. "You will be taken and shot," said he to us.

He entreated us to go elsewhere. M. Grévy's brother, consulted by us,
stated that he could not answer for the people of his house.

But what was to be done? Hunted now for two days, we had exhausted the
goodwill of nearly everybody, one refuge had been refused on the
preceding evening, and at this moment no house was offered to us. Since
the night of the 2d we had changed our refuge seventeen times, at times
going from one extremity of Paris to the other. We began to experience
some weariness. Besides, as I have already said, the house where we were
had this signal advantage--a back outlet upon the Rue Fontaine-Molière.
We decided to remain. Only we thought we ought to take precautionary
measures.

Every species of devotion burst forth from the ranks of the Left around
us. A noteworthy member of the Assembly--a man of rare mind and of rare
courage--Durand-Savoyat--who from the preceding evening until the last
day constituted himself our doorkeeper, and even more than this, our
usher and our attendant, himself had placed a bell on our table, and had
said to us, "When you want me, ring, and I will come in." Wherever we
went, there was he. He remained in the ante-chamber, calm, impassive,
silent, with his grave and noble countenance, his buttoned frock coat,
and his broad-brimmed hat, which gave him the appearance of an Anglican
clergyman. He himself opened the entrance door, scanned the faces of
those who came, and kept away the importunate and the useless. Besides,
he was always cheerful, and ready to say unceasingly, "Things are
looking well." We were lost, yet he smiled. Optimism in Despair.

We called him in. Landrin set forth to him his misgivings. We begged
Durand-Savoyat in future to allow no one to remain in the apartments,
not even the Representatives of the People, to take note of all news and
information, and to allow no one to penetrate to us but men who were
indispensable, in short, as far as possible, to send away every one in
order that the goings and comings might cease. Durand-Savoyat nodded his
head, and went back into the ante-chamber, saying, "It shall be done."
He confined himself of his own accord to these two formulas; for us,
"Things are looking well," for himself, "It shall be done." "It shall be
done," a noble manner in which to speak of duty.

Landrin and Durand-Savoyat having left, Michel de Bourges began to
speak.

"The artifice of Louis Bonaparte, imitator of his uncle in this as in
everything," said Michel de Bourges, "had been to throw out in advance
an appeal to the People, a vote to be taken, a plebiscitum, in short, to
create a Government in appearance at the very moment when he overturned
one. In great crises, where everything totters and seems ready to fall,
a People has need to lay hold of something. Failing any other support,
it will take the sovereignty of Louis Bonaparte. Well, it was necessary
that a support should be offered to the people, by us, in the form of
its own sovereignty. The Assembly," continued Michel de Bourges, "was,
as a fact, dead. The Left, the popular stump of this hated Assembly,
might suffice for the situation for a few days. No more. It was
necessary that it should be reinvigorated by the national sovereignty.
It was therefore important that we also should appeal to universal
suffrage, should oppose vote to vote, should raise erect the Sovereign
People before the usurping Prince, and should immediately convoke a new
Assembly." Michel de Bourges proposed a decree.

Michel de Bourges was right. Behind the victory of Louis Bonaparte could
be seen something hateful, but something which was familiar--the Empire;
behind the victory of the Left there was obscurity. We must bring in
daylight behind us. That which causes the greatest uneasiness to
people's imagination is the dictatorship of the Unknown. To convoke a
new Assembly as soon as possible, to restore France at once into the
hands of France, this was to reassure people's minds during the combat,
and to rally them afterwards; this was the true policy.

For some time, while listening to Michel de Bourges and Jules Favre, who
supported him, we fancied we heard, in the next room, a murmur which
resembled the sound of voices. Jules Favre had several times exclaimed,
"Is any one there?"

"It is not possible," was the answer. "We have instructed Durand-Savoyat
to allow no one to remain there." And the discussion continued.
Nevertheless the sound of voices insensibly increased, and ultimately
grew so distinct that it became necessary to see what it meant. Carnot
half opened the door. The room and the ante-chamber adjoining the room
where we were deliberating were filled with Representatives, who were
peaceably conversing.

Surprised, we called in Durand-Savoyat.

"Did you not understand us?" asked Michel de Bourges.

"Yes, certainly," answered Durand-Savoyat.

"This house is perhaps marked," resumed Carnot; "we are in danger of
being taken."

"And killed upon the spot," added Jules Favre, smiling with his calm
smile.

"Exactly so," answered Durand-Savoyat, with a look still quieter than
Jules Favre's smile. "The door of this inner room is shrouded in the
darkness, and is little noticeable. I have detained all the
Representatives who have come in, and have placed them in the larger
room and in the ante-chamber, whichever they have wished. A species of
crowd has thus been formed. If the police and the troops arrive, I shall
say to them, 'Here we are.' They will take us. They will not perceive
the door of the inner room, and they will not reach you. We shall pay
for you. If there is any one to be killed, they will content themselves
with us."

And without imagining that he had just uttered the words of a hero,
Durand-Savoyat went back to the antechamber.

We resumed our deliberation on the subject of a decree. We were
unanimously agreed upon the advantage of an immediate convocation of a
New Assembly. But for what date? Louis Bonaparte had appointed the 20th
of December for his Plebiscitum; we chose the 21st. Then, what should we
call this Assembly? Michel de Bourges strongly advocated the title of
"National Convention," Jules Favre that its name should be "Constituent
Assembly," Carnot proposed the title of "Sovereign Assembly," which,
awakening no remembrances, would leave the field free to all hopes. The
name of "Sovereign Assembly" was adopted.

The decree, the preamble of which Carnot insisted upon writing from my
dictation, was drawn up in these terms. It is one of those which has
been printed and placarded.

  "DECREE.

  "The crime of Louis Bonaparte imposes great duties upon the
  Representatives of the People remaining at liberty.

  "Brute force seeks to render the fulfilment of these duties impossible.

  "Hunted, wandering from refuge to refuge, assassinated in the streets,
  the Republican Representatives deliberate and act, notwithstanding the
  infamous police of the _coup d'état_.

  "The outrage of Louis Napoleon, in overturning all the Public Powers,
  has only left one authority standing,--the supreme authority,--the
  authority of the people: Universal Suffrage.

  "It is the duty of the Sovereign People to recapture and reconstitute
  all the social forces which to-day are dispersed.

  "Consequently, the Representatives of the People decree:--

  "ARTICLE I.--The People are convoked on the 21st December, 1851, for
  the election of a Sovereign Assembly.

  "ARTICLE II.--The election will take place by Universal Suffrage,
  according to the formalities determined by the decree of the
  Provisional Government of March 5, 1848.

  "Given at Paris, in Permanent Session, December 4, 1851."

As I finished signing this decree, Durand-Savoyat entered and whispered
to me that a woman had asked for me, and was waiting in the ante-chamber.
I went out to her. It was Madame Charassin. Her husband had disappeared.
The Representative Charassin, a political economist, an agriculturist, a
man of science, was at the same time a man of great courage. We had seen
him on the preceding evening at the most perilous points. Had he been
arrested? Madame Charassin came to ask me if we knew where he was. I was
ignorant. She went to Mazas to make inquiries for him there. A colonel
who simultaneously commanded in the army and in the police, received her,
and said, "I can only permit you to see your husband on one condition."
"What is that?" "You will talk to him about nothing." "What do you mean
Nothing?" "No news, no politics." "Very well." "Give me your word of
honor." And she had answered him, "How is it that you wish me to give you
my word of honor, since I should decline to receive yours?"

I have since seen Charassin in exile.

Madame Charassin had just left me when Théodore Bac arrived. He brought
us the protest of the Council of State.

Here it is:--

  "PROTEST OF THE COUNCIL OF STATE.

  "The undersigned members of the Council of State, elected by the
  Constituent and Legislative Assemblies, having assembled together,
  notwithstanding the decree of the 2d of December, at their usual place,
  and having found it surrounded by an armed force, which prohibited their
  access thereto, protest against the decree which has pronounced the
  dissolution of the Council of State, and declare that they only ceased
  their functions when hindered by force.

  "Paris, this 3d December, 1851.

  "Signed: BETHMONT, VIVIEN, BUREAU DE PUZY, ED. CHARTON, CUVIER, DE
  RENNEVILLE, HORACE SAY, BOULATIGNIER, GAUTIER DE RUMILLY, DE JOUVENCEL,
  DUNOYER, CARTERET, DE FRESNE, BOUCHENAY-LEFER, RIVET, BOUDET, CORMENIN,
  PONS DE L'HERAULT."

Let us relate the adventure of the Council of State.

Louis Bonaparte had driven away the Assembly by the Army, and the High
Court of Justice by the Police; he expelled the Council of State by the
porter.

On the morning of the 2d of December, at the very hour at which the
Representatives of the Right had gone from M. Daru's to the Mairie of
the Tenth Arrondissement, the Councillors of State betook themselves to
the Hotel on the Quai d'Orsay. They went in one by one.

The quay was thronged with soldiers. A regiment was bivouacking there
with their arms piled.

The Councillors of State soon numbered about thirty. They set to work to
deliberate. A draft protest was drawn up. At the moment when it was about
to be signed the porter came in, pale and stammering. He declared that he
was executing his orders, and he enjoined them to withdraw.

Upon this several Councillors of State declared that, indignant as they
were, they could not place their signatures beside the Republican
signatures.

A means of obeying the porter.

M. Bethmont, one of the Presidents of the Council of State, offered the
use of his house. He lived in the Rue Saint-Romain. The Republican
members repaired there, and without discussion signed the protocol which
has been given above.

Some members who lived in the more distant quarters had not been able to
come to the meeting. The youngest Councillor of State, a man of firm
heart and of noble mind, M. Edouard Charton, undertook to take the
protest to his absent colleagues.

He did this, not without serious risk, on foot, not having been able to
obtain a carriage, and he was arrested by the soldiery and threatened
with being searched, which would have been highly dangerous. Nevertheless
he succeeded in reaching some of the Councillors of State. Many signed,
Pons de l'Hérault resolutely, Cormenin with a sort of fever, Boudet after
some hesitation. M. Boudet trembled, his family were alarmed, they heard
through the open window the discharge of artillery. Charton, brave and
calm, said to him, "Your friends, Vivien, Rivet, and Stourm have signed."
Boullet signed.

Many refused, one alleging his great age, another the _res angusta domi_,
a third "the fear of doing the work of the Reds." "Say 'fear,' in short,"
replied Charton.

On the following day, December 3d, MM. Vivien and Bethmont took the
protest to Boulay de la Meurthe, Vice-President of the Republic, and
President of the Council of State, who received them in his dressing-gown,
and exclaimed to them, "Be off! Ruin yourselves, if you like, but without
me."

On the morning of the 4th, M. de Cormenin erased his signature, giving
this unprecedented but authentic excuse: "The word _ex_-Councillor of
State does not look well in a book; I am afraid of injuring my
publisher."

Yet another characteristic detail. M. Béhic, on the morning of the 2d,
had arrived while they were drawing up the protest. He had half opened
the door. Near the door was standing M. Gautier de Rumilly, one of the
most justly respected members of the Council of State. M. Béhic had
asked M. Gautier de Rumilly, "What are they doing? It is a crime. What
are we doing?" M. Gautier de Rumilly had answered, "A protest." Upon,
this word M. Béhic had reclosed the door, and had disappeared. He
reappeared later on under the Empire--a Minister.




CHAPTER III.


INSIDE THE ELYSEE

During the morning Dr. Yvan met Dr. Conneau. They were acquainted. They
talked together. Yvan belonged to the Left. Conneau belonged to the
Elysée. Yvan knew through Conneau the details of what had taken place
during the night at the Elysée, which he transmitted to us.

One of these details was the following:--

An inexorable decree had been compiled, and was about to be placarded.
This decree enjoined upon all submission to the _coup d'état_.
Saint-Arnaud, who, as Minister of War, should sign the decree, had drawn
it up. He had reached the last paragraph, which ran thus: "Whoever shall
be detected constructing a barricade, posting a placard of the
ex-Representatives, or reading it, shall be...." here Saint-Arnaud had
paused; Morny had shrugged his shoulders, had snatched the pen from his
hand, and written "_shot_!"

Other matters had been decided, but these were not recorded.

Various pieces of information came in in addition to these.

A National Guard, named Boillay de Dole, had formed one of the Guard at
the Elysée, on the night of the 3d and 4th. The windows of Louis
Bonaparte's private room, which was on the ground floor, were lighted up
throughout the night. In the adjoining room there was a Council of War.
From the sentry-box where he was stationed Boillay saw defined on the
windows black profiles and gesticulating shadows, which were
Magnan, Saint-Arnaud, Persigny, Fleury,--the spectres of the crime.

Korte, the General of the Cuirassiers, had been summoned, as also
Carrelet, who commanded the division which did the hardest work on the
following day, the 4th. From midnight to three o'clock in the morning
Generals and Colonels "did nothing but come and go." Even mere captains
had come there. Towards four o'clock some carriages arrived "with
women." Treason and debauchery went hand in hand. The boudoir in the
palace answered to the brothel in the barracks.

The courtyard was filled with lancers, who held the horses of the
generals who were deliberating.

Two of the women who came that night belong in a certain measure to
History. There are always feminine shadows of this sort in the
background. These women influenced the unhappy generals. Both belonged
to the best circles. The one was the Marquise of ----, she who became
enamored of her husband after having deceived him. She discovered that
her lover was not worth her husband. Such a thing does happen. She was
the daughter of the most whimsical Marshal of France, and of that pretty
Countess of ---- to whom M. de Chateaubriand, after a night of love,
composed this quatrain, which may now be published--all the personages
being dead.

    The Dawn peeps in at the window, she paints the sky with red;
    And over our loving embraces her rosy rays are shed:
    She looks on the slumbering world, love, with eyes that seem divine.
    But can she show on her lips, love, a smile as sweet as thine?[13]

The smile of the daughter was as sweet as that of the mother, and more
fatal. The other was Madame K----, a Russian, fair, tall, blonde,
lighthearted, involved in the hidden paths of diplomacy, possessing and
displaying a casket full of love letters from Count Molé somewhat of a
spy, absolutely charming and terrifying.

The precautions which had been taken in case of accident were visible
even from outside. Since the preceding evening there had been seen from
the windows of the neighboring houses two post-chaises in the courtyard
of the Elysée, horsed, ready to start, the postilions in their saddles.

In the stables of the Elysée in the Rue Montaigne there were other
carriages horsed, and horses saddled and bridled.

Louis Bonaparte had not slept. During the night he had given mysterious
orders; thence when morning came there was on this pale face a sort of
appalling serenity.

The Crime grown calm was a disquieting symptom.

During the morning he had almost laughed. Morny had come into his private
room. Louis Bonaparte, having been feverish, had called in Conneau, who
joined in the conversation. People are believed to be trustworthy,
nevertheless they listen.

Morny brought the police reports. Twelve workmen of the National Printing
Office had, during the night of the Second, refused to print the decrees
and the proclamations. They had been immediately arrested. Colonel
Forestier was arrested. They had transferred him to the Fort of Bicêtre,
together with Crocé Spinelli, Genillier, Hippolyte Magen, a talented and
courageous writer, Goudounèche, a schoolmaster, and Polino. This last
name had struck Louis Bonaparte. "Who is this Polino?" Morny had
answered, "An ex-officer of the Shah of Persia's service." And he had
added, "A mixture of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza." These prisoners had
been placed in Number Six Casemate. Further questions on the part of
Louis Bonaparte, "What are these casemates?" And Morny had answered,
"Cellars without air or daylight, twenty-four mètres long, eight wide,
five high, dripping walls, damp pavements." Louis Bonaparte had asked,
"Do they give them a truss of straw?" And Morny had said, "Not yet, we
shall see by and by." He had added, "Those who are to be transported are
at Bicêtre, those who are to be shot are at Ivry."

Louis Bonaparte had inquired, "What precautions had been taken?" Morny
gave him full particulars; that guards had been placed in all the
steeples; that all printing-presses had been placed under seal; that
all the drums of the National Guard had been locked up; that there
was therefore no fear either of a proclamation emanating from a
printing-office, or of a call to arms issuing from a Mairie, or of
the tocsin ringing from a steeple.

Louis Bonaparte had asked whether all the batteries contained their full
complements, as each battery should be composed of four pieces and two
mortars. He had expressly ordered that only pieces of eight, and mortars
of sixteen centimètres in diameter should be employed.

"In truth," Morny, who was in the secret, had said, "all this apparatus
will have work to do."

Then Morny had spoken of Mazas, that there were 600 men of the
Republican Guards in the courtyard, all picked men, and who when
attacked would defend themselves to the bitter end; that the soldiers
received the arrested Representatives with shouts of laughter, and that
they had gone so far as to stare Thiers in the face; that the officers
kept the soldiers at a distance, but with discretion and with a "species
of respect;" that three prisoners were kept in solitary confinement,
Greppo, Nadaud, and a member of the Socialist Committee, Arsène Meunier.
This last named occupied No. 32 of the Sixth Division. Adjoining, in No.
30, there was a Representative of the Right, who sobbed and cried
unceasingly. This made Arsène Meunier laugh, and this made Louis
Bonaparte laugh.

Another detail. When the _fiacre_ bringing M. Baze was entering the
courtyard of Mazas, it had struck against the gate, and the lamp of the
_fiacre_ had fallen to the ground and been broken to pieces. The
coachman, dismayed at the damage, bewailed it. "Who will pay for this?"
exclaimed he. One of the police agents, who was in the carriage with the
arrested Questor, had said to the driver, "Don't be uneasy, speak to the
Brigadier. In matters such as this, _where there is a breakage_, it is
the Government which pays."

And Bonaparte had smiled, and muttered under his moustache, "That is
only fair."

Another anecdote from Morny also amused him. This was Cavaignac's anger
on entering his cell at Mazas. There is an aperture at the door of each
cell, called the "spy-hole," through which the prisoners are played the
spy upon unknown to themselves. The jailers had watched Cavaignac. He had
begun by pacing up and down with folded arms, and then the space being
too confined, he had seated himself on the stool in his cell. These
stools are narrow pieces of plank upon three converging legs, which
pierce the seat in the centre, and project beyond the plank, so that one
is uncomfortably seated. Cavaignac had stood up, and with a violent kick
had sent the stool to the other end of the cell. Then, furious and
swearing, he had broken with a blow of his fist the little table of five
inches by twelve, which, with the stool, formed the sole furniture of the
dungeon.

This kick and fisticuff amused Louis Bonaparte.

"And Maupas is as frightened as ever," said Morny. This made Bonaparte
laugh still further.

Morny having given in his report, went away. Louis Bonaparte entered an
adjoining room; a woman awaited him there. It appears that she came to
entreat mercy for some one. Dr. Conneau heard these expressive words:
"Madam, I wink at your loves; do you wink at my hatreds."


[13] The above is a free rendering of the original, which is as follows:--

    Des rayons du matin l'horizon se colore,
    Le jour vient éclairer notre tendre entretien,
    Mais est-il un sourire aux lèvres de l'aurore.
                       Aussi doux que le tien?




CHAPTER IV.


BONAPARTE'S FAMILIAR SPIRITS

M. Mérimée was vile by nature, he must not be blamed for it.

With regard to M. de Morny it is otherwise, he was more worthy; there was
something of the brigand in him.

M. de Morny was courageous. Brigandage has its sentiments of honor.

M. Mérimée has wrongly given himself out as one of the confederates of
the _coup d'état_. He had, however, nothing to boast of in this.

The truth is that M. Mérimée was in no way a confidant. Louis Bonaparte
made no useless confidences.

Let us add that it is little probable, notwithstanding some slight
evidence to the contrary, that M. Mérimée, at the date of the 2d
December, had any direct relations with Louis Bonaparte. This ensued
later on. At first Mérimée only knew Morny.

Morny and Mérimée were both intimate at the Elysée, but on a different
footing. Morny can be believed, but not Mérimée. Morny was in the great
secrets, Mérimée in the small ones. Commissions of gallantry formed his
vocation.

The familiars of the Elysée were of two kinds, the trustworthy
confederates and the courtiers.

The first of the trustworthy confederates was Morny; the first--or the
last--of the courtiers was Mérimée.

This is what made the fortune of M. Mérimée.

Crimes are only glorious during the first moment; they fade quickly. This
kind of success lacks permanency; it is necessary promptly to supplement
it with something else.

At the Elysée a literary ornament was wanted. A little savor of the
Academy is not out of place in a brigand's cavern. M. Mérimée was
available. It was his destiny to sign himself "the Empress's Jester."
Madame de Montijo presented him to Louis Bonaparte, who accepted him,
and who completed his Court with this insipid but plausible writer.

This Court was a heterogeneous collection; a dinner-wagon of basenesses,
a menagerie of reptiles, a herbal of poisons.

Besides the trustworthy confederates who were for use, and the courtiers
who were for ornament, there were the auxiliaries.

Certain circumstances called for reinforcements; sometimes these were
women, _the Flying Squadron_.

Sometimes men: Saint-Arnaud, Espinasse, Saint-George, Maupas.

Sometimes neither men nor women: the Marquis de C.

The whole troop was noteworthy.

Let us say a few words of it.

There was Vieillard the preceptor, an atheist with a tinge of
Catholicism, a good billiard player.

Vieillard was an anecdotist. He recounted smilingly the following:--
Towards the close of 1807 Queen Hortense, who of her own accord lived
in Paris, wrote to the King Louis that she could not exist any longer
without seeing him, that she could not do without him, and that she was
about to come to the Hague. The King said, "She is with child." He sent
for his minister Van Maanen, showed him the Queen's letter, and added,
"She is coming. Very good. Our two chambers communicate by a door; the
Queen will find it walled up." Louis took his royal mantle in earnest,
for he exclaimed, "A King's mantle shall never serve as coverlet to a
harlot." The minister Van Maanen, terrified, sent word of this to the
Emperor. The Emperor fell into a rage, not against Hortense, but against
Louis. Nevertheless Louis held firm; the door was not walled up, but his
Majesty was; and when the Queen came he turned his back upon her. This
did not prevent Napoleon III. from being born.

A suitable number of salvoes of cannon saluted this birth.

Such was the story which, in the summer of 1840, in the house called La
Terrasse, before witnesses, among whom was Ferdinand B----, Marquis de la
L----, a companion during boyhood of the author of this book, was told by
M. Vieillard, an ironical Bonapartist, an arrant sceptic.

Besides Vieillard there was Vaudrey, whom Louis Bonaparte made a General
at the same time as Espinasse. In case of need a Colonel of Conspiracies
can become a General of Ambuscades.

There was Fialin,[14] the corporal who became a Duke.

There was Fleury, who was destined to the glory of travelling by the side
of the Czar on his buttocks.

There was Lacrosse, a Liberal turned Clerical, one of those Conservatives
who push order as far as the embalming, and preservation as far as the
mummy: later on a senator.

There was Larabit, a friend of Lacrosse, as much a domestic and not less
a senator.

There was Canon Coquereau, the "Abbé of La Belle-Poule." The answer is
known which he made to a princess who asked him, "What is the Elysée?" It
appears that one can say to a princess what one cannot say to a woman.

There was Hippolyte Fortoul, of the climbing genus, of the worth of a
Gustave Planche or of some Philarête Chasles, an ill-tempered writer who
had become Minister of the Marine, which caused Béranger to say, "This
Fortoul knows all the spars, including the 'greased pole.'"

There were some Auvergants there. Two. They hated each other. One had
nicknamed the other "the melancholy tinker."

There was Sainte-Beuve, a distinguished but inferior man, having a
pardonable fondness for ugliness. A great critic like Cousin is a great
philosopher.

There was Troplong, who had had Dupin for Procurator, and whom Dupin had
had for President. Dupin, Troplong; the two side faces of the mask placed
upon the brow of the law.

There was Abbatucci; a conscience which let everything pass by. To-day a
street.

There was the Abbé M----, later on Bishop of Nancy, who emphasized with a
smile the oaths of Louis Bonaparte.

There were the frequenters of a famous box at the Opera, Montg---- and
Sept----, placing at the service of an unscrupulous prince the deep side
of frivolous men.

There was Romieu--the outline of a drunkard behind a Red spectre.

There was Malitourne--not a bad friend, coarse and sincere.

There was Cuch----, whose name caused hesitation amongst the ushers at
the saloon doors.

There was Suin--a man able to furnish excellent counsel for bail actions.

There was Dr. Veron--who had on his cheek what the other men of the
Elysée had in their hearts.

There was Mocquart--once a handsome member of the Dutch Court. Mocquart
possessed romantic recollections. He might by age, and perhaps otherwise,
have been the father of Louis Bonaparte. He was a lawyer. He had shown
himself quick-witted about 1829, at the same time as Romieu. Later on he
had published something, I no longer remember what, which was pompous and
in quarto size, and which he sent to me. It was he who in May, 1847, had
come with Prince de la Moskowa to bring me King Jérome's petition to the
Chamber of Peers. This petition requested the readmittance of the
banished Bonaparte family into France. I supported it; a good action, and
a fault which I would again commit.

There was Billault, a semblance of an orator, rambling with facility, and
making mistakes with authority, a reputed statesman. What constitutes the
statesman is a certain superior mediocrity.

There was Lavalette, completing Morny and Walewski.

There was Bacciochi.

And yet others.

It was at the inspiration of these intimate associates that during his
Presidency Louis Bonaparte, a species of Dutch Machiavelli, went hither
and thither, to the Chamber and elsewhere, to Tours, to Ham, to Dijon,
snuffling, with a sleepy air, speeches full of treason.

The Elysée, wretched as it was, holds a place in the age. The Elysée, has
engendered catastrophes and ridicule.

One cannot pass it over in silence.

The Elysée was the disquieting and dark corner of Paris. In this bad
spot, the denizens were little and formidable. They formed a family
circle--of dwarfs. They had their maxim: to enjoy themselves. They lived
on public death. There they inhaled shame, and they throve on that which
kills others. It was there that was reared up with art, purpose,
industry, and goodwill, the decadence of France. There worked the bought,
fed, and obliging public men;--read prostituted. Even literature was
compounded there as we have shown; Vieillard was a classic of 1830, Morny
created Choufleury, Louis Bonaparte was a candidate for the Academy.
Strange place. Rambouillet's hotel mingled itself with the house of
Bancal. The Elysée has been the laboratory, the counting-house, the
confessional, the alcove, the den of the reign. The Elysée assumed to
govern everything, even the morals--above all the morals. It spread the
paint on the bosom of women at the same time as the color on the faces of
the men. It set the fashion for toilette and for music. It invented the
crinoline and the operetta. At the Elysée a certain ugliness was
considered as elegance; that which makes the countenance noble was there
scoffed at, as was that which makes the soul great; the phrase, "human
face divine" was ridiculed at the Elysée, and it was there that for
twenty years every baseness was brought into fashion--effrontery
included.

History, whatever may be its pride, is condemned to know that the Elysée
existed. The grotesque side does not prevent the tragic side. There is at
the Elysée a room which has seen the second abdication, the abdication
after Waterloo. It is at the Elysée that Napoleon the First ended and
that Napoleon the Third began. It is at the Elysée that Dupin appeared to
the two Napoleons; in 1815 to depose the Great, in 1851 to worship the
Little. At this last epoch this place was perfectly villainous. There no
longer remained one virtue there. At the Court of Tiberius there was
still Thraseas, but round Louis Bonaparte there was nobody. If one sought
Conscience, one found Baroche; if one sought Religion, one found
Montalembert.


[14] Better known afterwards as Persigny.




CHAPTER V.


A WAVERING ALLY

During this terribly historical morning of the 4th of December, a day the
master was closely observed by his satellites, Louis Bonaparte had shut
himself up, but in doing so he betrayed himself. A man who shuts himself
up meditates, and for such men to meditate is to premeditate. What could
be the premeditation of Louis Bonaparte? What was working in his mind.
Questions which all asked themselves, two persons excepted,--Morny, the
man of thought; Saint-Arnaud, the man of action.

Louis Bonaparte claimed, justly, a knowledge of men. He prided himself
upon it, and from a certain point of view he was right. Others have the
power of divination; he had the faculty of scent. It is brute-like, but
trustworthy.

He had assuredly not been mistaken in Maupas. To pick the lock of the Law
he needed a skeleton key. He took Maupas. Nor could any burglar's
implement have answered better in the lock of the Constitution than
Maupas. Neither was he mistaken in Q.B. He saw at once that this serious
man had in him the necessary composite qualities of a rascal. And in
fact, Q.B., after having voted and signed the Deposition at the Mairie of
the Tenth Arrondissement, became one of the three reporters of the Joint
Commissions; and his share in the abominable total recorded by history
amounts to _sixteen hundred and thirty four victims_.

Louis Bonaparte, however, at times judged amiss, especially respecting
Peauger. Peauger, though chosen by him, remained an honest man. Louis
Bonaparte, mistrusting the workmen of the National Printing-Office, and
not without reason, for twelve, as has been seen, were refractory, had
improvised a branch establishment in case of emergency, a sort of State
Sub-Printing-Office, as it were, situated in the Rue de Luxembourg, with
steam and hand presses, and eight workmen. He had given the management of
it to Peauger. When the hour of the Crime arrived, and with it the
necessity of printing the nefarious placards, he sounded Peauger, and
found him rebellious. He then turned to Saint Georges, a more subservient
lackey.

He was less mistaken, but still he was mistaken, in his appreciation of
X.

On the 2d of December, X., an ally thought necessary by Morny, became a
source of anxiety to Louis Bonaparte.

X. was forty-four years of age, loved women, craved promotion, and,
therefore, was not over-scrupulous. He began his career in Africa under
Colonel Combes in the forty-seventh of the line. He showed great bravery
at Constantine; at Zaatcha he extricated Herbillon, and the siege, badly
begun by Herbillon, had been brought to a successful termination by him.
X., who was a little short man, his head sunk in his shoulders, was
intrepid, and admirably understood the handling of a brigade. Bugeaud,
Lamoricière, Cavaignac, and Changarnier were his four stepping-stones to
advancement. At Paris, in 1851, he met Lamoricière, who received him
coldly, and Changarnier, who treated him better. He left Satory
indignant, exclaiming, "_We must finish with this Louis Bonaparte. He is
corrupting the army. These drunken soldiers make one sick at heart. I
shall return to Africa_." In October Changarnier's influence decreased,
and X.'s enthusiasm abated. X. then frequented the Elysée, but without
giving his adherence. He promised his support to General Bedeau, who
counted upon him. At daybreak on the 2d of December some one came to
waken X. It was Edgar Ney. X. was a prop for the _coup d'état_, but would
he consent? Edgar Ney explained the affair to him, and left him only
after seeing him leave the barracks of the Rue Verte at the head of the
first regiment. X. took up his position at the Place de la Madeleine. As
he arrived there La Rochejaquelein, thrust back from the Chamber by its
invaders, crossed the Place. La Rochejaquelein, not yet a Bonapartist,
was furious. He perceived X., his old schoolfellow at the Ecole Militaire
in 1830, with whom he was on intimate terms. He went up to him,
exclaiming, "This is an infamous act. What are you doing?" "_I am
waiting_," answered X. La Rochejaquelein left him; X. dismounted, and
went to see a relation, a Councillor of State, M.R., who lived in the Rue
de Suresne. He asked his advice. M.R., an honest man, did not hesitate.
He answered, "I am going to the Council of State to do my duty. It is a
Crime." X. shook his head, and said, "_We must wait and see_."

This _I am waiting_, and _We must see_, preoccupied Louis Bonaparte.
Morny said, "_Let us make use of the flying squadron_."




CHAPTER VI.


DENIS DUSSOUBS

Gaston Dussoubs was one of the bravest members of the Left. He was a
Representative of the Haute-Vienne. At the time of his first appearance
in the Assembly he wore, as formerly did Théophile Gautier, a red
waistcoat, and the shudder which Gautier's waistcoat caused among the men
of letters in 1830, Gaston Dussoubs' waistcoat caused among the Royalists
of 1851. M. Parisis, Bishop of Langres, who would have had no objection
to a red hat, was terrified by Gaston Dussoubs' red waistcoat. Another
source of horror to the Right was that Dussoubs had, it was said, passed
three years at Belle Isle as a political prisoner, a penalty incurred by
the "Limoges Affair." Universal Suffrage had, it would seem, taken him
thence to place him in the Assembly. To go from the prison to the Senate
is certainly not very surprising in our changeful times, although it is
sometimes followed by a return from the Senate to the prison. But the
Right was mistaken, the culprit of Limoges was, not Gaston Dussoubs, but
his brother Denis.

In fine, Gaston Dussoubs inspired fear. He was witty, courageous, and
gentle.

In the summer of 1851 I went to dine every day at the Concièrgerie with
my two sons and my two imprisoned friends. These great hearts and great
minds, Vacquerie, Meurice, Charles, and François Victor, attracted men of
like quality. The livid half-light that crept in through latticed and
barred windows disclosed a family circle at which there often assembled
eloquent orators, among others Crémieux, and powerful and charming
writers, including Peyrat.

One day Michel de Bourges brought to us Gaston Dussoubs.

Gaston Dussoubs lived in the Faubourg St. Germain, near the Assembly.

On the 2d of December we did not see him at our meetings. He was ill,
"nailed down" as he wrote me, by rheumatism of the joints, and compelled
to keep his bed.

He had a brother younger than himself, whom we have just mentioned, Denis
Dussoubs. On the morning of the 4th his brother went to see him.

Gaston Dussoubs knew of the _coup d'état_, and was exasperated at being
obliged to remain in bed. He exclaimed, "I am dishonored. There will be
barricades, and my sash will not be there!"

"Yes," said his brother. "It will be there!"

"How?"

"Lend it to me."

"Take it."

Denis took Gaston's sash, and went away.

We shall see Denis Dussoubs later on.




CHAPTER VII.


ITEMS AND INTERVIEWS

Lamoricière on the same morning found means to convey to me by Madame de
Courbonne[15] the following information.

"---- Fortress of Ham.--The Commandant's name is Baudot. His appointment,
made by Cavaignac in 1848, was countersigned by Charras. Both are to-day
his prisoners. The Commissary of Police, sent by Morny to the village of
Ham to watch the movements of the jailer and the prisoners, is Dufaure de
Pouillac."[16]

I thought when I received this communication that the Commandant Baudot,
"the jailer," had connived at its rapid transmission.

A sign of the instability of the central power.

Lamoricière, by the same means, put me in possession of some details
concerning his arrest and that of his fellow-generals.

These details complete those which I have already given.

The arrests of the Generals were affected at the same time at their
respective homes under nearly similar circumstances. Everywhere houses
surrounded, doors opened by artifice or burst open by force, porters
deceived, sometimes garotted, men in disguise, men provided with ropes,
men armed with axes, surprises in bed, nocturnal violence. A plan of
action which resembled, as I have said, an invasion of brigands.

General Lamoricière, according to his own expression, was a sound
sleeper. Notwithstanding the noise at his door, he did not awake. His
servant, a devoted old soldier, spoke in a loud voice, and called out to
arouse the General. He even offered resistance to the police. A police
agent wounded him in the knee with a sword thrust.[17] The General was
awakened, seized, and carried away.

While passing in a carriage along the Quai Malaquais, Lamoricière noticed
troops marching by with their knapsacks on their backs. He leaned quickly
forward out of the window. The Commissary of Police thought he was about
to address the soldiers. He seized the General by the arm, and said to
him, "General, if you say a word I shall put this on you." And with the
other hand he showed him in the dim light something which proved to be a
gag.

All the Generals arrested were taken to Mazas. There they were locked up
and forgotten. At eight in the evening General Changarnier had eaten
nothing.

These arrests were not pleasant tasks for the Commissaries of Police.
They were made to drink down their shame in large draughts. Cavaignac,
Leflô, Changarnier, Bedeau, and Lamoricière did not spare them any more
than Charras did. As he was leaving, General Cavaignac took some money
with him. Before putting it in his pocket, he turned towards Colin, the
Commissary of Police who had arrested him, and said, "Will this money be
safe on me?"

The Commissary exclaimed, "Oh, General, what are you thinking of?"

"What assurance have I that you are not thieves?" answered Cavaignac. At
the same time, nearly the same moment, Charras said to Courteille, the
Commissary of Police, "Who can tell me that you are not pick-pockets?"

A few days afterwards these pitiful wretches all received the Cross of
the Legion of Honor.

This cross given by the last Bonaparte to policemen after the 2d of
December is the same as that affixed by the first Napoleon to the eagles
of the Grand Army after Austerlitz.

I communicated these details to the Committee. Other reports came in. A
few concerned the Press. Since the morning of the 4th the Press was
treated with soldierlike brutality. Serrière, the courageous printer,
came to tell us what had happened at the _Presse_. Serrière published
the _Presse_ and the _Avénement du Peuple_, the latter a new name for
the _Evénement_, which had been judicially suppressed. On the 2d, at
seven o'clock in the morning, the printing-office had been occupied by
twenty-eight soldiers of the Republican Guard, commanded by a
Lieutenant named Pape (since decorated for this achievement). This man
had given Serrière an order prohibiting the printing of any article
signed "Nusse." A Commissary of Police accompanied Lieutenant Pape.
This Commissary had notified Serrière of a "decree of the President of
the Republic," suppressing the _Avénement du Peuple_, and had placed
sentinels over the presses. The workmen had resisted, and one of them
said to the soldiers, "_We shall print it in spite of you_." Then forty
additional Municipal Guards arrived, with two quarter-masters, four
corporals, and a detachment of the line, with drums at their head,
commanded by a captain. Girardin came up indignant, and protested with
so much energy that a quarter-master said to him, "_I should like a
Colonel of your stamp_." Girardin's courage communicated itself to the
workmen, and by dint of skill and daring, under the very eyes of the
gendarmes, they succeeded in printing Girardin's proclamations with the
hand-press, and ours with the brush. They carried them away wet, in
small packages, under their waistcoats.

Luckily the soldiers were drunk. The gendarmes made them drink, and
the workmen, profiting by their revels, printed. The Municipal Guards
laughed, swore and jested, drank champagne and coffee, and said, "_We
fill the places of the Representatives, we have twenty-five francs a
day_." All the printing-houses in Paris were occupied in the same manner
by the soldiery. The _coup d'état_ reigned everywhere. The Crime even
ill-treated the Press which supported it. At the office of the _Moniteur
Parisien_, the police agents threatened to fire on any one who should
open a door. M. Delamare, director of the _Patrie_, had forty Municipal
Guards on his hands, and trembled lest they should break his presses. He
said to one of them, "_Why, I am on your side_." The gendarme replied,
"_What is that to me?_"

At three o'clock on the morning of the 4th all the printing-offices were
evacuated by the soldiers. The Captain said to Serrière, "We have orders
to concentrate in our own quarters." And Serrière, in announcing this
fact, added, "Something is in preparation."

I had had since the previous night several conversations with Georges
Biscarrat, an honest and brave man, of whom I shall have occasion to
speak hereafter. I had given him rendezvous at No. 19, Rue Richelieu.
Many persons came and went during this morning of the 4th from No. 15,
where we deliberated, to No. 19, where I slept.

As I left this honest and courageous man in the street I saw M. Mérimée,
his exact opposite, coming towards me.

"Oh!" said M. Mérimée, "I was looking for you."

I answered him,--

"I hope you will not find me."

He held out his hand to me, and I turned my back on him.

I have not seen him since. I believe he is dead.

In speaking one day in 1847 with Mérimée about Morny, we had the
following conversation:--Mérimée said, "M. de Morny has a great future
before him." And he asked me, "Do you know him?"

I answered,--

"Ah! he has a fine future before him! Yes, I know M. de Morny. He is a
clever man. He goes a great deal into society, and conducts commercial
operations. He started the Vieille Montagne affair, the zinc-mines, and
the coal-mines of Liège. I have the honor of his acquaintance. He is a
sharper."

There was this difference between Mérimée and myself: I despised Morny,
and he esteemed him.

Morny reciprocated his feeling. It was natural.

I waited until Mérimée had passed the corner of the street. As soon as
he disappeared I went into No. 15.

There, they had received news of Canrobert. On the 2d he went to see
Madame Leflô, that noble woman, who was most indignant at what had
happened. There was to be a ball next day given by Saint-Arnaud at the
Ministry of War. General and Madame Leflô were invited, and had made an
appointment there with General Canrobert. But the ball did not form a
part of Madame Leflô's conversation with him. "General," said she, "all
your comrades are arrested; is it possible that you give your support
to such an act?" "What I intend giving," replied Canrobert, "is my
resignation and," he added, "you may tell General Leflô so." He was pale,
and walked up and down, apparently much agitated. "Your resignation,
General?" "Yes, Madame." "Is it positive?" "Yes, Madame, if there is no
riot." "General Canrobert," exclaimed Madame Leflô, "that _if_ tells me
your intentions."

Canrobert, however, had not yet taken his decision. Indeed, indecision
was one of his chief characteristics. Pelissier, who was cross-grained
and gruff, used to say, "Judge men by their names, indeed! I am
christened _Amable_, Randon _César_, and Canrobert _Certain_."


[15] No. 16, Rue d'Anjou, Saint Honoré.

[16] The author still has in his possession the note written by
Lamoricière.

[17] Later on, the wound having got worse, he was obliged to have his
leg taken off.




CHAPTER VIII.


THE SITUATION

Although the fighting tactics of the Committee were, for the reasons
which I have already given, not to concentrate all their means of
resistance into one hour, or in one particular place, but to spread
them over as many points and as many days as possible, each of us knew
instinctively, as also the criminals of the Elysée on their side, that
the day would be decisive.

The moment drew near when the _coup d'état_ would storm us from every
side, and when we should have to sustain the onslaught of an entire
army. Would the people, that great revolutionary populace of the
faubourgs of Paris, abandon their Representatives? Would they abandon
themselves? Or, awakened and enlightened, would they at length arise? A
question more and more vital, and which we repeated to ourselves with
anxiety.

The National Guard had shown no sign of earnestness. The eloquent
proclamation, written at Marie's by Jules Favre and Alexander Rey, and
addressed in our name to the National Legions, had not been printed.
Hetzel's scheme had failed. Versigny and Lebrousse had not been able to
rejoin him; the place appointed for their meeting, the corner of the
boulevard and the Rue de Richelieu, having been continually scoured by
charges of cavalry. The courageous effort of Colonel Grassier to win
over the Sixth Legion, the more timid attempt of Lieutenant Colonel
Howyne upon the Fifth, had failed. Nevertheless indignation began to
manifest itself in Paris. The preceding evening had been significant.

Hingray came to us during the morning, bringing under his cloak a
bundle of copies of the Decree of Deposition, which had been reprinted.
In order to bring them to us he had twice run the risk of being
arrested and shot. We immediately caused these copies to be distributed
and placarded. This placarding was resolutely carried out; at several
points our placards were posted by the side of the placards of the
_coup d'état_, which pronounced the penalty of death against any one
who should placard the decrees emanating from the Representatives.
Hingray told us that our proclamations and our decrees had been
lithographed and distributed by hand in thousands. It Was urgently
necessary that we should continue our publications. A printer, who had
formerly been a publisher of several democratic journals, M. Boulé, had
offered me his services on the preceding evening. In June, 1848, I had
protected his printing-office, then being devastated by the National
Guards. I wrote to him: I enclosed our judgments and our decrees in the
letter, and the Representative Montaigu undertook to take them to him.
M. Boulé excused himself; his printing-presses had been seized by the
police at midnight.

Through the precautions which we had taken, and thanks to the patriotic
assistance of several young medical and chemical students, powder had
been manufactured in several quarters. At one point alone, the Rue
Jacob, a hundred kilogrammes had been turned out during the night. As,
however, this manufacture was principally carried out on the left bank
of the river, and as the fighting took place on the right bank, it was
necessary to transport this powder across the bridges. They managed
this In the best manner they could. Towards nine o'clock we were warned
that the police, having been informed of this, had organized a system
of inspection, and that all persons crossing the river were searched,
particularly on the Pont Neuf.

A certain strategical plan became manifest. The ten central bridges
mere militarily guarded.

People were arrested in the street on account of their personal
appearance. A sergent-de-ville, at the corner of he Pont-au-Change,
exclaimed, loud enough for the passers-by to hear, "We shall lay hold
of all those who have not their beards properly trimmed, or who do not
appear to have slept."

Notwithstanding all this we had a little powder; the disarming of the
National Guard at various points had produced about eight hundred
muskets, our proclamations and our decrees were being placarded, our
voice was reaching the people, a certain confidence was springing up.

"The wave is rising! the wave is rising!" exclaimed Edgar Quinet, who
had come to shake my hand.

We were informed that the schools were rising in insurrection during
the day, and that they offered us a refuge in the midst of them.

Jules Favre exclaimed joyfully,--

"To-morrow we shall date our decrees from the Pantheon."

Signs of good omen grew more numerous. An old hotbed of insurrection,
the Rue Saint-André-des-Arts, was becoming agitated. The association
called La Presse du Travail gave signs of life. Some brave workmen, at
the house of one of their colleagues, Nétré No. 13, Rue du Jardinet,
had organized a little printing-press in a garret, a few steps from the
barracks of the Gendarmerie Mobile. They had spent the night first in
compiling, and then in printing "A Manifesto to Working Men," which
called the people to arms. They were five skilful and determined men;
they had procured paper, they had perfectly new type; some of them
moistened the paper, while the others composed; towards two o'clock in
the morning they began to print. It was essential that they should not
be heard by the neighbors; they had succeeded in muffling the hollow
blows of the ink-rollers, alternating with the rapid sound of the
printing blankets. In a few hours fifteen hundred copies were pulled,
and at daybreak they were placarded at the corners of the streets. The
leader of these intrepid workmen, A. Desmoulins, who belonged to that
sturdy race of men who are both cultured and who can fight, had been
greatly disheartened on the preceding day; he now had become hopeful.

On the preceding day he wrote:--"Where are the Representatives? The
communications are cut. The quays and the boulevards can no longer be
crossed. It has become impossible to reunite the popular Assembly. The
people need direction. De Flotte in one district, Victor Hugo in
another, Schoelcher in a third, are actively urging on the combat, and
expose their lives a score of times, but none feel themselves supported
by any organized body: and moreover the attempt of the Royalists in the
Tenth Arrondissement has roused apprehension. People dread lest they
should see them reappear when all is accomplished."

Now, this man so intelligent and so courageous recovered confidence,
and he wrote,--

"Decidedly, Louis Napoleon is afraid. The police reports are alarming
for him. The resistance of the Republican Representatives is bearing
fruit. Paris is arming. Certain regiments appear ready to turn back.
The Gendarmerie itself is not to be depended upon, and this morning an
entire regiment refused to march. Disorder is beginning to show itself
in the services. Two batteries fired upon each other for a long time
without recognition. One would say that the _coup d'état_ is about to
fail."

The symptoms, as may be seen, were growing more reassuring.

Had Maupas become unequal to the task? Had they resorted to a more
skilful man? An incident seemed to point to this. On the preceding
evening a tall man had been seen, between five and seven o'clock,
walking up and down before the café of the Place Saint-Michel; he had
been joined by two of the Commissaries of the Police who had effected
the arrests of the 2d of December, and had talked to them for a long
time. This man was Carlier. Was he about to supplant Maupas?

The Representative Labrousse, seated at a table of the café, had
witnessed this conspirators' parley.

Each of the two Commissaries was followed by that species of police
agent which is called "the Commissary's dog."

At the same time strange warnings reached the Committee; the following
letter[18] was brought to our knowledge.

  "3d December.

  "MY DEAR BOCAGE,

  "To-day at six o'clock, 25,000 francs has been offered to any one who
  arrests or kills Hugo.

  "You know where he is. He must not go out under any pretext whatever.

  "Yours ever,

  "AL. DUMAS."

At the back was written, "Bocage, 18, Rue Cassette." It was necessary
that the minutest details should be considered. In the different places
of combat a diversity of passwords prevailed, which might cause danger.
For the password on the day before we had given the name of "Baudin." In
imitation of this the names of other Representatives had been adopted as
passwords on barricades. In the Rue Rambuteau the password was "Eugène
Sue and Michel de Bourges;" in the Rue Beaubourg, "Victor Hugo;" at the
Saint Denis chapel, "Esquiros and De Flotte." We thought it necessary to
put a stop to this confusion, and to suppress the proper names, which
are always easy to guess. The password settled upon was, "What is Joseph
doing?"

At every moment items of news and information came to us from all
sides, that barricades were everywhere being raised, and that firing
was beginning in the central streets. Michel de Bourges exclaimed,
"Construct a square of four barricades, and we will go and deliberate
in the centre."

We received news from Mont Valérien. Two prisoners the more. Rigal and
Belle had just been committed. Both of the Left. Dr. Rigal was the
Representative of Gaillac, and Belle of Lavaur. Rigal was ill; they had
arrested him in bed. In prison he lay upon a pallet, and could not
dress himself. His colleague Belle acted as his _valet de chambre_.

Towards nine o'clock an ex-Captain of the 8th Legion of the National
Guard of 1848, named Jourdan, came to place himself at our service. He
was a bold man, one of those who had carried out, on the morning of the
24th February, the rash surprise of the Hôtel de Ville. We charged him
to repeat this surprise, and to extend it to the Prefecture of Police.
He knew how to set about the work. He told us that he had only a few
men, but that during the day he would cause certain houses of strategical
importance on the Quai des Cèvres, on the Quai Lepelletier, and in the
Rue de la Cité, to be silently occupied, and that if it should chance
that the leaders of the _coup d'état_, owing to the combat in the centre
of Paris growing more serious, should be forced to withdraw the troops
from the Hôtel de Ville and the Prefecture, an attack would be immediately
commenced on these two points. Captain Jourdan, we may at once mention,
did what he had promised us; unfortunately, as we learnt that evening,
he began perhaps a little too soon. As he had foreseen, a moment arrived
when the square of the Hôtel de Ville was almost devoid of troops, General
Herbillon having been forced to leave it with his cavalry to take the
barricades of the centre in the rear. The attack of the Republicans burst
forth instantly. Musket shots were fired from the windows on the Quai
Lepelletier; but the left of the column was still on the Pont d'Arcole,
a line of riflemen had been placed by a major named Larochette before
the Hôtel de Ville, the 44th retraced its steps, and the attempt
failed.

Bastide arrived, with Chauffour and Laissac.

"Good news," said he to us, "all is going on well." His grave, honest,
and dispassionate countenance shone with a sort of patriotic serenity.
He came from the barricades, and was about to return thither. He had
received two balls in his cloak. I took him aside, and said to him,
"Are you going back?" "Yes." "Take me with you." "No," answered he,
"you are necessary here. To-day you are the general, I am the soldier."
I insisted in vain. He persisted in refusing, repeating continually.
"The Committee is our centre, it should not disperse itself. It is your
duty to remain here. Besides," added he, "Make your mind easy. You run
here more risk than we do. If you are taken you will be shot." "Well,
then," said I, "the moment may come when our duty will be to join in
the combat." "Without doubt." I resumed, "You who are on the barricades
will be better judges than we shall of that moment. Give me your word
of honor that you will treat me as you would wish me to treat you, and
that you will come and fetch us." "I give it you," he answered, and he
pressed my two hands in his own.

Later on, however, a few moments after Bastide had left, great as was
my confidence in the loyal word of this courageous and generous man, I
could no longer restrain myself, and I profited by an interval of two
hours of which I could dispose, to go and see with my own eyes what was
taking place, and in what manner the resistance was behaving.

I took a carriage in the square of the Palais Royal. I explained to the
driver who I was, and that I was about to visit and encourage the
barricades; that I should go sometimes on foot, sometimes in the
carriage, and that I trusted myself to him. I told him my name.

The first comer is almost always an honest man. This true-hearted
coachman answered me, "I know where the barricades are. I will drive
you wherever it is necessary. I will wait for you wherever it is
necessary. I will drive you there and bring you back; and if you have
no money, do not pay me, I am proud of such an action."

And we started.


[18] The original of this note is in the hands of the author of this
book. It was handed to us by M. Avenel on the part of M. Bocage.




CHAPTER IX.


THE PORTE SAINT MARTIN

Important deeds had been already achieved during the morning.

"It is taking root," Bastide had said.

The difficulty is not to spread the flames but to light the fire.

It was evident that Paris began to grow ill-tempered. Paris does not
get angry at will. She must be in the humor for it. A volcano possesses
nerves. The anger was coming slowly, but it was coming. On the horizon
might be seen the first glimmering of the eruption.

For the Elysée, as for us, the critical moment was drawing nigh. From
the preceding evening they were nursing their resources. The _coup
d'état_ and the Republic were at length about to close with each other.
The Committee had in vain attempted to drag the wheel; some
irresistible impulse carried away the last defenders of liberty and
hurried them on to action. The decisive battle was about to be fought.

In Paris, when certain hours have sounded, when there appears an
immediate necessity for a progressive movement to be carried out, or a
right to be vindicated, the insurrections rapidly spread throughout the
whole city. But they always begin at some particular point. Paris, in
its vast historical task, comprises two revolutionary classes, the
"middle-class" and the "people." And to these two combatants correspond
two places of combat; the Porte Saint Martin when the middle-class are
revolting, the Bastille when the people are revolting. The eye of the
politician should always be fixed on these two points. There, famous in
contemporary history, are two spots where a small portion of the hot
cinders of Revolution seem ever to smoulder.

When a wind blows from above, these burning cinders are dispersed, and
fill the city with sparks.

This time, as we have already explained, the formidable Faubourg
Antoine slumbered, and, as has been seen, nothing had been able to
awaken it. An entire park of artillery was encamped with lighted
matches around the July Column, that enormous deaf-and-dumb memento of
the Bastille. This lofty revolutionary pillar, this silent witness of
the great deeds of the past, seemed to have forgotten all. Sad to say,
the paving stones which had seen the 14th of July did not rise under
the cannon-wheels of the 2d of December. It was therefore not the
Bastille which began, it was the Porte Saint Martin.

From eight o'clock in the morning the Rue Saint Denis and the Rue Saint
Martin were in an uproar throughout their length; throngs of indignant
passers-by went up and down those thoroughfares. They tore down the
placards of the _coup d'état_; they posted up our Proclamations; groups
at the corners of all the adjacent streets commented upon the decree of
outlawry drawn up by the members of the Left remaining at liberty; they
snatched the copies from each other. Men mounted on the kerbstones read
aloud the names of the 120 signatories, and, still more than on the day
before, each significant or celebrated name was hailed with applause.
The crowd increased every moment--and the anger. The entire Rue Saint
Denis presented the strange aspect of a street with all the doors and
windows closed, and all the inhabitants in the open air. Look at the
houses, there is death; look at the street, it is the tempest.

Some fifty determined men suddenly emerged from a side alley, and
began to run through the streets, saying, "To arms! Long live the
Representatives of the Left! Long live the Constitution!" The disarming
of the National Guards began. It was carried out more easily than on
the preceding evening. In less than an hour more than 150 muskets had
been obtained.

In the meanwhile the street became covered with barricades.




CHAPTER X.


MY VISIT TO THE BARRICADE

My coachman deposited me at the corner of Saint Eustache, and said to
me, "Here you are in the hornets' nest."

He added, "I will wait for you in the Rue de la Vrillière, near the
Place des Victoires. Take your time."

I began walking from barricade to barricade.

In the first I met De Flotte, who offered to serve me as a guide. There
is not a more determined man than De Flotte. I accepted his offer; he
took me everywhere where my presence could be of use.

On the way he gave me an account of the steps taken by him to print our
proclamations; Boulé's printing-office having failed him, he had applied
to a lithographic press, at No. 30, Rue Bergère, and at the peril of
their lives two brave men had printed 500 copies of our decrees. These
two true-hearted workmen were named, the one Rubens, the other Achille
Poincellot.

While walking I made jottings in pencil (with Baudin's pencil, which I
had with me); I registered facts at random; I reproduce this page here.
These living facts are useful for History; the _coup d'état_ is there,
as though freshly bleeding.

"Morning of the 4th. It looks as if the combat was suspended. Will it
burst forth again? Barricades visited by me: one at the corner of
Saint Eustache. One at the Oyster Market. One in the Rue Mauconseil.
One in the Rue Tiquetonne. One in the Rue Mandar (Rocher de Cancale).
One barring the Rue du Cadran and the Rue Montorgueil. Four closing
the Petit-Carreau. The beginning of one between the Rue des Deux
Portes and the Rue Saint Sauveur, barring the Rue Saint Denis. One,
the largest, barring the Rue Saint Denis, at the top of the Rue
Guérin-Boisseau. One barring the Rue Grenetat. One farther on in the
Rue Grenetat, barring the Rue Bourg-Labbé (in the centre an overturned
flour wagon; a good barricade). In the Rue Saint Denis one barring the
Rue de Petit-Lion-Saint-Sauveur. One barring the Rue du Grand
Hurleur, with its four corners barricaded. This barricade has already
been attacked this morning. A combatant, Massonnet, a comb-maker of
154, Rue Saint Denis, received a ball in his overcoat; Dupapet, called
'the man with the long beard,' was the last to stay on the summit of
the barricade. He was heard to cry out to the officers commanding the
attack, 'You are traitors!' He is believed to have been shot. The
troops retired--strange to say without demolishing the barricade. A
barricade is being constructed in the Rue du Renard. Some National
Guards in uniform watch its construction, but do not work on it. One
of them said to me, 'We are not against you, you are on the side of
Right.' They add that there are twelve or fifteen barricades in the
Rue Rambuteau. This morning at daybreak the cannon had fired
'steadily,' as one of them remarks, in the Rue Bourbon-Villeneuve. I
visit a powder manufactory improvised by Leguevel at a chemist's
opposite the Rue Guérin-Boisseau.

"They are constructing the barricades amicably, without angering any
one. They do what they can not to annoy the neighborhood. The combatants
of the Bourg-Labbé barricades are ankle-deep in mud on account of the
rain. It is a perfect sewer. They hesitate to ask for a truss of straw.
They lie down in the water or on the pavement.

"I saw there a young man who was ill, and who had just got up from his
bed with the fever still on him. He said to me, 'I am going to my death'
(he did so).

"In the Rue Bourbon-Villeneuve they had not even asked a mattress of the
'shopkeepers,' although, the barricade being bombarded, they needed them
to deaden the effect of the balls.

"The soldiers make bad barricades, because they make them too well. A
barricade should be tottering; when well built it is worth nothing; the
paving-stones should want equilibrium, 'so that they may roll down on
the troopers,' said a street-boy to me, 'and break their paws.' Sprains
form a part of barricade warfare.

"Jeanty Sarre is the chief of a complete group of barricades. He
presented his first lieutenant to me, Charpentier, a man of thirty-six,
lettered and scientific. Charpentier busies himself with experiments
with the object of substituting gas for coal and wood in the firing of
china, and he asks permission to read a tragedy to me 'one of these
days.' I said to him, 'We shall make one.'

"Jeanty Sarre is grumbling at Charpentier; the ammunition is failing.
Jeanty Sarre, having at his house in the Rue Saint Honoré a pound of
fowling-powder and twenty army cartridges, sent Charpentier to get them.
Charpentier went there, and brought back the fowling-powder and the
cartridges, but distributed them to the combatants on the barricades
whom he met on the way. 'They were as though famished,' said he.
Charpentier had never in his life touched a fire-arm. Jeanty Sarre
showed him how to load a gun.

"They take their meals at a wine-seller's at the corner, and they warm
themselves there. It is very cold. The wine-seller says, 'Those who are
hungry, go and eat.' A combatant asked him, 'Who pays?' 'Death,' was the
answer. And in truth some hours afterwards he had received seventeen
bayonet thrusts.

"They have not broken the gas-pipes--always for the sake of not doing
unnecessary damage. They confine themselves to requisitioning the
gasmen's keys, and the lamplighters' winches in order to open the pipes.
In this manner they control the lighting or extinguishing.

"This group of barricades is strong, and will play an important part. I
had hoped at one moment that they would attack it while I was there. The
bugle had approached, and then had gone away again. Jeanty Sarre tells
me 'it will be for this evening.'

"His intention is to extinguish the gas in the Rue du Petit-Carreau and
all the adjoining streets, and to leave only one jet lighted in the Rue
du Cadran. He has placed sentinels as far as the corner of the Rue Saint
Denis; at that point there is an open side, without barricades, but
little accessible to the troops, on account of the narrowness of the
streets, which they can only enter one by one. Thence little danger
exists, an advantage of narrow streets; the troops are worth nothing
unless massed together. The soldier does not like isolated action; in
war the feeling of elbow to elbow constitutes half the bravery. Jeanty
Sarre has a reactionary uncle with whom he is not on good terms, and who
lives close by at No. 1, Rue du Petit-Carreau.--'What a fright we shall
give him presently!' said Jeanty Sarre to me, laughing. This morning
Jeanty Sarre has inspected the Montorgueil barricade. There was only one
man on it, who was drunk, and who put the barrel of his gun against his
breast, saying, 'No thoroughfare.' Jeanty Sarre disarmed him.

"I go to the Rue Pagevin. There at the corner of the Place des Victoires
there is a well-constructed barricade. In the adjoining barricade in the
Rue Jean Jacques Rousseau, the troops this morning made no prisoners.
The soldiers had killed every one. There are corpses as far as the Place
des Victoires. The Pagevin barricade held its own. There are fifty men
there, well armed. I enter. 'Is all going on well?' 'Yes.' 'Courage.' I
press all these brave hands; they make a report to me. They had seen a
Municipal Guard smash in the head of a dying man with the butt end of
his musket. A pretty young girl, wishing to go home, took refuge in the
barricade. There, terrified, she remained for an hour. When all danger
was over, the chef of the barricade caused her to be reconducted home by
the eldest of his men.

"As I was about to leave the barricade Pagevin, they brought me a
prisoner, a police spy, they said.

"He expected to be shot. I had him set at liberty."

Bancel was in this barricade of the Rue Pagevin. We shook hands.

He asked me,--

"Shall we conquer?"

"Yes," I answered.

We then could hardly entertain a doubt.

De Flotte and Bancel wished to accompany me, fearing that I should be
arrested by the regiment guarding the Bank.

The weather was misty and cold, almost dark. This obscurity concealed
and helped us. The fog was on our side.

As we reached the corner of the Rue de la Vrillière, a group on
horseback passed by.

It consisted of a few others, preceded by a man who seemed a soldier,
but who was not in uniform. He wore a cloak with a hood.

De Flotte nudged me with his elbow, and whispered,--

"Do you know Fialin?"

I answered,--

"No."

"Have you seen him?

"No."

"Do you wish to see him?"

"No."

"Look at him."

I looked at him.

This man in truth was passing before us. It was he who preceded the
group of officers. He came out of the Bank. Had he been there to effect
a new forced loan? The people who were at the doors looked at him with
curiosity, and without anger. His entire bearing was insolent. He turned
from time to time to say a word to one of his followers. This little
cavalcade "pawed the ground" in the mist and in the mud. Fialin had the
arrogant air of a man who caracoles before a crime. He gazed at the
passers-by with a haughty look. His horse was very handsome, and, poor
beast, seemed very proud. Fialin was smiling. He had in his hand the
whip that his face deserved.

He passed by. I never saw the man except on this occasion.

De Flotte and Bancel did not leave me until they had seen me get into my
vehicle. My true-hearted coachman was waiting for me in the Rue de la
Vrillière. He brought me back to No 15, Rue Richelieu.




CHAPTER XI.


THE BARRICADE OF THE RUE MESLAY

The first barricade of the Rue Saint Martin was erected at the junction
of the Rue Meslay. A large cart was overturned, placed across the
street, and the roadway was unpaved; some flag-stones of the footway
were also torn up. This barricade, the advanced work of defence of the
whole revolted street, could only form a temporary obstacle. No portion
of the piled-up stones was higher than a man. In a good third of the
barricade the stones did not reach above the knee. "It will at all
events be good enough to get killed in," said a little street Arab who
was rolling numerous flag-stones to the barricade. A hundred combatants
took up their position behind it. Towards nine o'clock the movements of
the troops gave warning of the attack. The head of the column of the
Marulaz Brigade occupied the corner of the street on the side of the
boulevard. A piece of artillery, raking the whole of the street, was
placed in position before the Porte Saint Martin. For some time both
sides gazed on each other in that moody silence which precedes an
encounter; the troops regarding the barricade bristling with guns, the
barricade regarding the gaping cannon. After a while the order for a
general attack was given. The firing commenced. The first shot passed
above the barricade, and struck a woman who was passing some twenty
paces in the rear, full in the breast. She fell, ripped open. The fire
became brisk without doing much injury to the barricade. The cannon was
too near; the bullets flew too high.

The combatants, who had not yet lost a man, received each bullet with a
cry of "Long live the Republic!" but without firing. They possessed few
cartridges, and they husbanded them. Suddenly the 49th regiment
advanced in close column order.

The barricade fired.

The smoke filled the street; when it cleared away, there could be seen
a dozen men on the ground, and the soldiers falling back in disorder by
the side of the houses. The leader of the barricade shouted, "They are
falling back. Cease firing! Let us not waste a ball."

The street remained for some time deserted. The cannon recommenced
fining. A shot came in every two minutes, but always badly aimed. A man
with a fowling-piece came up to the leader of the barricade, and said
to him, "Let us dismount that cannon. Let us kill the gunners."

"Why!" said the chief, smiling, "they are doing us no harm, let us do
none to them."

Nevertheless the sound of the bugle could be distinctly heard on the
other side of the block of houses which concealed the troops echelloned
on the Square of Saint Martin, and it was manifest that a second attack
was being prepared.

This attack would naturally be furious, desperate, and stubborn.

It was also evident that, if this barricade were carried, the entire
street would be scoured. The other barricades were still weaker than
the first, and more feebly defended. The "middle class" had given their
guns, and had re-entered their houses. They lent their street, that was
all.

It was therefore necessary to hold the advanced barricade as long as
possible. But what was to be done, and how was the resistance to be
maintained? They had scarcely two shots per man left.

An unexpected source of supply arrived.

A young man, I can name him, for he is dead--Pierre Tissié,[19] who was
a workman, and who also was a poet, had worked during a portion of the
morning at the barricades, and at the moment when the firing began he
went away, stating as his reason that they would not give him a gun. In
the barricade they had said, "There is one who is afraid."

Pierre Tissié was not afraid, as we shall see later on.

He left the barricade.

Pierre Tissié had only his knife with him, a Catalan knife; he opened
it at all hazards, he held it in his hand, and went on straight before
him.

As he came out of the Rue Saint Sauveur, he saw at the corner of a
little lonely street, in which all the windows were closed, a soldier
of the line standing sentry, posted there doubtlessly by the main guard
at a little distance.

This soldier was at the halt with his gun to his shoulder ready to
fire.

He heard the step of Pierre Tissié, and cried out,--

"Who goes there?"

"Death!" answered Pierre Tissié.

The soldier fired, and missed Pierre Tissié, who sprang on him, and
struck him down with a blow of his knife.

The soldier fell, and blood spurted out of his mouth.

"I did not know I should speak so truly," muttered Pierre Tissié.

And he added, "Now for the ambulance!"

He took the soldier on his back, picked up the gun which had fallen to
the ground, and came back to the barricade. "I bring you a wounded
man," said he.

"A dead man," they exclaimed.

In truth the soldier had just expired.

"Infamous Bonaparte!" said Tissié. "Poor red breeches! All the same, I
have got a gun."

They emptied the soldier's pouch and knapsack. They divided the
cartridges. There were 150 of them. There were also two gold pieces of
ten francs, two days' pay since the 2d of December. These were thrown
on the ground, no one would take them.

They distributed the cartridges with shouts of "Long live the Republic!"

Meanwhile the attacking party had placed a mortar in position by the
side of the cannon.

The distribution of the cartridges was hardly ended when the infantry
appeared, and charged upon the barricade with the bayonet. This second
assault, as had been foreseen, was violent and desperate. It was
repulsed. Twice the soldiers returned to the charge, and twice they
fell back, leaving the street strewn with dead. In the interval between
the assaults, a shell had pierced and dismantled the barricade, and the
cannon began to fire grape-shot.

The situation was hopeless; the cartridges were exhausted. Some began
to throw down their guns and go away. The only means of escape was by
the Rue Saint Sauveur, and to reach the corner of the Rue Saint Sauveur
it was necessary to get over the lower part of the barricade, which
left nearly the whole of the fugitives unprotected. There was a perfect
rain of musketry and grape-shot. Three or four were killed there, one,
like Baudin, by a ball in his eye. The leader of the barricade suddenly
noticed that he was alone with Pierre Tissié, and a boy of fourteen
years old, the same who had rolled so many stones for the barricade. A
third attack was pending, and the soldiers began to advance by the side
of the houses.

"Let us go," said the leader of the barricade.

"I shall remain," said Pierre Tissié.

"And I also," said the boy.

And the boy added,--

"I have neither father nor mother. As well this as anything else."

The leader fired his last shot, and retired like the others over the
lower part of the barricade. A volley knocked off his hat. He stooped
down and picked it up again. The soldiers were not more than
twenty-five paces distant.

He shouted to the two who remained,--

"Come along!"

"No," said Pierre Tissié.

"No," said the boy.

A few moments afterwards the soldiers scaled the barricade already half
in ruins.

Pierre Tissié and the boy were killed with bayonet thrusts.

Some twenty muskets were abandoned in this barricade.


[19] It must not be forgotten that this has been written in exile, and
that to name a hero was to condemn him to exile.




CHAPTER XII.


THE BARRICADE OF THE MAIRIE OF THE FIFTH ARRONDISSEMENT

National Guards in uniform filled the courtyard of the Mairie of the
Fifth Arrondissement. Others came in every moment. An ex-drummer of the
Garde Mobile had taken a drum from a lower room at the side of the
guard-room, and had beaten the call to arms in the surrounding streets.
Towards nine o'clock a group of fourteen or fifteen young men, most of
whom were in white blouses, entered the Mairie, shouting, "Long live
the Republic!" They were armed with guns. The National Guard received
them with shouts of "Down with Louis Bonaparte!" They fraternized in
the courtyard. Suddenly there was a movement. It was caused by the
arrival of the Representatives Doutre and Pelletier.

"What is to be done?" shouted the crowd.

"Barricades," said Pelletier.

They unharnessed the horses, which the carter led away, and they turned
the cart round without upsetting it across the wide roadway of the
faubourg. The barricade was completed in a moment. A truck came up.
They took it and stood it against the wheels of the cart, just as a
screen is placed before a fireplace.

The remainder was made up of casks and paving-stones. Thanks to the
flour-cart the barricade was lofty, and reached to the first story of
the houses. It intersected the faubourg at the corner of the little Rue
Saint Jean. A narrow entrance had been contrived at the barricade at
the corner of the street.

"One barricade is not sufficient," said Doutre, "we must place the
Mairie between two barriers, so as to be able to defend both sides at
the same time."

They constructed a second barricade, facing the summit of the faubourg.
This one was low and weakly built, being composed only of planks and of
paving-stones. There was about a hundred paces distance between the two
barricades.

There were three hundred men in this space. Only one hundred had guns.
The majority had only one cartridge.

The firing began about ten o'clock. Two companies of the line appeared
and fired several volleys. The attack was only a feint. The barricade
replied, and made the mistake of foolishly exhausting its ammunition.
The troops retired. Then the attack began in earnest. Some Chasseurs de
Vincennes emerged from the corner of the boulevard.

Following out the African mode of warfare, they glided along the side
of the walls, and then, with a run, they threw themselves upon the
barricade.

No more ammunition in the barricade. No quarter to be expected.

Those who had no more powder or balls threw down their guns. Some
wished to reoccupy their position in the Mairie, but it was impossible
for them to maintain any defence there, the Mairie being open and
commanded from every side; they scaled the walls and scattered
themselves about in the neighboring houses; others escaped by the
narrow passage of the boulevard which led into the Rue Saint Jean; most
of the combatants reached the opposite side of the boulevard, while
those who had a cartridge left fired a last volley upon the troops from
the height of the paving-stones. Then they awaited their death. All
were killed.

One of those who succeeded in slipping into the Rue Saint Jean, where
moreover they ran the gauntlet of a volley from their assailants, was
M.H. Coste, Editor of the _Evénement_ and of the _Avénement du Peuple_.

M. Coste had been a captain in the Garde Mobile. At a bend in the
street, which placed him out of reach of the balls, M. Conte noticed in
front of him the drummer of the Garde Mobile, who, like him, had
escaped by the Rue Saint Jean, and who was profiting by the loneliness
of the street to get rid of his drum.

"Keep your drum," cried he to him.

"For what purpose?"

"To beat the call to arms."

"Where?"

"At Batignolles."

"I will keep it," said the drummer.

These two men came out from the jaws of death, and at once consented to
re-enter them.

But how should they cross all Paris with this drum? The first patrol
which met them would shoot them. A porter of an adjoining house, who
noticed their predicament, gave them a packing-cloth. They enveloped
the drum in it, and reached Batignolles by the lonely streets which
skirt the walls.




CHAPTER VIII.


THE BARRICADE OF THE RUE THEVENOT

Georges Biscarrat was the man who had given the signal for the looting
in the Rue de l'Echelle.

I had known Georges Biscarrat ever since June, 1848. He had taken part
in that disastrous insurrection. I had had an opportunity of being
useful to him. He had been captured, and was kneeling before the
firing-party; I interfered, and I saved his life, together with that of
some others, M., D., D., B., and that brave-hearted architect Rolland,
who when an exile, later on, so ably restored the Brussels Palace of
Justice.

This took place on the 24th June, 1848, in the underground floor of No.
93, Boulevard Beaumarchais, a house then in course of construction.

Georges Biscarrat became attached to me. It appeared that he was the
nephew of one of the oldest and best friends of my childhood, Félix
Biscarrat, who died in 1828. Georges Biscarrat came to see me from time
to time, and on occasions he asked my advice or gave me information.

Wishing to preserve him from evil influences, I had given him, and he
had accepted, this guiding maxim, "No insurrection except for Duty and
for Right."

What was this hooting in the Rue de l'Echelle? Let us relate the
incident.

On the 2d of December, Bonaparte had made an attempt to go out. He had
ventured to go and look at Paris. Paris does not like being looked at
by certain eyes; it considers it an insult, and it resents an insult
more than a wound. It submits to assassination, but not to the leering
gaze of the assassin. It took offence at Louis Bonaparte.

At nine o'clock in the morning, at the moment when the Courbevoie
garrison was descending upon Paris, the placards of the _coup d'état_
being still fresh upon the walls, Louis Bonaparte had left the Elysée,
had crossed the Place de la Concorde, the Garden of the Tuileries, and
the railed courtyard of the Carrousel, and had been seen to go out, by
the gate of the Rue de l'Echelle. A crowd assembled at once. Louis
Bonaparte was in a general's uniform; his uncle, the ex-King Jérôme,
accompanied him, together with Flahaut, who kept in the near. Jérôme
wore the full uniform of a Marshal of France, with a hat with a white
feather; Louis Bonaparte's horse was a head before Jérôme's horse.
Louis Bonaparte was gloomy, Jérôme attentive, Flahaut beaming. Flahaut
had his hat on one side. There was a strong escort of Lancers. Edgar
Ney followed. Bonaparte intended to go as far as the Hôtel de Ville.
Georges Biscarrat was there. The street was unpaved, the road was being
macadamized; he mounted on a heap of stones, and shouted, "Down with
the Dictator! Down with the Praetorians!" The soldiers looked at him
with bewilderment, and the crowd with astonishment. Georges Biscarrat
(he told me so himself) felt that this cry was too erudite, and that it
would not be understood, so he shouted, "Down with Bonaparte! Down with
the Lancers!"

The effect of this shout was electrical. "Down with Bonaparte! Down
with the Lancers!" cried the people, and the whole street became stormy
and turbulent. "Down with Bonaparte!" The outcry resembled the
beginning of an execution; Bonaparte made a sudden movement to the
right, turned back, and re-entered the courtyard of the Louvre.

Georges Biscarrat felt it necessary to complete his shout by a
barricade.

He said to the bookseller, Benoist Mouilhe, who had just opened his
shop, "Shouting is good, action is better." He returned to his house in
the Rue du Vert Bois, put on a blouse and a workman's cap, and went
down into the dark streets. Before the end of the day he had made
arrangements with four associations--the gas-fitters, the last-makers,
the shawl-makers, and the hatters.

In this manner he spent the day of the 2d of December.

The day of the 3d was occupied in goings and comings "almost useless."
So Biscarrat told Versigny, and he added, "However I have succeeded in
this much, that the placards of the _coup d'état_ have been everywhere
torn down, so much so that in order to render the tearing down more
difficult the police have ultimately posted them in the public
conveniences--their proper place."

On Thursday, the 4th, early in the morning, Georges Biscarrat went to
Ledouble's restaurant, where four Representatives of the People usually
took their meals, Brives, Bertlhelon, Antoine Bard, and Viguier,
nicknamed "Father Viguier." All four were there. Viguier related what
we had done on the preceding evening, and shared my opinion that the
closing catastrophe should be hurried on, that the Crime should be
precipitated into the abyss which befitted it. Biscarrat came in. The
Representatives did not know hire, and stared at him. "Who are you?"
asked one of them. Before he could answer, Dr. Petit entered, unfolded
a paper, and said,--

"Does any one know Victor Hugo's handwriting?"

"I do," said Biscarrat. He looked at the paper. It was my proclamation
to the army. "This must be printed," said Petit. "I will undertake it,"
said Biscarrat. Antoine Bard asked him, "Do you know Victor Hugo?" "He
saved my life," answered Biscarrat. The Representatives shook hands
with him.

Guilgot arrived. Then Versigny. Versigny knew Biscarrat. He had seen
him at my house. Versigny said, "Take care what you do. There is a man
outside the door." "It is a shawl-maker," said Biscarrat. "He has come
with me. He is following me." "But," resumed Versigny, "he is wearing a
blouse, beneath which he has a handkerchief. He seems to be hiding
this, and he has something in the handkerchief."

"Sugar-plums," said Biscarrat.

They were cartridges.

Versigny and Biscarrat went to the office of the _Siècle_; at the
_Siècle_ thirty workmen, at the risk of being shot, offered to print my
Proclamation. Biscarrat left it with them, and said to Versigny, "Now I
want my barricade."

The shawl-maker walked behind them. Versigny and Biscarrat turned their
steps towards the top of the Saint Denis quarter. When they drew near
to she Porte Saint Denis they heard the hum of many voices. Biscarrat
laughed and said to Versigny, "Saint Denis is growing angry, matters
are improving." Biscarrat recruited forty combatants on the way,
amongst whom was Moulin, head of the association of leather-dressers.
Chapuis, sergeant-major of the National Guard, brought them four
muskets and ten swords. "Do you know where there are any more?" asked
Biscarrat. "Yes, at the Saint Sauveur Baths." They went there, and
found forty muskets. They gave them swords and cartridge-pouches.
Gentlemen well dressed, brought tin boxes containing powder and balls.
Women, brave and light-hearted, manufactured cartridges. At the first
door adjoining the Rue du Hasard-Saint-Sauveur they requisitioned iron
bars and hammers from a large courtyard belonging to a locksmith.
Having the arms, they had the men. They speedily numbered a hundred.
They began to tear up the pavements. It was half-past ten. "Quick!
quick!" cried Georges Biscarrat, "the barricade of my dreams!" It was
in the Rue Thévenot. The barrier was constructed high and formidable.
To abridge. At eleven o'clock Georges Biscarrat had completed his
barricade. At noon he was killed there.




CHAPTER XIV.


OSSIAN AND SCIPIO

Arrests grew more numerous.

Towards noon a Commissary of Police, named Boudrot, appeared at the
divan of the Rue Lepelletier. He was accompanied by the police agent
Delahodde. Delahodde was that traitorous socialist writer, who, upon
being unmasked, had passed from the Secret Police to the Public Police
Service. I knew him, and I record this incident. In 1832 he was a
master in the school at which were my two sons, then boys, and he had
addressed poetry to me. At the same time he was acting the spy upon me.
The Lepelletier divan was the place of meeting of a large number of
Republican journalists. Delahodde knew them all. A detachment of the
Republican Guard occupied the entrances to the café. Then ensued an
inspection of all the ordinary customers, Delahodde walking first, with
the Commissary behind him. Two Municipal Guards followed them. From
time to time Delahodde looked round and said, "Lay hold of this man."
In this manner some score of writers were arrested, among whom were
Hennett de Kesler.[20] On the preceding evening Kesler had been on the
Saint Antoine barricade. Kesler said to Delahodde, "You are a miserable
wretch." "And you are an ungrateful fellow," replied Delahodde; "_I am
saving your life_." Curious words; for it is difficult to believe that
Delahodde was in the secret of what was to happen on the fatal day of
the Fourth.

At the head-quarters of the Committee encouraging information was
forwarded to us from every side. Testelin, the Representative of Lille,
is not only a learned man, but a brave man. On the morning of the 3d he
had reached, shortly after me, the Saint Antoine barricade, where
Baudin had just been killed. All was at an end in that direction.
Testelin was accompanied by Charles Gambon, another dauntless man.[21]
The two Representatives wandered through the agitated and dark streets,
little followed, in no way understood, seeking a ferment of insurgents,
and only finding a swarming of the curious. Testelin, nevertheless,
having come to the Committee, informed us of the following:--At the
corner of a street of the Faubourg Saint Antoine Gambon and himself had
noticed a crowd. They had gone up to it. This crowd was reading a bill
placarded on a wall. It was the Appeal to Arms signed "Victor Hugo."
Testelin asked Gambon, "Have you a pencil?" "Yes," answered Gambon.
Testelin took the pencil, went up to the placard, and wrote his name
beneath mine, then he gave the pencil to Gambon, who in turn wrote his
name beneath that of Testelin. Upon this the crowd shouted, "Bravo!
these are true-hearted men!" "Shout 'Long live the Republic!'" cried
Testelin. All shouted "Long live the Republic!" "And from above, from
the open windows," added Gambon, "women clapped their hands."

"The little hands of women applauding are a good sign," said Michel de
Bourges.

As has been seen, and we cannot lay too much stress upon the fact, what
the Committee of Resistance wished was to prevent the shedding of blood
as much as possible. To construct barricades, to let them be destroyed,
and to reconstruct them at other points, to avoid the army, and to wear
it out, to wage in Paris the war of the desert, always retreating,
never yielding, to take time for an ally, to add days to days; on the
one hand to give the people time to understand and to rise, on the
other, to conquer the _coup d'état_ by the weariness of the army; such
was the plan discussed and adopted.

The order was accordingly given that the barricades should be but
slightly defended.

We repeated in every possible form to the combatants,--

"Shed as little blood as possible! Spare the blood of the soldiers and
husband your own."

Nevertheless, the struggle once begun, it became impossible in many
instances, during certain excited hours of fighting, to moderate their
ardor. Several barricades were obstinately defended, particularly those
in the Rue Rambuteau, in the Rue Montorgueil, and in the Rue Neuve
Saint Eustache.

These barricades were commanded by daring leaders.

Here, for the sake of history, we will record a few of these brave men
fighting outlines who appeared and disappeared in the smoke of the
combat. Radoux, an architect, Deluc, Mallarmet, Félix Bony, Luneau, an
ex-Captain of the Republican Guard, Camille Berru, editor of the
_Avénement_, gay, warmhearted, and dauntless, and that young Eugène
Millelot, who was destined to be condemned at Cayenne to receive 200
lashes, and to expire at the twenty-third stroke, before the very eyes
of his father and brother, proscribed and convicts like himself.

The barricade of the Rue Aumaire was amongst those which were not
carried without resistance. Although raised in haste, it was fairly
constructed. Fifteen or sixteen resolute men defended it; two were
killed.

The barricade was carried with the bayonet by a battalion of the 16th
of the line. This battalion, hurled on the barricade at the double, was
received by a brisk fusillade; several soldiers were wounded.

The first who fell in the soldiers' ranks was an officer. He was a
young man of twenty-five, lieutenant of the first company, named Ossian
Dumas; two balls broke both of his legs as though by a single blow.

At that time there were in the army two brothers of the name of Dumas,
Ossian and Scipio. Scipio was the elder. They were near relatives of
the Representative, Madier de Montjau.

These two brothers belonged to a poor but honored family. The elder had
been educated at the Polytechnic School, the other at the School of
Saint Cyr.

Scipio was four years older than his brother. According to that
splendid and mysterious law of ascent, which the French Revolution has
created, and which, so to speak, has placed a ladder in the centre of a
society hitherto caste-bound and inaccessible, Scipio Dumas' family had
imposed upon themselves the most severe privations in order to develop
his intellect and secure his future. His relations, with the touching
heroism of the poor of the present era, denied themselves bread to
afford him knowledge. In this manner he attained to the Polytechnic
School, where he quickly became one of the best pupils.

Having concluded his studies, he was appointed an officer in the
artillery, and sent to Metz. It then became his turn to help the boy
who had to mount after him. He held out his hand to his younger
brother. He economized the modest pay of an artillery lieutenant, and,
thanks to him, Ossian became an officer like Scipio. While Scipio,
detained by duties belonging to his position, remained at Metz, Ossian
was incorporated in an infantry regiment, and went to Africa. There he
saw his first service.

Scipio and Ossian were Republicans. In October, 1851, the 16th of the
line, in which Ossian was serving, was summoned to Paris. It was one of
the regiments chosen by the ill-omened hand of Louis Bonaparte, and on
which the _coup d'état_ counted.

The 2d of December arrived.

Lieutenant Ossian Dumas obeyed, like nearly all his comrades, the order
to take up arms; but every one round him could notice his gloomy
attitude.

The day of the 3d was spent in marches and counter-marches. On the 4th
the combat began. The 16th, which formed part of the Herbillon Brigade,
was told off to capture the barricades of the Rues Beaubourg,
Trausnonain, and Aumaire. This battle-field was formidable; a perfect
square of barricades had been raised there.

It was by the Rue Aumaire, and with the regiment of which Ossian formed
part, that the military leaders resolved to begin action.

At the moment when the regiment, with arms loaded, was about to march
upon the Rue Aumaire, Ossian Dumas went up to his captain, a brave and
veteran officer, with whom he was a favorite, and declared that he
would not march a step farther, that the deed of the 2d of December was
a crime, that Louis Bonaparte was a traitor, that it was for them,
soldiers, to maintain the oath which Bonaparte violated; and that, as
for himself, he would not lend his sword to the butchery of the
Republic.

A halt was made. The signal of attack was awaited; the two officers,
the old captain and the young lieutenant, conversed in a low tone.

"And what do you want to do?" asked the captain.

"Break my sword."

"You will be taken to Vincennes."

"That is all the same to me."

"Most certainly dismissed."

"Possibly."

"Perhaps shot."

"I expect it."

"But there is no longer any time; you should have resigned yesterday."

"There is always time to avoid committing a crime."

The captain, as may be seen, was simply one of those professional
heroes, grown old in the leather stock, who know of no country but the
flag, and no other law but military discipline. Iron arms and wooden
heads. They are neither citizens nor men. They only recognize honor in
the form of a general's epaulets. It is of no use talking to them of
political duties, of obedience to the laws, of the Constitution. What
do they know about all this? What is a Constitution; what are the most
holy laws, against three words which a corporal may murmur into the ear
of a sentinel? Take a pair of scales, put in one side the Gospels, in
the other the official instructions; now weigh them. The corporal turns
the balance; the Deity kicks the beam.

God forms a portion of the order of the day of Saint Bartholomew. "Kill
all. He will recognized his own."

This is what the priests accept, and at times glorify.

Saint Bartholomew has been blessed by the Pope and decorated with the
Catholic medal.[22]

Meanwhile Ossian Dumas appeared determined. The captain made a last
effort.

"You will ruin yourself," said he.

"I shall save my honor."

"It is precisely your honor that you are sacrificing."

"Because I am going away?"

"To go away is to desert."

This seemed to impress Ossian Dumas. The captain continued,--

"They are about to fight. In a few minutes the barricade will be
attacked. Your comrades will fall, dead or wounded. You are a young
officer--you have not yet been much under fire."

"At all events," warmly interrupted Ossian Dumas, "I shall not have
fought against the Republic; they will not say I am a traitor."

"No, but they will say that you are a coward."

Ossian made no reply.

A moment afterwards the command was given to attack.

The regiment started at the double. The barricade fired.

Ossian Dumas was the first who fell.

He had not been able to bear that word "coward," and he had remained in
his place in the first rank.

They took him to the ambulance, and from thence to the hospital.

Let us at once state the conclusion of this touching incident.

Both of his legs were broken. The doctors thought that it would be
necessary to amputate them both.

General Saint-Arnaud sent him the Cross of Honor.

As is known, Louis Bonaparte hastened to discharge his debt to his
praetorian accomplices. After having massacred, the sword voted.

The combat was still smoking when the army was brought to the
ballot-box.

The garrison of Paris voted "Yes." It absolved itself.

With the rest of the army it was otherwise. Military honor was
indignant, and roused the civic virtue. Notwithstanding the pressure
which was exercised, although the regiments deposited their votes in
the shakos of their colonels, the army voted "No" in many districts of
France and Algeria.

The Polytechnic School voted "No" in a body. Nearly everywhere the
artillery, of which the Polytechnic School is the cradle, voted to the
same effect as the school.

Scipio Dumas, it may be remembered, was at Metz.

By some curious chance it happened that the feeling of the artillery,
which everywhere else had pronounced against the _coup d'état_,
hesitated at Metz, and seemed to lean towards Bonaparte.

Scipio Dumas, in presence of this indecision set an example. He voted
in a loud voice, and with an open voting paper, "No."

Then he sent in his resignation. At the same time that the Minister at
Paris received the resignation of Scipio Dumas, Scipio Dumas at Metz,
received his dismissal, signed by the Minister.

After Scipio Dumas' vote, the same thought had come at the same time to
both the Government and to the officer, to the Government that the
officer was a dangerous man, and that they could no longer employ him,
to the officer that the Government was an infamous one, and that he
ought no longer to serve it.

The resignation and the dismissal crossed on the way. By this word
"dismissal" must be understood the withdrawal of employment.

According to our existing military laws it is in this manner that they
now "break" an officer. Withdrawal of employment, that is to say, no
more service, no more pay; poverty.

Simultaneously with his dismissal, Scipio Dumas learnt the news of the
attack on the barricade of the Rue Aumaire, and that his brother had
both his legs broken. In the fever of events he had been a week without
news of Ossian. Scipio had confined himself to writing to his brother
to inform him of his vote and of his dismissal, and to induce him to do
likewise.

His brother wounded! His brother at the Val-de. Grâce! He left
immediately for Paris.

He hastened to the hospital. They took him to Ossian's bedside. The
poor young fellow had had both his legs amputated on the preceding day.

At the moment when Scipio, stunned, appeared at his bedside, Ossian
held in his hand the cross which General Saint-Arnaud had just sent
him.

The wounded man turned towards the aide-de-camp who had brought it, and
said to him,--

"I will not have this cross. On my breast it would be stained with the
blood of the Republic."

And perceiving his brother, who had just entered, he held out the cross
to him, exclaiming,--

"You take it. You have voted "No," and you have broken your sword! It
is you who have deserved it!"


[20] Died in exile in Guernsey. See the "Pendant l'Exil," under the
heading _Actes et Paroles_, vol. ii.

[21] Died in exile at Termonde.

[22] Pro Hugonotorum strage. Medal struck at Rome in 1572.




CHAPTER XV.


THE QUESTION PRESENTS ITSELF

It was one o'clock in the afternoon.

Bonaparte had again become gloomy.

The gleams of sunshine on such countenances as these last very short
time.

He had gone back to his private room, had seated himself before the
fire, with his feet on the hobs, motionless, and no one any longer
approached him except Roquet.

What was he thinking of?

The twistings of the viper cannot be foreseen.

What this man achieved on this infamous day I have told at length in
another book. See "Napoleon the Little."

From time to time Roquet entered and informed him of what was going on.
Bonaparte listened in silence, deep in thought, marble in which a
torrent of lava boiled.

He received at the Elysée the same news that we received in the Rue
Richelieu; bad for him, good for us. In one of the regiments which had
just voted, there were 170 "Noes:" This regiment has since been
dissolved, and scattered abroad in the African army.

They had counted on the 14th of the line which had fired on the people
in February. The Colonel of the 14th of the line had refused to
recommence; he had just broken his sword.

Our appeal had ended by being heard. Decidedly, as we have seen, Paris
was rising. The fall of Bonaparte seemed to be foreshadowed. Two
Representatives, Fabvier and Crestin, met in the Rue Royale, and
Crestin, pointing to the Palace of the Assembly, said to Fabvier, "We
shall be there to-morrow."

One noteworthy incident. Mazes became eccentric, the prison unbent
itself; the interior experienced an undefinable reverberation from the
outside. The warders, who the preceding evening had been insolent to
the Representatives when going for their exercise in the courtyard, now
saluted them to the ground. That very morning of Thursday, the 4th, the
governor of the prison had paid a visit to the prisoners, and had said
to them, "It is not my fault." He brought them books and writing-paper,
a thing which up to that time he had refused. The Representative
Valentin was in solitary confinement; on the morning of the 4th his
warder suddenly became amiable, and offered to obtain for him news from
outside, through his wife, who, he said, had been a servant in General
Leflô's household. These were significant signs. When the jailer smiles
it means that the jail is half opening.

We may add, what is not a contradiction, that at the same time the
garrison at Mazas was being increased. 1200 more men were marched in,
in detachments of 100 men each, spacing out their arrivals in "little
doses" as an eye-witness remarked to us. Later on 400 men. 100 litres
of brandy were distributed to them. One litre for every sixteen men.
The prisoners could hear the movement of artillery round the prison.

The agitation spread to the most peaceable quarters. But the centre of
Paris was above all threatening. The centre of Paris is a labyrinth of
streets which appears to be made for the labyrinth of riots. The Ligue,
the Fronde, the Revolution--we must unceasingly recall these useful
facts--the 14th of July, the 10th of August, 1792, 1830, 1848, have
come out from thence. These brave old streets were awakened. At eleven
o'clock in the morning from Notre Dame to the Porte Saint Martin there
were seventy-seven barricades. Three of them, one in the Rue Maubuée,
another in the Rue Bertin-Poirée, another in the Rue Guérin-Boisseau,
attained the height of the second stories; the barricade of the Porte
Saint Denis was almost as bristling and as formidable as the barrier of
the Faubourg Saint Antoine in June, 1848. The handful of the
Representatives of the People had swooped down like a shower of sparks
on these famous and inflammable crossroads. The beginning of the fire.
The fire had caught. The old central market quarter, that city which is
contained in the city, shouted, "Down with Bonaparte!" They hooted the
police, they hissed the troops. Some regiments seemed stupefied. They
cried, "Throw up your butt ends in the air!" From the windows above,
women encouraged the construction of the barricades. There was powder
there, there were muskets. Now, we were no longer alone. We saw rising
up in the gloom behind us the enormous head of the people. Hope at the
present time was on our side. The oscillation of uncertainty had at
length become steady, and we were, I repeat, almost perfectly
confident.

There had been a moment when, owing to the good news pouring in upon
us, this confidence had become so great that we who had staked our
lives on this great contest, seized with an irresistible joy in the
presence of a success becoming hourly more certain, had risen from our
seats, and had embraced each other. Michel de Bourges was particularly
angered against Bonaparte, for he had believed his word, and had even
gone so far as to say, "He is my man." Of the four of us, he was the
most indignant. A gloomy flash of victory shone in him. He struck the
table with his fist, and exclaimed, "Oh! the miserable wretch!
To-morrow--" and he struck the table a second time, "to-morrow his
head shall fall in the Place de Grève before the Hôtel de Ville."

I looked at him.

"No," said I, "this man's head shall not fall."

"What do you mean?"

"I do not wish it."

"Why?"

"Because," said I, "if after such a crime we allow Louis Bonaparte to
live we shall abolish the penalty of death."

This generous Michel de Bourges remained thoughtful for a moment, then
he pressed my hand.

Crime is an opportunity, and always gives us a choice, and it is better
to extract from it progress than punishment. Michel de Bourges realized
this.

Moreover this incident shows to what a pitch our hopes had been raised.

Appearances were on our side, actual facts not so. Saint-Arnaud had his
orders. We shall see them.

Strange incidents took place.

Towards noon a general, deep in thought, was on horseback in the Place
de la Madeleine, at the head of his wavering troops. He hesitated.

A carriage stopped, a woman stepped out and conversed in a low tone
with the general. The crowd could see her. The Representative Raymond,
who lived at No 4, Place de la Madeleine, saw her from his window. This
woman was Madame K. The general stooping down on his horse, listened,
and finally made the dejected gesture of a vanquished man. Madame K.
got back into her carriage. This man, they said, loved that woman. She
could, according to the side of her beauty which fascinated her victim,
inspire either heroism or crime. This strange beauty was compounded of
the whiteness of an angel, combined with the look of a spectre.

It was the look which conquered.

This man no longer hesitated. He entered gloomily into the enterprise.

From twelve to two o'clock there was in this enormous city given over
to the unknown an indescribable and fierce expectation. All was calm
and awe-striking. The regiments and the limbered batteries quitted the
faubourg and stationed themselves noiselessly around the boulevards.
Not a cry in the ranks of the soldiery. An eye-witness said, "The
soldiers march with quite a jaunty air." On the Quai de la Ferronnerie,
heaped up with regiments ever since the morning of the 2d of December,
there now only remained a post of Municipal Guards. Everything ebbed
back to the centre, the people as well as the army; the silence of the
army had ultimately spread to the people. They watched each other.

Each soldier had three days' provisions and six packets of cartridges.

It has since transpired that at this moment 10,000 francs were daily
spent in brandy for each brigade.

Towards one o'clock, Magnan went to the Hôtel de Ville, had the reserve
limbered under his own eyes, and did not leave until all the batteries
were ready to march.

Certain suspicious preparations grew more numerous. Towards noon the
State workmen and the hospital corps had established a species of huge
ambulance at No. 2, Faubourg Montmartre. A great heap of litters was
piled up there. "What is all this for?" asked the crowd.

Dr. Deville, who had attended Espinasse when he had been wounded,
noticed him on the boulevard, and asked him, "Up to what point are you
going?"

Espinasse's answer is historical.

He replied, "To the end."

At two o'clock five brigades, those of Cotte, Bourgon, Canrobert, Dulac,
and Reybell, five batteries of artillery, 16,400 men,[23] infantry and
cavalry, lancers, cuirassiers, grenadiers, gunners, were echelloned
without any ostensible reason between the Rue de la Paix and the Faubourg
Poissonnière. Pieces of cannon were pointed at the entrance of every
street; there were eleven in position on the Boulevard Poissonnière alone.
The foot soldiers had their guns to their shoulders, the officers their
swords drawn. What did all this mean? It was a curious sight, well worth
the trouble of seeing, and on both sides of the pavements, on all the
thresholds of the shops, from all the stories of the houses, an
astonished, ironical, and confiding crowd looked on.

Little by little, nevertheless, this confidence diminished, and irony
gave place to astonishment; astonishment changed to stupor. Those who
have passed through that extraordinary minute will not forget it. It
was evident that there was something underlying all this. But what?
Profound obscurity. Can one imagine Paris in a cellar? People felt as
though they were beneath a low ceiling. They seemed to be walled up in
the unexpected and the unknown. They seemed to perceive some mysterious
will in the background. But after all they were strong; they were the
Republic, they were Paris; what was there to fear! Nothing. And they
cried, "Down with Bonaparte!" The troops continued to keep silence, but
the swords remained outside their scabbards, and the lighted matches of
the cannon smoldered at the corners of the streets. The cloud grew
blacker every minute, heavier and more silent. This thickening of the
darkness was tragical. One felt the coming crash of a catastrophe, and
the presence of a villain; snake-like treason writhed during this
night, and none can foresee where the downward slide of a terrible
design will stop when events are on a steep incline.

What was coming out of this thick darkness?


[23] 16,410 men, the figures taken from the Ministry of War.




CHAPTER XVI.


THE MASSACRE

Suddenly a window was opened.

Upon Hell.

Dante, had he leaned over the summit of the shadow, would have been able
to see the eighth circle of his poem; the funereal Boulevard Montmartre.

Paris, a prey to Bonaparte; a monstrous spectacle. The gloomy armed men
massed together on this boulevard felt an appalling spirit enter into
them; they ceased to be themselves, and became demons.

There was no longer a single French soldier, but a host of indefinable
phantoms, carrying out a horrible task, as though in the glimmering
light of a vision.

There was no longer a flag, there was no longer law, there was no longer
humanity, there was no longer a country, there was no longer France;
they began to assassinate.

The Schinderhannes division, the brigades of Mandrin, Cartouche,
Poulailler, Trestaillon, and Tropmann appeared in the gloom, shooting
down and massacring.

No; we do not attribute to the French army what took place during this
mournful eclipse of honor.

There have been massacres in history, abominable ones assuredly, but
they have possessed some show of reason; Saint Bartholomew and the
Dragonnades are explained by religion, the Sicilian Vespers and the
butcheries of September are explained by patriotism; they crush the
enemy or annihilate the foreigner; these are crimes for a good cause;
but the carnage of the Boulevard Montmartre is a crime without an
ostensible reason.

The reason exists, however. It is hideous.

Let us give it.

Two things stand erect in a State, the Law and the People.

A man murders the Law. He feels the punishment approaching, there only
remains one thing for him to do, to murder the People. He murders the
People.

The Second of December was the Risk, the Fourth was the Certainty.

Against the indignation which arose they opposed the Terror.

The Fury, Justice, halted petrified before the Fury, Extermination.
Against Erinnyes they set up Medusa.

To put Nemesis to flight, what a terrifying triumph!

To Louis Napoleon pertains this glory, which is the summit of his shame.

Let us narrate it.

Let us narrate what History had never seen before.

The assassination of a people by a man.

Suddenly, at a given signal, a musket shot being fired, no matter where,
no matter by whom, the shower of bullets poured upon the crowd. A shower
of bullets is also a crowd; it is death scattered broadcast. It does not
know whither it goes, nor what it does; it kills and passes on.

But at the same time it has a species of soul; it is premeditated, it
executes a will. This was an unprecedented moment. It seemed as though a
handful of lightnings was falling upon the people. Nothing simpler. It
formed a clear solution to the difficulty; the rain of lead overwhelmed
the multitude. What are you doing there? Die! It is a crime to be
passing by. Why are you in the street? Why do you cross the path of the
Government? The Government is a cut-throat. They have announced a thing,
they must certainly carry it out; what is begun must assuredly be
achieved; as Society is being saved, the People must assuredly be
exterminated.

Are there not social necessities? Is it not essential that Béville
should have 87,000 francs a year and Fleury 95,000 francs? Is it not
essential that the High Chaplain, Menjaud, Bishop of Nancy, should have
342 francs a day, and that Bassano and Cambacérès should each have 383
francs a day, and Vaillant 468 francs, and Saint-Arnaud 822 francs? Is
it not necessary that Louis Bonaparte should have 76,712 francs a day?
Could one be Emperor for less?

In the twinkling of an eye there was a butchery on the boulevard a
quarter of a league long. Eleven pieces of cannon wrecked the
Sallandrouze carpet warehouse. The shot tore completely through
twenty-eight houses. The baths of Jouvence were riddled. There was a
massacre at Tortoni's. A whole quarter of Paris was filled with an
immense flying mass, and with a terrible cry. Everywhere sudden death. A
man is expecting nothing. He falls. From whence does this come? From
above, say the Bishops' _Te Deum_; from below, says Truth.

From a lower place than the galleys, from a lower place than Hell.

It is the conception of a Caligula, carried out by a Papavoine.

Xavier Durrieu comes upon the boulevard. He states,--

"I have taken sixty steps, I have seen sixty corpses."

And he draws back. To be in the street is a Crime, to be at home is a
Crime. The butchers enter the houses and slaughter. In slaughter-house
slang the soldiers cry, "Let us pole-axe the lot of them."

Adde, a bookseller, of 17, Boulevard Poissonnière, is standing before his
door; they kill him. At the same moment, for the field of murder is vast,
at a considerable distance from there, at 5, Rue de Lancry, M. Thirion de
Montauban, owner of the house, is at his door; they kill him. In the Rue
Tiquetonne a child of seven years, named Boursier, is passing by; they
kill him. Mdlle. Soulac, 196, Rue du Temple, opens her window; they kill
her. At No. 97, in the same street, two women, Mesdames Vidal and
Raboisson, sempstresses, are in their room; they kill them. Belval, a
cabinet-maker, 10, Rue de la Lune, is at home; they kill him. Debaëcque,
a merchant, 45, Rue du Sentier, is in his own house; Couvercelle,
florist, 257, Rue Saint Denis, is in his own house; Labitte, a jeweller,
55, Boulevard Saint Martin, is in his own house; Monpelas, perfumer, 181,
Rue Saint Martin, is in his own house; they kill Monpelas, Labitte,
Couvercelle, and Debaëcque. They sabre at her own home, 240, Rue Saint
Martin, a poor embroideress, Mdlle. Seguin, who not having sufficient
money to pay for a doctor, died at the Beaujon hospital, on the 1st of
January, 1852, on the same day that the Sibour _Te Deum_ was chanted at
Notre Dame. Another, a waistcoat-maker, Françoise Noël, was shot down at
20, Rue du Faubourg Montmartre, and died in the Charité. Another, Madame
Ledaust, a working housekeeper, living at 76, Passage du Caire, was shot
down before the Archbishop's palace, and died at the Morgue. Passers-by,
Mdlle. Gressier, living at 209, Faubourg Saint Martin; Madame Guilard,
living at 77, Boulevard Saint Denis; Madame Gamier, living at 6,
Boulevard Bonne Nouvelle, who had fallen, the first named beneath the
volleys on the Boulevard Montmartre, the two others on the Boulevard
Saint Denis, and who were still alive, attempted to rise, and became
targets for the soldiers, bursting with laughter, and this time fell back
again dead. Deeds of gallantry ware performed. Colonel Rochefort, who was
probably created General for this, charged in the Rue do la Paix at the
head of his Lancers a flock of nurses, who were put to flight.

Such was this indescribable enterprise. All the men who took part in it
were instigated by hidden influences; all had something which urged them
forward; Herbillon had Zaatcha behind him; Saint-Arnaud had Kabylia;
Renault had the affair of the Saint-André and Saint Hippolyte villages;
Espinasse, Rome and the storming of the 30th of June; Magnan, his debts.

Must we continue? We hesitate. Dr. Piquet, a man of seventy, was killed
in his drawing-room by a ball in his stomach; the painter Jollivart, by
a ball in the forehead, before his easel, his brains bespattered his
painting. The English captain, William Jesse, narrowly escaped a ball
which pierced the ceiling above his head; in the library adjoining the
Magasins du Prophète, a father, mother, and two daughters were sabred.
Lefilleul, another bookseller, was shot in his shop on the Boulevard
Poissonnière; in the Rue Lepelletier, Boyer, a chemist, seated at his
counter, was "spitted" by the Lancers. A captain, killing all before
him, took by storm the house of the Grand Balcon. A servant was killed
in the shop of Brandus. Reybell through the volleys said to Sax, "And I
also am discoursing sweet music." The Café Leblond was given over to
pillage. Billecoq's establishment was bombarded to such a degree that it
had to be pulled down the next day. Before Jouvain's house lay a heap of
corpses, amongst them an old man with his umbrella, and a young man with
his eye-glass. The Hôtel de Castille, the Maison Dorée, the Petite
Jeannette, the Café de Paris, the Café Anglais became for three hours
the targets of the cannonade. Raquenault's house crumbled beneath the
shells; the bullets demolished the Montmartre Bazaar.

None escaped. The guns and pistols were fired at close quarters.

New Year's-day was not far off, some shops were full of New Year's
gifts. In the passage du Saumon, a child of thirteen, flying before the
platoon-firing, hid himself in one of these shops, beneath a heap of
toys. He was captured and killed. Those who killed him laughingly
widened his wounds with their swords. A woman told me, "The cries of the
poor little fellow could be heard all through the passage." Four men
were shot before the same shop. The officer said to them, "This will
teach you to loaf about." A fifth named Mailleret, who was left for dead,
was carried the next day with eleven wounds to the Charité. There he
died.

They fired into the cellars by the air-holes.

A workman, a currier, named Moulins, who had taken refuge in one of
these shot-riddled cellars, saw through the cellar air-hole a passer-by,
who had been wounded in the thigh by a bullet, sit down on the pavement
with the death rattle in his throat, and lean against a shop. Some
soldiers who heard this rattle ran up and finished off the wounded man
with bayonet thrusts.

One brigade killed the passer-by from the Madeleine to the Opera,
another from the Opera to the Gymmase; another from the Boulevard Bonne
Nouvelle to the Porte Saint Denis; the 75th of the line having carried
the barricade of the Porte Saint Denis, it was no longer a fight, it was
a slaughter. The massacre radiated--a word horribly true--from the
boulevard into all the streets. It was a devil-fish stretching out its
feelers. Flight? Why? Concealment? To what purpose? Death ran after you
quicker than you could fly. In the Rue Pagevin a soldier said to a
passer-by, "What are you doing here?" "I am going home." The soldier
kills the passer-by. In the Rue des Marais they kill four young men in
their own courtyard. Colonel Espinasse exclaimed, "After the bayonet,
cannon!" Colonel Rochefort exclaimed, "Thrust, bleed, slash!" and he
added, "It is an economy of powder and noise." Before Barbedienne's
establishment an officer was showing his gun, an arm of considerable
precision, admiringly to his comrades, and he said, "With this gun I can
score magnificent shots between the eyes." having said this, he aimed at
random at some one, and succeeded. The carnage was frenzied. While the
butchering under the orders of Carrelet filled the boulevard, the
Bourgon brigade devastated the Temple, the Marulaz brigade devastated
the Rue Rambuteau; the Renault division distinguished itself on the
"other side of the water." Renault was that general, who, at Mascara,
had given his pistols to Charras. In 1848 he had said to Charras,
"Europe must be revolutionized." And Charras had said, "Not quite so
fast!" Louis Bonaparte had made him a General of Division in July, 1851.
The Rue aux Ours was especially devastated. Morny that evening said to
Louis Bonaparte, "The 15th Light Infantry have scored a success. They
have cleaned out the Rue aux Ours."

At the corner of the Rue du Sentier an officer of Spahis, with his sword
raised, cried out, "This is not the sort of thing! You do not understand
at all. Fire on the women." A woman was flying, she was with child, she
falls, they deliver her by the means of the butt-ends of their muskets.
Another, perfectly distracted, was turning the corner of a street. She
was carrying a child. Two soldiers aimed at her. One said, "At the
woman!" And he brought down the woman. The child rolled on the pavement.
The other soldier said, "At the child!" And he killed the child.

A man of high scientific repute, Dr. Germain Sée, declares that in one
house alone, the establishment of the Jouvence Baths, there were at six
o'clock, beneath a shed in the courtyard, about eighty wounded, nearly
all of whom (seventy, at least) were old men, women, and children. Dr.
Sée was the first to attend to them.

In the Rue Mandar, there was, stated an eye-witness, "a rosary of
corpses," reaching as far as the Rue Neuve Saint Eustache. Before the
house of Odier twenty-six corpses. Thirty before the hotel Montmorency.
Fifty-two before the Variétés, of whom eleven were women. In the Rue
Grange-Batelière there were three naked corpses. No. 19, Faubourg
Montmartre, was full of dead and wounded.

A woman, flying and maddened, with dishevelled hair and her arms raised
aloft, ran along the Rue Poissonnière, crying, "They kill! they kill!
they kill! they kill! they kill!"

The soldiers wagered. "Bet you I bring down that fellow there." In this
manner Count Poninsky was killed whilst going into his own house, 52,
Rue de la Paix.

I was anxious to know what I ought to do. Certain treasons, in order to
be proved, need to be investigated. I went to the field of murder.

In such mental agony as this, from very excess of feeling one no longer
thinks, or if one thinks, it is distractedly. One only longs for some
end or other. The death of others instills in you so much horror that
your own death becomes an object of desire; that is to say, if by dying,
you would be in some degree useful! One calls to mind deaths which have
put an end to angers and to revolts. One only retains this ambition, to
be a useful corpse.

I walked along terribly thoughtful.

I went towards the boulevards; I saw there a furnace; I heard there a
thunderstorm.

I saw Jules Simon coming up to me, who during these disastrous days
bravely risked a precious life. He stopped me. "Where are you going?" he
asked me. "You will be killed. What do you want?" "That very thing,"
said I.

We shook hands.

I continued to go on.

I reached the boulevard; the scene was indescribable. I witnessed this
crime, this butchery, this tragedy. I saw that reign of blind death, I
saw the distracted victims fall around me in crowds. It is for this that
I have signed myself in this book AN EYE-WITNESS.

Destiny entertains a purpose. It watches mysteriously over the future
historian. It allows him to mingle with exterminations and carnages, but
it does not permit him to die, because it wishes him to relate them.

In the midst of this inexpressible Pandemonium, Xavier Durrieu met me as
I was crossing the bullet-swept boulevard. He said to me, "Ah, here you
are. I have just met Madame D. She is looking for you." Madame D.[24]
and Madame de la R.,[25] two noble and brave women, had promised Madame
Victor Hugo, who was ill in bed, to ascertain where I was, and to give
her some news of me. Madame D. had heroically ventured into this carnage.
The following incident happened to her. She stopped before a heap of
bodies, and had had the courage to manifest her indignation; at the cry
of horror to which she gave vent, a cavalry soldier had run up behind
her with a pistol in his hand, and had it not been for a quickly opened
door through which she threw herself, and which saved her, she would
have been killed.

It is well known that the total slaughter in this butchery is
unrecorded. Bonaparte has kept these figures hidden in darkness. Such is
the habit of those who commit massacres. They are scarcely likely to
allow history to certify the number of the victims. These statistics are
an obscure multitude which quickly lose themselves in the gloom. One of
the two colonels of whom we have had a glimpse in pages 223-225 of this
work, has stated that his regiment alone had killed "at least 2,500
persons." This would be more than one person per soldier. We believe
that this zealous colonel exaggerates. Crime sometimes boasts of its
blackness.

Lireux, a writer, arrested in order to be shot, and who escaped by a
miracle, declares that he saw "more than 800 corpses."

Towards four o'clock the post-chaises which were in the courtyard of the
Elysée were unhorsed and put up.

This extermination, which an English witness, Captain William Jesse,
calls "a wanton fusillade," lasted from two till five o'clock. During
these three terrible hours, Louis Bonaparte carried out what he had been
premeditating, and completed his work. Up to that time the poor little
"middle-class" conscience was almost indulgent. Well, what of it? It was
a game at Prince, a species of state swindling, a conjuring feat on a
large scale; the sceptics and the knowing men said, "It is a good joke
played upon those idiots." Suddenly Louis Bonaparte grew uneasy and
revealed all his policy. "Tell Saint-Arnaud to execute my orders."
Saint-Arnaud obeyed, the _coup d'état_ acted according to its own code
of laws, and from that appalling moment an immense torrent of blood
began to flow across this crime.

They left the corpses lying on the pavements, wild-looking, livid,
stupefied, with their pockets turned inside out. The military murderer
is thus condemned to mount the villainous scale of guilt. In the morning
an assassin, in the evening a thief.

When night came enthusiasm and joy reigned at the Elysée. These men
triumphed. Conneau has ingeniously related the scene. The familiar
spirits were delirious with joy. Fialin addressed Bonaparte in
hail-fellow-well-met style. "You had better break yourself of that,"
whispered Vieillard. In truth this carnage made Bonaparte Emperor. He
was now "His Majesty." They drank, they smoked like the soldiers on the
boulevards; for having slaughtered throughout the day, they drank
throughout the night; wine flowed upon the blood. At the Elysée they
were amazed at the result. They were enraptured; they loudly expressed
their admiration. "What a capital idea the Prince had had! How well the
thing had been managed! This was much better than flying the country, by
Dieppe, like D'Haussez; or by Membrolle, like Guernon-Ranville; or being
captured, disguised as a footboy, and blacking the boots of Madame de
Saint Fargeau, like poor Polignac!" "Guizot was no cleverer than
Polignac," exclaimed Persigny. Fleury turned to Morny: "Your theorists
would not have succeeded in a _coup d'état_." "That is true, they were
not particularly vigorous," answered Morny. He added, "And yet they were
clever men,--Louis Philippe, Guizot, Thiers--" Louis Bonaparte, taking
his cigarette from his lips, interrupted, "If such are clever men, I
would rather be an ass--"

"A hyena in an ass's skin," says History.


[24] No. 20, Cité Rodier.

[25] Rue Caumartin. See pages 142, 145-148.




CHAPTER XVII.


THE APPOINTMENT MADE WITH THE WORKMEN'S SOCIETIES

What had become of our Committee during these tragic events, and what
was it doing? It is necessary to relate what took place.

Let us go back a few hours.

At the moment when this strange butchery began, the seat of the
Committee was still in the Rue Richelieu. I had gone back to it after
the exploration which I had thought it proper to make at several of the
quarters in insurrection, and I gave an account of what I had seen to my
colleagues. Madier de Montjau, who also arrived from the barricades,
added to my report details of what he had seen. For some time we heard
terrible explosions, which appeared to be close by, and which mingled
themselves with our conversation. Suddenly Versigny came in. He told us
that horrible events were taking place on the Boulevards; that the
meaning of the conflict could not yet be ascertained, but that they were
cannonading, and firing volleys of musket-balls, and that the corpses
bestrewed the pavement; that, according to all appearances, it was a
massacre,--a sort of Saint Bartholomew improvised by the coup d'état;
that they were ransacking the houses at a few steps from us, and that
they were killing every one. The murderers were going from door to door,
and were drawing near. He urged us to leave Grévy's house without delay.
It was manifest that the Insurrectionary Committee would be a "find" for
the bayonets. We decided to leave, whereupon M. Dupont White, a man
distinguished for his noble character and his talent, offered us a
refuge at his house, 11, Rue Monthabor. We went out by the back-door of
Grévy's house, which led into 1, Rue Fontaine Molière, but leisurely,
and two by two, Madier de Montjau with Versigny, Michel de Bourges with
Carnot, myself arm-in-arm with Jules Favre. Jules Favre, dauntless and
smiling as ever, wrapped a comforter over his mouth, and said, "I do not
much mind being shot, but I do mind catching cold."

Jules Favre and I reached the rear of Saint Roch, by the Rue des
Moulins. The Rue Veuve Saint Roch was thronged with a mass of affrighted
passers-by, who came from the Boulevards flying rather than walking. The
men were talking in a loud voice, the women screaming. We could hear the
cannon and the ear-piercing rattle of the musketry. All the shops were
being shut. M. de Falloux, arm-in-arm with M. Albert de Rességuier, was
striding down the Rue de Saint Roch and hurrying to the Rue Saint
Honoré. The Rue Saint Honoré presented a scene of clamorous agitation.
People were coming and going, stopping, questioning one another,
running. The shopkeepers, at the threshold of their half-opened doors,
asked the passers-by what was taking place, and were only answered by
this cry, "Oh, my God!" People came out of their houses bareheaded and
mingled with the crowd. A fine rain was falling. Not a carriage in the
street. At the corner of the Rue Saint Roch and Rue Saint Honoré we
heard voices behind us saying, "Victor Hugo is killed."

"Not yet," said Jules Favre, continuing to smile, and pressing my arm.

They had said the same thing on the preceding day to Esquiros and to
Madier de Montjau. And this rumor, so agreeable to the Reactionaries,
had even reached my two sons, prisoners in the Concièrgerie.

The stream of people driven back from the Boulevards and from the Rue
Richelieu flowed towards the Rue de la Paix. We recognized there some of
the Representatives of the Right who had been arrested on the 2d, and
who were already released. M. Buffet, an ex-minister of M. Bonaparte,
accompanied by numerous other members of the Assembly, was going towards
the Palais Royal. As he passed close by us he pronounced the name of
Louis Bonaparte in a tone of execration.

M. Buffet is a man of some importance; he is one of the three political
advisers of the Right; the two others are M. Fould and M. Molé.

In the Rue Monthabor, two steps from the Rue Saint Honoré, there was
silence and peace. Not one passer-by, not a door open, not a head out of
window.

In the apartment into which we were conducted, on the third story, the
calm was not less perfect. The windows looked upon an inner courtyard.
Five or six red arm-chairs were drawn up before the fire; on the table
could be seen a few books which seemed to me works on political economy
and executive law. The Representatives, who almost immediately joined us
and who arrived in disorder, threw down at random their umbrellas and
their coats streaming with water in the corner of this peaceful room. No
one knew exactly what was happening; every one brought forward his
conjectures.

The Committee was hardly seated in an adjoining little room when our
ex-colleague, Leblond, was announced. He brought with him King the
delegate of the working-men's societies. The delegate told us that the
committee of the societies were sitting in permanent session, and had
sent him to us. According to the instructions of the Insurrectionary
Committee, they had done what they could to lengthen the struggle by
evading too decisive encounters. The greater part of the associations
had not yet given battle; nevertheless the plot was thickening. The
combat had been severe during the morning. The Association of the Rights
of Man was in the streets; the ex-constituent Beslay had assembled, in
the Passage du Caire, six or seven hundred workmen from the Marais, and
had posted them in the streets surrounding the Bank. New barricades
would probably be constructed during the evening, the forward movement
of the resistance was being precipitated, the hand-to-hand struggle
which the Committee had wished to delay seemed imminent, all was rushing
forward with a sort of irresistible impulse. Should we follow it, or
should we stop? Should we run the risk of bringing matters to an end
with one blow, which should be the last, and which would manifestly
leave one adversary on the ground--either the Empire or the Republic?
The workmen's societies asked for our instructions; they still held in
reserve their three or four thousand combatants; and they could,
according to the order which the Committee should give them, either
continue to restrain them or send them under fire without delay. They
believed themselves curtain of their adherents; they would do whatever
we should decide upon, while not hiding from us that the workmen wished
for an immediate conflict, and that it would be somewhat hazardous to
leave them time to become calm.

The majority of the members of the Committee were still in favor of a
certain slackening of action which should tend to prolong the struggle;
and it was difficult to say that they were in the wrong. It was certain
that if they could protract the situation in which the _coup d'état_ had
thrown Paris until the next week, Louis Bonaparte was lost. Paris does
not allow herself to be trampled upon by an army for a whole week.
Nevertheless, I was for my own part impressed with the following:--The
workmen's societies offered us three or four thousand combatants, a
powerful assistance;--the workman does not understand strategy, he lives
on enthusiasm, abatements of ardor discourage him; his zeal is not
extinguished, but it cools:--three thousand to-day would be five hundred
to-morrow. And then some serious incident had just taken place on the
Boulevards. We were still ignorant of what it actually was: we could not
foresee what consequences it might bring about; but seemed to me
impossible that the still unknown, but yet violent event, which had just
taken place would not modify the situation, and consequently change our
plan of battle. I began to speak to this effect. I stated that we ought
to accept the offer of the associations, and to throw them at once into
the struggle; I added that revolutionary warfare often necessitates
sudden changes of tactics, that a general in the open country and before
the enemy operates as he wishes; it is all clear around him; he knows
the effective strength of his soldiers, the number of his regiments; so
many men, so many horses, so many cannons, he knows his strength, and
the strength of his enemy, he chooses his hour and his ground, he has a
map under his eyes, he sees what he is doing. He is sure of his
reserves, he possesses them, he keeps them back, he utilizes them when
he wishes, he always has them by him. "But for ourselves," cried I, "we
are in an undefined and inconceivable position. We are stepping at a
venture upon unknown risks. Who is against us? We hardly know. Who is
with us? We are ignorant. How many soldiers? How many guns? How many
cartridges? Nothing! but the darkness. Perhaps the entire people,
perhaps no one. Keep a reserve! But who would answer for this reserve?
It is an army to-day, it will be a handful of dust to-morrow. We only
can plainly distinguish our duty, as regards all the rest it is black
darkness. We are guessing at everything. We are ignorant of everything.
We are fighting a blind battle! Let us strike all the blows that can be
struck, let us advance straight before us at random, let us rush upon
the danger! And let us have faith, for as we are Justice and the Law,
God must be with us in this obscurity. Let us accept this glorious and
gloomy enterprise of Right disarmed yet still fighting."

The ex-constituent Leblond and the delegate King being consulted by the
Committee, seconded my advice. The Committee decided that the societies
should be requested in our name to come down into the streets
immediately, and to call out their forces. "But we are keeping nothing
for to-morrow," objected a member of the Committee, "what ally shall we
have to-morrow?" "Victory," said Jules Favre. Carnot and Michel de
Bourges remarked that it would be advisable for those members of the
association who belonged to the National Guard to wear their uniforms.
This was accordingly settled.

The delegate King rose,--"Citizen Representatives," said he, "these
orders will be immediately transmitted, our friends are ready, in a few
hours they will assemble. To-night barricades and the combat!"

I asked him, "Would it be useful to you if a Representative, a member of
the Committee, were with you to-night with his sash girded?"

"Doubtless," he answered.

"Well, then," resumed I, "here I am! Take me."

"We will all go," exclaimed Jules Favre.

The delegate observed that it would suffice for one of us to be there at
the moment when the societies should make their appearance, and that he
could then notify the other members of the Committee to come and join
him. It was settled that as soon as the places of meeting and the
rallying-points should be agreed upon, he would send some one to let me
know, and to take me wherever the societies might be. "Before an hour's
time you shall hear from me," said he on leaving us.

As the delegates were going away Mathieu de la Drôme arrived. On coming
in he halted on the threshold of the door, he was pale, he cried out to
us, "You are no longer in Paris, you are no longer under the Republic;
you are in Naples and under King Bomba."

He had come from the boulevards.

Later on I again saw Mathieu de la Drôme. I said to him, "Worse than
Bomba,--Satan."




CHAPTER XVIII.


THE VERIFICATION OF MORAL LAWS

The carnage of the Boulevard Montmartre constitutes the originality of
the _coup d'état_. Without this butchery the 2d of December would only
be an 18th Brumaire. Owing to the massacre Louis Bonaparte escapes the
charge of plagiarism.

Up to that time he had only been an imitator. The little hat at Boulogne,
the gray overcoat, the tame eagle appeared grotesque. What did this parody
mean? people asked. He made them laugh; suddenly he made
them tremble.

He who becomes detestable ceases to be ridiculous.

Louis Bonaparte was more than detestable, he was execrable.

He envied the hugeness of great crimes; he wished to equal the worst.
This striving after the horrible has given him a special place to
himself in the menagerie of tyrants. Petty rascality trying to emulate
deep villainy, a little Nero swelling himself to a huge Lacénaire; such
is this phenomenon. Art for art, assassination for assassination.

Louis Bonaparte has created a special genus.

It was in this manner that Louis Bonaparte made his entry into the
Unexpected. This revealed him.

Certain brains are abysses. Manifestly for a long time past Bonaparte
had harbored the design of assassinating in order to reign.
Premeditation haunts criminals, and it is in this manner that treason
begins. The crime is a long time present in them, but shapeless and
shadowy, they are scarcely conscious of it; souls only blacken
gradually. Such abominable deeds are not invented in a moment; they do
not attain perfection at once and at a single bound; they increase and
ripen, shapeless and indecisive, and the centre of the ideas in which
they exist keeps them living, ready for the appointed day, and vaguely
terrible. This design, the massacre for a throne, we feel sure, existed
for a long time in Louis Bonaparte's mind. It was classed among the
possible events of this soul. It darted hither and thither like a
_larva_ in an aquarium, mingled with shadows, with doubts, with desires,
with expedients, with dreams of one knows not what Caesarian socialism,
like a Hydra dimly visible in a transparency of chaos. Hardly was he
aware that he was fostering this hideous idea. When he needed it, he
found it, armed and ready to serve him. His unfathomable brain had
darkly nourished it. Abysses are the nurseries of monsters.

Up to this formidable day of the 4th December, Louis Bonaparte did not
perhaps quite know himself. Those who studied this curious Imperial
animal did not believe him capable of such pure and simple ferocity.
They saw in him an indescribable mongrel, applying the talents of a
swindler to the dreams of an Empire, who, even when crowned, would be a
thief, who would say of a parricide, What roguery! Incapable of gaining
a footing on any height, even of infamy, always remaining half-way
uphill, a little above petty rascals, a little below great malefactors.
They believed him clever at effecting all that is done in gambling-hells
and in robbers' caves, but with this transposition, that he would cheat
in the caves, and that he would assassinate in the gambling-hells.

The massacre of the Boulevards suddenly unveiled this spirit. They saw it
such as it really was: the ridiculous nicknames "Big-beak," "Badinguet,"
vanished; they saw the bandit, they saw the true _contraffatto_ hidden
under the false Bonaparte.

There was a shudder! It was this then which this man held in reserve!

Apologies have been attempted, they could but fail. It is easy to praise
Bonaparte, for people have praised Dupin; but it is an exceedingly
complicated operation to cleanse him. What is to be done with the 4th
of December? How will that difficulty be surmounted? It is far more
troublesome to justify than to glorify; the sponge works with greater
difficulty than the censer; the panegyrists of the _coup d'état_ have
lost their labor. Madame Sand herself, although a woman of lofty
intellect, has failed miserably in her attempt to rehabilitate
Bonaparte, for the simple reason that whatever one may do, the
death-roll reappears through this whitewashing.

No! no! no extenuation whatever is possible. Unfortunate Bonaparte. The
blood is drawn. It must be drunk.

The deed of the 4th of December is the most colossal dagger-thrust that
a brigand let loose upon civilization has ever effected, we will not say
upon a people, but upon the entire human race. The stroke was most
monstrous, and struck Paris to the ground. Paris on the ground is
Conscience, is Reason, is all human liberty on the ground; it is the
progress of centuries lying on the pavement; it is the torch of Justice,
of Truth, and of Life reversed and extinguished. This is what Louis
Bonaparte effected the day when he effected this.

The success of the wretch was complete. The 2d of December was lost;
the 4th of December saved the 2d of December. It was something like
Erostratus saving Judas. Paris understood that all had not yet been told
as regards deeds of horror, and that beneath the oppressor there was the
garbage-picker. It was the case of a swindler stealing César's mantle.
This man was little, it is true, but terrifying. Paris consented to this
terror, renounced the right to have the last word, went to bed and
simulated death. Suffocation had its share in the matter. This crime
resembled, too, no previous achievements. Even after centuries have
passed, and though he should be an Aeschylus or a Tacitus, any one
raising the cover would smell the stench. Paris resigned herself, Paris
abdicated, Paris surrendered; the novelty of the treason proved its
chief strength; Paris almost ceased to be Paris; on the next day the
chattering of this terrified Titan's teeth could be heard in the
shadows.

Let us lay a stress upon this, for we must verify the laws of morality.
Louis Bonaparte remained, even after the 4th of December, Napoleon the
Little. This enormity still left him a dwarf. The size of the crime does
not change the stature of the criminal, and the pettiness of the
assassin withstands the immensity of the assassination.

Be that as it may, the Pigmy had the better of the Colossus. This
avowal, humiliating as it is, cannot be evaded.

Such are the blushes to which History, that greatly dishonored one, is
condemned.




THE FOURTH DAY--THE VICTORY.




CHAPTER I.


WHAT HAPPENED DURING THE NIGHT--THE RUE TIQUETONNE

Just as Mathieu de la Drôme had said, "You are under King Bomba,"
Charles Gambon entered. He sank down upon a chair and muttered, "It is
horrible." Bancel followed him. "We have come from it," said Bancel.
Gambon had been able to shelter himself in the recess of a doorway. In
front of Barbedienne's alone he had counted thirty-seven corpses. What
was the meaning of it all? To what purpose was this monstrous
promiscuous murder? No one could understand it. The Massacre was a
riddle.

We were in the Sphinx's Grotto.

Labrousse came in. It was urgently necessary that we should leave Dupont
White's house. It was on the point of being surrounded. For some moments
the Rue Monthabor, ordinarily so deserted, was becoming thronged with
suspicious figures. Men seemed to be attentively watching number Eleven.
Some of these men, who appeared to be acting in concert, belonged to the
ex-"Club of Clubs," which, owing to the manoeuvres of the Reactionists,
exhaled a vague odor of the police. It was necessary that we should
disperse. Labrousse said to us, "I have just seen Longe-pied roving
about."

We separated. We went away one by one, and each in his own direction. We
did not know where we should meet again, or whether we should meet
again. What was going to happen and what was about to become of us all?
No one knew. We were filled with a terrible dread.

I turned up towards the Boulevards, anxious to see what was taking
place.

What was taking place I have just related.

Bancel and Versigny had rejoined me.

As I left the Boulevards, mingled with the whirl of the terrified crowd,
not knowing where I was going, returning towards the centre of Paris, a
voice suddenly whispered in my ear, "There is something over there which
you ought to see." I recognized the voice. It was the voice of E.P.

E.P. is a dramatic author, a man of talent, for whom under Louis
Philippe I had procured exemption from military service. I had not seen
him for four or five years. I met him again in this tumult. He spoke to
me as though we had seen each other yesterday. Such are these times of
bewilderment. There is no time to greet each other "according to the
rules of society." One speaks as though all were in full flight.

"Ah! it is you!" I exclaimed. "What do you want with me?"

He answered me, "I live in a house over there."

And he added,-

"Come."

He drew me into a dark street. We could hear explosions. At the bottom
of the street could be seen the ruins of a barricade. Versigny and
Bancel, as I have just said, were with me. E.P. turned to them.

"These gentlemen can come," said he.

I asked him,--

"What street is this?"

"The Rue Tiquetonne."

We followed him.

I have elsewhere told this tragical event.[26]

E.P. stopped before a tall and gloomy house. He pushed open a
street-door which was not shut, then another door and we entered into a
parlor perfectly quiet and lighted by a lamp.

This room appeared to adjoin a shop. At the end could be distinguished
two beds side by side, one large and one small. Above the little bed
hung a woman's portrait, and above the portrait a branch of holy
box-tree.

The lamp was placed over the fireplace, where a little fire was burning.

Near the lamp upon a chair there was an old woman leaning forward,
stooping down, folded in two as though broken, over something which was
in the shadow, and which she held in her arms. I drew near. That which
she held in her arms was a dead child.

The poor woman was silently sobbing.

E.P., who belonged to the house, touched her on the shoulder, and
said,--

"Let us see it."

The old woman raised her head, and I saw on her knees a little boy, pale,
half-undressed, pretty, with two red holes in his forehead.

The old woman stared at me, but she evidently did not see me, she
muttered, speaking to herself,--

"And to think that he called me 'Granny' this morning!"

E.P. took the child's hand, the hand fell back again.

"Seven years old," he said to me.

A basin was on the ground. They had washed the child's face; two tiny
streams of blood trickled from the two holes.

At the end of the room, near a half-opened clothes-press, in which could
be seen some linen, stood a woman of some forty years, grave, poor, clean,
fairly good-looking.

"A neighbor," E.P. said to me.

He explained to me that a doctor lived in the house, that the doctor had
come down and had said, "There is nothing to be done." The child had
been hit by two balls in the head while crossing the street to "get out
of the way." They had brought him back to his grandmother, who "had no
one left but him."

The portrait of the dead mother hung above the little bed.

The child had his eyes half open, and that inexpressible gaze of the
dead, where the perception of the real is replaced by the vision of the
infinite. The grandmother spoke through her sobs by snatches: "God! is
it possible? Who would have thought it?--What brigands!"

She cried out,--

"Is this then the Government?"

"Yes," I said to her.

We finished undressing the child. He had a top in his pocket. His head
rolled from one shoulder to the other; I held him and I kissed him on
the brow; Versigny and Bancel took off his stockings. The grandmother
suddenly started up.

"Do not hurt him!" she cried.

She took the two little white and frozen feet in her old hands, trying
to warm them.

When the poor little body was naked, they began to lay it out. They took
a sheet from the clothes-press.

Then the grandmother burst into bitter lamentation.

She cried out,--

"They shall give him back to me!"

She drew herself up and gazed at us, and began to pour forth incoherent
utterances, in which were mingled Bonaparte, and God, and her little
one, and the school to which he went, and her daughter whom she had
lost, and even reproaches to us. She was livid, haggard, as though
seeing a vision before her, and was more of a phantom than the dead
child.

Then she again buried her face in her hands, placed her folded arms on
her child, and once more began to sob.

The woman who was there came up to me, and without saying a word, wiped
my mouth with a handkerchief. I had blood upon my lips.

What could be done? Alas! We went out overwhelmed.

It was quite dark. Bancel and Versigny left me.


[26] "Les Châtiments."




CHAPTER II.


WHAT HAPPENED DURING THE NIGHT--THE MARKET QUARTER

I came back to my lodging, 19, Rue Richelieu.

The massacre seemed to be at an end; the fusillades were heard no
longer. As I was about to knock at the door I hesitated for a moment; a
man was there who seemed to be waiting. I went straight up to this man,
and I said to him,--

"You seem to be waiting for somebody?"

He answered,--

"Yes."

"For whom?"

"For you."

And he added, lowering his voice, "I have come to speak to you."

I looked at this man. A street-lamp shone on him. He did not avoid the
light.

He was a young man with a fair beard, wearing a blue blouse, and who had
the gentle bearing of a thinker and the robust hands of a workman.

"Who are you?" I asked him.

He answered,--"I belong to the Society of the Last-makers. I know you
very well, Citizen Victor Hugo."

"From whom do you come?" I resumed.

He answered still in a whisper,--

"From Citizen King."

"Very good," said I.

He then told me his name. As he has survived the events of the night of
the 4th, and as he since escaped the denunciations, it can be understood
that we will not mention his name here, and that we shall confine
ourselves to terming him throughout the course of this story by his
trade, calling him the "last-maker."[27]

"What do you want to say to me?" I asked him.

He explained that matters were not hopeless, that he and his friends
meant to continue the resistance, that the meeting-places of the
Societies had not yet been settled, but that they would be during the
evening, that my presence was desired, and that if I would be under the
Colbert Arcade at nine o'clock, either himself or another of their men
would be there, and would serve me as guide. We decided that in order to
make himself known, the messenger, when accosting me, should give the
password, "What is Joseph doing?"

I do not know whether he thought he noticed any doubt or mistrust on my
part. He suddenly interrupted himself, and said,--

"After all, you are not bound to believe me. One does not think of
everything: I ought to have asked them to give me a word in writing. At
a time like this one distrusts everybody."

"On the contrary," I said to him, "one trusts everybody. I will be in
the Colbert Arcade at nine o'clock."

And I left him.

I re-entered my asylum. I was tired, I was hungry, I had recourse to
Charamaule's chocolate and to a small piece of bread which I had still
left. I sank down into an arm-chair, I ate and I slept. Some slumbers
are gloomy. I had one of those slumbers, full of spectres; I again saw
the dead child and the two red holes in his forehead, these formed two
mouths: one said "Morny," and the other "Saint-Arnaud." History is not
made, however, to recount dreams. I will abridge. Suddenly I awoke. I
started: "If only it is not past nine o'clock!" I had forgotten to wind
up my watch. It had stopped. I went out hastily. The street was lonely,
the shops were shut. In the Place Louvos I heard the hour striking
(probably from Saint Roch); I listened. I counted nine strokes. In a few
moments I was under the Colbert Arcade. I peered into the darkness. No
one was under the Arcade.

I felt that it was impossible to remain there, and have the appearance
of waiting about; near the Colbert Arcade there is a police-station, and
the patrols were passing every moment. I plunged into the street. I
found no one there. I went as far as the Rue Vivienne. At the corner of
the Rue Vivienne a man was stopping before a placard and was trying to
deface it or to tear it down. I drew near this man, who probably took me
for a police agent, and who fled at the top of his speed. I retraced my
steps. Near the Colbert Arcade, and just as I reached the point in the
street where they post the theatrical bills, a workman passed me, and
said quickly, "What is Joseph doing?"

I recognized the last-maker.

"Come," he said to me.

We set out without speaking and without appearing to know each other, he
walking some steps before me.

We first went to two addresses, which I cannot mention here without
pointing out victims for the proscription. In these two houses we got no
news; no one had come there on the part of the societies.

"Let us go to the third place," said the last-maker, and he explained to
me that they had settled among them three successive meeting-places, in
case of need, so as to be always sure of finding each other if,
perchance, the police discovered the first or even the second
meeting-place, a precaution which for our part we adopted as much as
possible with regard to our meetings of the Left end of the Committee.

We had reached the market quarter. Fighting had been going on there
throughout the day. There were no longer any gas-lamps in the streets.
We stopped from time to time, and listened so as not to run headlong
into the arms of a patrol. We got over a paling of planks almost
completely destroyed, and of which barricades had probably been made,
and we crossed the extensive area of half-demolished houses which at
that epoch encumbered the lower portions of the Rue Montmartre and Rue
Montorgueil. On the peaks of the high dismantled gables could be seen a
flickering red glow, doubtless the reflection of the bivouac-fires of the
soldiers encamped in the markets and in the neighborhood of Saint
Eustache. This reflection lighted our way. The last-maker, however,
narrowly escaped falling into a deep hole, which was no less than the
cellar of a demolished house. On coming out of this region, covered with
ruins, amongst which here and there a few trees might be perceived, the
remains of gardens which had now disappeared, we entered into narrow,
winding, and completely dark streets, where it was impossible to
recognize one's whereabouts. Nevertheless the last-maker walked on as
much at his ease as in broad daylight, and like a man who is going
straight to his destination. Once he turned round to me, and said to
me,--

"The whole of this quarter is barricaded; and if, as I hope, our friends
come down, I will answer that they will hold it for a long time."

Suddenly he stopped. "Here is one," said he. In truth, seven or eight
paces before us was a barricade entirely constructed of paving-stones,
not exceeding a man's height, and which in the darkness appeared like a
ruined wall. A narrow passage had been formed at one end. We passed
through it. There was no one behind the barricade.

"There has already been fighting here a short time ago," said the
last-maker in a low voice; and he added, after a pause, "We are getting
near."

The unpaving had left holes, of which we had to be careful. We strode,
and sometimes jumped, from paving-stone to paving-stone. Notwithstanding
the intense darkness, there yet hovered about an indefinable glimmer; on
our way we noticed before us on the ground, close to the foot-pavement,
something which looked like a stretched-out form. "The devil!" muttered
my guide, "we were just going to walk upon it." He took a little wax
match from his pocket and struck it on his sleeve; the flame flashed
out. The light fell upon a pallid face, which looked at us with fixed
eyes. It was a corpse lying there; it was an old man. The last-maker
rapidly waved the match from his head to his feet. The dead man was
almost in the attitude of a crucified man; his two arms were stretched
out; his white hair, red at the ends, was soaking in the mud; a pool of
blood was beneath him; a large blackish patch on his waistcoat marked
the place where the ball had pierced his breast; one of his braces was
undone; he had thick laced boots on his feet. The last-maker lifted up
one of his arms, and said, "His collar-bone is broken." The movement
shook the head, and the open mouth turned towards us as though about to
speak to us. I gazed at this vision; I almost listened. Suddenly it
disappeared.

This face re-entered the gloom; the match had just gone out.

We went away in silence. After walking about twenty paces, the
last-maker, as though talking to himself, said in a whisper, "Don't know
him."

We still pushed forward. From the cellars to the roofs, from the
ground-floors to the garrets, there was not a light in the house. We
appeared to be groping in an immense tomb.

A man's voice, firm and sonorous, suddenly issued out of the darkness,
and shouted to us, "Who goes there?"

"Ah, there they are!" said the last-maker, and he uttered a peculiar
whistle.

"Come on," resumed the voice.

It was another barricade. This one, a little higher than the first, and
separated from it by a distance of about a hundred paces, was, as far as
could be seen, constructed of barrels filled with paving-stones. On the
top could be seen the wheels of a truck entangled between the barrels;
planks and beams were intermingled. A passage had been contrived still
narrower than the gangway of the other barricade.

"Citizens," said the last-maker, as he went into the barricade, "how
many of you are there here?"

The voice which had shouted, "Who goes there?" answered,--

"There are two of us."

"Is that all?"

"That is all."

They were in truth two,--two men who alone during that night, in that
solitary street, behind that heap of paving-stones, awaited the
onslaught of a regiment.

Both wore blouses; they were two workmen; with a few cartridges in their
pockets, and a musket upon each of their shoulders.

"So then," resumed the last-maker, in an impatient tone, "our friends
have not yet come!"

"Well, then," I said to him, "let us wait for them."

The last-maker spoke for a short time in a low tone, and probably told
my name to one of the two defenders of the barricade, who came up to me
and saluted me. "Citizen Representative," said he, "it will be very warm
here shortly."

"In the meantime," answered I laughingly, "it is cold."

It was very cold, in truth. The street which was completely unpaved
behind the barricade, was nothing better than a sewer, ankle deep in
water.

"I say that it will be warm," resumed the workman, "and that you would
do well to go farther off."

The last-maker put his hand on his shoulder: "Comrade, it is necessary
that we should remain here. The meeting-place is close by, in the
ambulance."

"All the same," resumed the other workman, who was very short, and who
stood up on a paving-stone; "the Citizen Representative would do well to
go farther off."

"I can very well be where you are," said I to him.

The street was quite dark, nothing could be seen of the sky. Inside the
barricade on the left, on the side where the passage was, could be seen
a high paling of badly joined planks, through which shone in places a
feeble light. Above the paling rose out, lost in the darkness, a house
of six or seven storys; the ground floor, which was being repaired, and
which was under-pinned, being closed in by these planks. A ray of light
issuing from between the planks fell on the opposite wall, and lighted
up an old torn placard, on which could be read, "Asnières. Water
tournaments. Grand ball."

"Have you another gun?" asked the last-maker of the taller of the two
workmen.

"If we had three guns we should be three men," answered the workman.

The little one added, "Do you think that the good will is wanting? There
are plenty of musicians, but there are no clarionets."

By the side of the wooden paling could be seen a little, narrow and low
door, which looked more like the door of a stall than the door of a
shop. The shop to which this door belonged was hermetically sealed. The
door seemed to be equally closed. The last-maker went up to it and
pushed it gently. It was open.

"Let us go in," he said.

I went in first, he followed me, and shut the door behind me. We were in
a room on the ground floor. At the end, on the left, a half-opened door
emitted the reflection of a light. The room was only lighted by this
reflection. A counter and a species of stove, painted in black and
white, could be dimly distinguished.

A short, half-suffocated, intermittent gurgling could be heard, which
seemed to come from an adjoining room on the same side as the light. The
last-maker walked quickly to the half-opened door. I crossed the room
after him, and we found ourselves in a sort of vast shed, lighted by one
candle. We were on the other side of the plank paling. There was only
the plank paling between ourselves and the barricade.

This species of shed was the ground floor in course of demolition. Iron
columns, painted red, and fixed into stone sockets at short distances
apart, supported the joists of the ceiling; facing the street, a huge
framework standing erect, and denoting the centre of the surrounding
paling, supported the great cross-beam of the first story, that is to
say, supported the whole house. In a corner were lying some masons'
tools, a heap of rubbish, and a large double ladder. A few straw-bottomed
chairs were scattered here and there. The damp ground served for the
flooring. By the side of a table, on which stood a candle in the midst
of medicine bottles, an old woman and a young girl of about eight years
old--the woman seated, the child squatting before a great basketful of
old linen--were making lint. The end of the room, which was lost in the
darkness, was carpeted with a litter of straw, on which three mattresses
had been thrown. The gurgling noise came from there.

"It is the ambulance," said the last-maker.

The old woman turned her head, and seeing us, shuddered convulsively,
and then, reassured probably by the blouse of the last-maker, she got up
and came towards us.

The last-maker whispered a few words in her ear. She answered, "I have
seen nobody."

Then she added, "But what makes me uneasy is that my husband has not yet
come back. They have done nothing but fire muskets the whole evening."

Two men were lying on two of the mattresses at the end of the room. A
third mattress was unoccupied and was waiting.

The wounded man nearest to me had received a musket ball in his stomach.
He it was who was gurgling. The old woman came towards the mattress with
a candle, and whispered to us, showing us her fist, "If you could only
see the hole that that has made! We have stuffed lint as large as this
into his stomach."

She resumed, "He is not above twenty-five years old. He will be dead
to-morrow morning."

The other was still younger. He was hardly eighteen. "He has a handsome
black overcoat," said the woman. "He is most likely a student." The
young man had the whole of the lower part of his face swathed in
blood-stained linen. She explained to us that he had received a ball in
the mouth, which had broken his jaw. He was in a high fever, and gazed
at us with lustrous eyes. From time to time he stretched his right arm
towards a basin full of water in which a sponge was soaking; he took the
sponge, carried it to his face, and himself moistened his bandages.

It seemed to me that his gaze fastened upon me in a singular manner. I
went up to him, I stooped down, and I gave him my hand, which he took in
his own. "Do you know me?" I asked him. He answered "Yes," by a pressure
of the hand which went to my heart.

The last-maker said to me, "Wait a minute for me here, I shall be back
directly; I want to see in this neighborhood, if there is any means of
getting a gun."

He added,--

"Would you like one for yourself?"

"No," answered I. "I shall remain here without a gun. I only take a half
share in the civil war; I am willing to die, I am not willing to kill."

I asked him if he thought his friends were going to come. He declared
that he could not understand it, that the men from the societies ought
to have arrived already, that instead of two men in the barricade there
should be twenty, that instead of two barricades in the street there
should have been ten, and that something must have happened; he added,--

"However, I will go and see; promise to wait for me here."

"I promise you," I answered, "I will wait all night if necessary."

He left me.

The old woman had reseated herself near the little girl, who did not
seem to understand much of what was passing round her, and who from time
to time raised great calm eyes towards me. Both were poorly clad, and it
seemed to me that the child had stockingless feet. "My man has not yet
come back," said the old woman, "my poor man has not yet come back. I
hope nothing has happened to him!" With many heart-rending "My God's,"
and all the while quickly picking her lint, she wept. I could not help
thinking with anguish of the old man we had seen stretched on the
pavement at a few paces distant.

A newspaper was lying on the table. I took it up, and I unfolded it. It
was the _P----_, the rest of the title had been torn off. A
blood-stained hand was plainly imprinted on it. A wounded man on
entering had probably placed his hand on the table on the spot where the
newspaper lay. My eyes fell upon these lines:--

"M. Victor Hugo has just published an appeal to pillage and
assassination."

In these terms the journal of the Elysée described the proclamation
which I had dictated to Baudin, and which may be read in page 103 of
this History.

As I threw back the paper on the table one of the two defenders of the
barricade entered. It was the short man.

"A glass of water," said he. By the side of the medicine bottles there
was a decanter and a glass. He drank, greedily. He held in his hand a
morsel of bread and a sausage, which he was biting.

Suddenly we heard several successive explosions, following one after
another, and which seemed but a short distance off. In the silence of
this dark night it resembled the sound of a load of wood being shot on
to the pavement.

The calm and serious voice of the other combatant shouted from outside,
"It is beginning."

"Have I time to finish my bread?" asked the little one.

"Yes," said the other.

The little one then turned to me.

"Citizen Representative," said he to me, "those are volleys. They are
attacking the barricades over there. Really you must go away."

I answered him, "But you yourselves are going to stay here."

"As for us, we are armed," resumed he; "as for you, you are not. You
will only get yourself killed without benefiting any one. If you had a
gun, I should say nothing. But you have not. You must go away."

"I cannot," I answered him. "I am waiting for some one."

He wished to continue and to urge me. I pressed his hand.

"Let me do as I like," said I.

He understood that my duty was to remain, and no longer persisted.

There was a pause. He again began to bite his bread. The gurgling of the
dying man alone was audible. At that moment a sort of deep and hollow
booming reached us. The old woman started from her chair, muttering, "It
is the cannon!"

"No," said the little man, "it is the slamming of a street-door." Then
he resumed, "There now! I have finished my bread," and he dusted one
hand against the other, and went out.

In the meantime the explosions continued, and seemed to come nearer. A
noise sounded in the shop. It was the last-maker who was coming back. He
appeared on the threshold of the ambulance. He was pale.

"Here I am," said he, "I have come to fetch you. We must go home. Let us
be off at once."

I arose from the chair where I had seated myself. "What does this mean?
Will they not come?"

"No," he answered, "no one will come. All is at an end."

Then he hastily explained that he had gone through the whole of the
quarter in order to find a gun, that it was labor lost, that he had
spoken to "two or three," that we must abandon all hope of the
societies, _that they would not come down_, that what had been done
during the day had appalled every one, that the best men were terrified,
that the boulevards were "full of corpses," that the soldiers had
committed "horrors," that the barricade was about to be attacked, that
on his arrival he had heard the noise of footsteps in the direction of
the crossway, that it was the soldiers who were advancing, that we could
do nothing further there, that we must be off, that this house was
"stupidly chosen," that there was no outlet in the rear, that perhaps we
should already find it difficult to get out of the street, and that we
had only just time.

He told this all panting, briefly, jerkily, and interrupted at every
moment with this ejaculation, "And to think that they have no arms, and
to think that I have no gun!"

As he finished we heard from the barricade a shout of "Attention!" and
almost immediately a shot was fired.

A violent discharge replied to this shot.

Several balls struck the paling of the ambulance, but they were too
obliquely aimed, and none pierced it. We heard the glass of several
broken windows falling noisily into the street.

"There is no longer time," said the last-maker calmly; "the barricade is
attacked."

He took a chair and sat down. The two workmen were evidently excellent
marksmen. Two volleys assailed the barricade, one after the other. The
barricade answered with animation. Then the fire ceased. There was a
pause.

"Now they are coming at us with the bayonet! They are coming at the
double!" said a voice in the barricade.

The other voice said, "Let us be off." A last musket-shot was fired.
Then a violent blow which we interpreted as a warning shook our wooden
wall. It was in reality one of the workmen who had thrown down his gun
when going away; the gun in falling had struck the paling of the
ambulance. We heard the rapid steps of the two combatants, as they ran
off.

Almost at the same moment a tumult of voices, and of butt ends of
muskets striking the paving-stones, filled the barricade.

"It is taken," said the last-maker, and he blew out the candle.

To the silence which enveloped this street a moment before succeeded a
sort of ill-omened tumult. The soldiers knocked at the doors of the
houses with the butt-ends of their muskets. It was by a miracle that the
shop-door escaped them. If they had merely pushed against it, they would
have seen that it was not shut, and would have entered.

A voice, probably the voice of an officer, cried out, "Light up the
windows!" The soldiers swore. We heard them say, "Where are those
blackguard Reds? Let us search the houses." The ambulance was plunged in
darkness. Not a word was spoken, not a breath could be heard; even the
dying man, as though he divined the danger, had ceased to gurgle. I felt
the little girl pressing herself against my legs.

A soldier struck the barrels, and said laughingly,--

"Here is something to make a fire with to-night."

Another resumed,--

"Which way have they gone? They were at least thirty. Let us search the
houses."

We heard one raising objections to this,--

"Nonsense! What do you want to do on a night like this? Enter the houses
of the 'middle classes' indeed! There is some waste ground over yonder.
They have taken refuge there."

"All the same," repeated the others, "let us search the houses."

At this moment a musket-shot was fired from the end of the street.

This shot saved us.

In fact, it was probably one of the two workmen who had fired in order
to draw off their attention from us.

"That comes from over there," cried the soldiers, "They are over there!"
and all starting off at once in the direction from which the shot had
been fired, they left the barricade and ran down the street at the top
of their speed.

The last-maker and myself got up.

"They are no longer there," whispered he. "Quick! let us be off."

"But this poor woman," said I. "Are we going to leave her here?"

"Oh," she said, "do not be afraid, I have nothing to fear; as for me, I
am an ambulance. I am taking care of the wounded. I shall even relight
my candle when you are gone. What troubles me is that my poor husband
has not yet come back!"

We crossed the shop on tiptoe. The last-maker gently opened the door and
glanced out into the street. Some inhabitants had obeyed the order to
light up their windows, and four or five lighted candles here and there
flickered in the wind upon the sills of the windows. The street was no
longer completely dark.

"There is no one about now," said the last-maker; "but let us make
haste, for they will probably come back."

We went out: the old woman closed the door behind us, and we found
ourselves in the street. We got over the barricade and hurried away as
quickly as possible. We passed by the dead old man. He was still there,
lying on the pavement indistinctly revealed by the flickering glimmer
from the windows; he looked as though he was sleeping. As we reached the
second barricade we heard behind us the soldiers, who were returning.

We succeeded in regaining the streets in course of demolition. There we
were in safety. The sound of musketry still reached us. The last-maker
said, "They are fighting in the direction of the Rue de Cléry." Leaving
the streets in course of demolition, we went round the markets, not
without risk of falling into the hands of the patrols, by a number of
zigzags, and from one little street to another little street. We reached
the Rue Saint Honoré.

At the corner of the Rue de l'Arbre Sec the last-maker and I separated,
"For in truth," said he to me, "two run more danger than one." And I
regained No. 19, Rue Richelieu.

While crossing the rue des Bourdonnais we had noticed the bivouac of the
Place Saint Eustache. The troops who had been dispatched for the attack
had not yet come back. Only a few companies were guarding it. We could
hear shouts of laughter. The soldiers were warming themselves at large
fires lighted here and there. In the fire which was nearest to us we
could distinguish in the middle of the brazier the wheels of the
vehicles which had served for the barricades. Of some there only
remained a great hoop of red-hot iron.


[27] We may now, after twenty-six years, give the name of this loyal
and courageous man. His name was Galoy (and not Galloix, as certain
historians of the _coup d'état_ have printed it while recounting, after
their fashion, the incidents which we are about to read).




CHAPTER III.


WHAT HAPPENED DURING THE NIGHT.--THE PETIT CARREAU

On the same night, almost at the same moment, at a few paces distant, a
villainous deed was being perpetrated.

After the taking of the barricade, where Pierre Tissié was killed,
seventy or eighty combatants had retired in good order by the Rue Saint
Sauveur. They had reached the Rue Montorgueil, and had rejoined each
other at the junction of the Rue du Petit Carreau and the Rue du Cadran.
At this point the street rises. At the corner of the Rue du Petit
Carreau and the Rue de Cléry there was a deserted barricade, fairly high
and well built. There had been fighting there during the morning. The
soldiers had taken it, but had not demolished it. Why? As we have said,
there were several riddles of this nature during this day.

The armed band which came from the Rue Saint Denis had halted there and
had waited. These men were astonished at not being pursued. Had the
soldiers feared to follow them into the little narrow streets, where
each corner of the houses might conceal an ambuscade? Had a counter
order been given? They hazarded various conjectures. Moreover they heard
close by, evidently on the boulevard, a terrific noise of musketry, and
a cannonade which resembled continuous thunder. Having no more
ammunition, they were reduced to listen. If they had known what was
taking place there, they would have understood why they were not
pursued. The butchery of the boulevard was beginning. The generals
employed in the massacre had suspended fighting for awhile.

The fugitives of the boulevard streamed in their direction, but when
they perceived the barricade they turned back. Some, however, joined
them indignant, and crying out for vengeance. One who lived in the
neighborhood ran home and brought back a little tin barrel full of
cartridges.

These were sufficient for an hour's fighting. They began to construct a
barricade at the corner of the Rue du Cadran. In this manner the Rue du
Petit Carreau, closed by two barricades, one towards the Rue de Cléry,
the other at the corner of the Rue du Cadran, commanded the whole of the
Rue Montorgueil. The space between these two barricades formed a perfect
citadel. The second barricade was stronger than the first.

These men nearly all wore coats. Some of them rolled the paving-stones
with gloves on.

Few workmen were amongst them, but those who were there were intelligent
and energetic. These workmen were what might be termed the "pick of the
crowd."

Jeanty Sarre had rejoined them; he at once became their leader.

Charpentier accompanied him, too brave to abandon the enterprise, but
too much a dreamer to become a commander.

Two barricades, enclosing in the same manner some forty yards of the Rue
Montorgueil, had just been constructed at the top of the Rue Mauconseil.

Three other barricades, extremely feebly constructed, again intersected
the Rue Montorgueil in the space which separates the Rue Mauconseil from
Saint Eustache.

Evening was closing in. The fusillade was ceasing upon the boulevard. A
surprise was possible. They established a sentry-post at the corner of
the Rue du Cadran, and sent a main-guard in the direction of the Rue
Montmartre. Their scouts came in to report some items of information. A
regiment seemed to be preparing to bivouac in the Place des Victoires.

Their position, to all appearance strong, was not so in reality. There
were too few in number to defend at the same time the two barricades on
the Rue de Cléry and the Rue Montorgueil, and the soldiers arriving in
the rear hidden by the second barricade would have been upon them
without being even noticed. This determined them to establish a post in
the Rue de Cléry. They put themselves in communication with the
barricades of the Rue du Cadran and with the two Mauconseil barricades.
These two last barricades were only separated from them by a space of
about 150 paces. They were about six feet high, fairly solid, but only
guarded by six workmen who had built them.

Towards half-past four, in the twilight--the twilight begins early in
December--Jeanty Sarre took four men with him and went out to
reconnoitre. He thought also of raising an advanced barricade in one of
the little neighboring streets. On the way they found one which had been
abandoned, and which had been built with barrels. The barrels, however,
were empty, only one contained any paving-stones, and the barricade
could not have been held for two minutes. As they left this barricade
they were assailed by a sharp discharge of musketry. A company of
infantry, hardly visible in the dusk, was close upon them.

They fell back hastily; but one of them, who was a shoemaker of the
Faubourg du Temple, was hit, and had remained on the pavement. They went
back and brought him away. He had the thumb of the right hand smashed.
"Thank God!" said Jeanty Sarre, "they have not killed him." "No," said
the poor man, "it is my bread which they have killed."

And he added, "I can no longer work; who will maintain my children?"

They went back, carrying the wounded man. One of them, a medical
student, bound up his wound.

The sentries, whom it was necessary to post in every direction, and who
were chosen from the most trustworthy men, thinned and exhausted the
little central land. There were scarcely thirty in the barricade itself.

There, as in the Quarter of the Temple, all the streetlamps were
extinguished; the gas-pipes cut; the windows closed and unlighted; no
moon, not even stars. The night was profoundly dark.

They could hear distant fusillades. The soldiers were firing from around
Saint Eustache, and every three minutes sent a ball in their direction,
as much as to say, "We are here." Nevertheless they did not expect an
attack before the morning.

Dialogues like the following took place amongst them:--

"I wish I had a truss of straw," said Charpentier; "I have a notion that
we shall sleep here to-night."

"Will you be able to get to sleep?" asked Jeanty Sarre.

"I? Certainly I shall go to sleep."

He did go to sleep, in fact, a few moments later.

In this gloomy network of narrow streets, intersected with barricades,
and blockaded by soldiers, two wine-shops had remained open. They made
more lint there, however, than they drank wine; the orders of the chiefs
were only to drink reddened water.

The doorway of one of these wine-shops opened exactly between the two
barricades of the Petit Cancan. In it was a clock by which they
regulated the sentries' relief. In a back room they had locked up two
suspicious-looking persons who had intermingled with the combatants. One
of these men at the moment when he was arrested said, "I have come to
fight for Henri V." They kept them under lock and key, and placed a
sentry at the door.

An ambulance had been established in an adjoining room. There the
wounded shoemaker was lying upon a mattress thrown upon the ground.

They had established, in case of need, another ambulance in the Rue du
Cadran. An opening had been effected at the corner of the barricade on
this side, so that the wounded could be easily carried away.

Towards half-past nine in the evening a man came up to the barricade.

Jeanty Sarre recognized him.

"Good day, Denis," said he.

"Call me, Gaston," said the man.

"Why?"

"Because--"

"Are you your brother?"

"Yes, I am my brother. For to-day."

"Very well. Good-day, Gaston."

They heartily shook hands.

It was Denis Dussoubs.

He was pale, calm, and bleeding; he had already been fighting during the
morning. At the barricade of the Faubourg Saint Martin a ball had grazed
his breast, but had been turned off by some money in his pocket, and had
only broken the skin. He had had the rare good fortune of being
scratched by a ball. It was like the first touch from the claws of
death. He wore a cap, his hat having been left behind in the barricade
where he had fought: and he had replaced his bullet-pierced overcoat,
which was made of Belleisle cloth, by a pea-jacket bought at a
slop-shop.

How had he reached the barricade of the Petit Carreau? He could not say.
He had walked straight before him. He had glided from street to street.
Chance takes the predestined by the hand, and leads them straight to
their goal through the thick darkness.

At the moment when he entered the barricade they cried out to him, "Who
goes there?" He answered, "The Republic!"

They saw Jeanty Sarre shake him by the hand. They asked Jeanty Sarre,--

"Who is he?"

Jeanty Sarre answered,--

"It is some one."

And he added,--

"We were only sixty a short time since. We are a hundred now."

All pressed round the new-comer. Jeanty Sarre offered him the command.

"No," said he, "I do not understand the tactics of barricade fighting. I
should be a bad chief, but I am a good soldier. Give me a gun."

They seated themselves on the paving-stones. They exchanged their
experiences of what had been done. Denis described to them the fighting
on the Faubourg Saint Martin. Jeanty Sarre told Denis of the fighting in
the Rue Saint Denis.

During all this time the generals were preparing a final assault,--what
the Marquis of Clermont-Tonnerre, in 1822, called the "Coup de Collier,"
and what, in 1789, the Prince of Lambese had called the "Coup de Bas."
Throughout all Paris there was now only this point which offered any
resistance. This knot of barricade, this labyrinth of streets, embattled
like a redoubt, was the last citadel of the People and of Right. The
generals invested it leisurely, step by step, and on all sides. They
concentrated their forces. They, the combatants of this fateful hour,
knew nothing of what was being done. Only from time to time they
interrupted their recital of events and they listened. From the right
and from the left, from the front, from the rear, from every side, at
the same time, an unmistakable murmur, growing every moment louder, and
more distinct, hoarse, piercing, fear-inspiring, reached them through
the darkness. It was the sound of the battalions marching and charging
at the trumpet-command in all the adjoining streets. They resumed their
gallant conversation, and then in another moment they stopped again and
listened to that species of ill-omened chant, chanted by Death, which
was approaching.

Nevertheless some still thought that they would not be attacked till the
next morning. Night combats are rare in street-warfare. They are more
"risky" than all the other conflicts. Few generals venture upon them.
But amongst the old hands of the barricade, from certain never-failing
signs, they believed that an assault was imminent.

In fact, at half-past ten at night, and not at eight o'clock as General
Magnan has said in the despicable document which he calls his report--a
special movement was heard in the direction of the markets. This was the
marching of the troops. Colonel de Lourmel had determined to make the
attack. The 51st of the Line, posted at Saint Eustache, entered the Rue
Montorgueil. The 2d battalion formed the advanced guard. The Grenadiers
and the Light Infantry, hurled forward at the double, quickly carried
the three little barricades which were on the other side of the vacant
space of the Rue Mauconseil, and the feebly defended barricades of the
adjoining streets. It was at that very moment that the barricade near
which I was happened to be carried.

From the barricade of the Petit Carreau they heard the night-strife draw
near through the darkness, with a fitful noise, strange and appalling.
First a great tumult, then volleys, then silence, and then all began
again. The flashing of the fusillades suddenly delineated in the darkness
the outlines of the houses, which appeared as though they themselves
were affrighted.

The decisive moment drew near.

The outpost had fallen back upon the barricades. The advanced posts of
the Rue de Cléry and the Rue du Cadran had come back. They called over
the roll. Not one of those of the morning was missing.

They were, as we have said, about sixty combatants, and not a hundred,
as the Magnan report has stated.

From the upper extremity of the street where they were stationed it was
difficult to ascertain what was happening. They did not exactly know how
many barricades they were in the Rue Montorgueil between them and Saint
Eustache, whence the troops were coming. They only knew that their
nearest point of resistance was the double Mauconseil barricade, and
that, when all was at an end there, it would be their turn.

Denis had posted himself on the inner side of the barricade in such a
manner that half his body was above the top, and from there he watched.
The glimmer which came from the doorway of the wine-shop rendered his
gestures visible.

Suddenly he made a sign. The attack on the Mauconseil redoubt was
beginning.

The soldiers, in fact, after having some time hesitated before this
double wall of paving-stones, lofty, well-built, and which they supposed
was well defended, had ended by rushing upon it, and attacking it with
blows of their guns.

They were not mistaken. It was well defended. We have already said that
there were only six men in this barricade, the six workmen who had built
it. Of the six one only had three cartridges, the others had only two
shots to fire. These six men heard the regiment advancing and the roll
of the battery which was followed on it, and did not stir. Each remained
silent at his post of battle, the barrel of his gun between two
paving-stones. When the soldiers were within range they fired, and t