n785 does not
seem to hold good. General Washington, to whom he referred as to a
conversation in 1785, replied to a correspondent that the idea of
Rumsey, as he remembered and understood it, was simply the propelling
of a boat by a machine, the power of which was to be merely manual
labor.

=Robert Fulton= was born in 1765, and at the time of Symington's
experiment in Scotland, was twenty-three years of age. He was then an
artist student of Benjamin West, in London, but, after several years
of study, felt that he was better adapted for engineering, and soon
thereafter wrote a work on canal navigation. In 1797 he went to Paris.
He resided there seven years and built a small steamboat on the Seine,
which worked well, but made very slow progress.

It is remarkable that the two most practical achievements of our
century have been consummated by artists,--the telegraph by Morse
after a score of "invented" failures, and the successful application
of steam to navigation by Fulton.

       * * *

    I was glad to think that among the last memorable
    beauties which have glided past us were pictures traced
    by no common hand, not easily to grow old or fade beneath
    the dust of time--the Kaatskill Mountains, Sleepy
    Hollow and the Tappan Zee.

    _Charles Dickens._

       * * *

Soon after his return to New York he brought his idea to successful
completion. His reputation was now assured, and his invention of
"torpedoes" gave him additional fame. Congress not only purchased
these instruments of warfare, but also set apart $320,000 for a steam
frigate to be constructed under his supervision.

Through Livingston's influence the legislature passed an act granting
to Fulton the exclusive privilege of navigating the waters of the
State by means of steam power. The only conditions imposed were that
he should, within a year, construct a boat of not less than "twenty
tons burthen," which should navigate the Hudson at a speed not less
than four miles an hour, and that one such boat should not fail of
running regularly between New York and Albany for the space of one
year.

="The Clermont,"= named after the ancestral home of the Livingstons,
was built for "Livingston and Fulton," by Charles Brownne in New York.
The machinery came from the works of Watt and Bolton, England. She
left the wharf of Corlear's Hook and the newspapers published with
pride that she made in speed from four to five miles an hour. She was
100 feet in length and boasted of "three elegant cabins, one for the
ladies and two for the gentlemen, with kitchen, library, and every
convenience." She averaged 100 passengers up or down the river. Every
passenger paid $7, for which he had dinner, tea and bed, breakfast and
dinner, with the liberty to carry 200 pounds of baggage.

       * * *

  The stars are on the running stream,
    And fling, as its ripples gently flow,
  A burnished length of wavy-beam
    In an eel-like, spiral line below.

  _Joseph Rodman Drake._

       * * *

An original letter from Robert Fulton to the minister of Bavaria at
the court of France, written in 1809, upon the question of putting
steamboats on the Danube, is of interest at the present day: "The
distance from New York to Albany is 160 miles; the tide rises as far
as Albany; its velocity is on an average 11/2 miles an hour.

"We thus have the tide half the time in favor of the boat and half the
time against her. The boat is 100 feet long, 16 feet wide and 7 feet
deep; the steam engine is of the power of 20 horses; she runs 41/2
miles an hour in still water. Consequently when the tide is 11/2
miles an hour in her favor she runs 53/4 miles an hour. When the
tide is against her she runs 23/4 miles an hour. Thus in theory her
average velocity is 41/4 miles an hour, but in practice we take
advantage of the currents. When they are against us we keep near shore
in the eddies, where the current is weak or the eddy in our favor;
when the tide is in our favor we take the centre of the stream and
draw every advantage from it. In this way our average speed is 5 miles
an hour, and we run to Albany, 160 miles, in about 32 hours." Previous
to the invention of the steamboat there were two modes of conveyance.
One was by the common sloops; they charged 42 francs, and were on the
average four days in making the passage--they have sometimes been as
long as eight days. The dread of such tedious voyages prevented great
numbers of persons from going in sloops. The second mode of conveyance
was the mail, or stage. They charged $8, or 44 francs, and the
expenses on the road were about $5, or 30 francs, so that expenses
amounted to $13. The time required was 48 hours. The steamboat has
rendered the communication between New York and Albany so cheap and
certain that the number of passengers are rapidly increasing. Persons
who live 150 miles beyond Albany know the hour she will leave that
city, and making their calculations to arrive at York, stay two
days to transact business, return with the boat, and are with their
families in one week. The facility has rendered the boat a great
favorite with the public.

       * * *

  Through many a blooming wild and woodland green
  The Hudson's sleeping waters winding stray.

  _Margaretta V. Faugeres._

       * * *

A telegram from Exeter, N. H., in 1886, recorded the death of Dr.
William Perry, the oldest person in Exeter and the oldest graduate of
Harvard College, at the age of ninety-eight years. He was the sole
survivor of the passengers on Fulton's first steamboat on its first
trip down the Hudson, and the connecting link of three generations of
progress. He was born in 1788, was a member of 1811 in Harvard, and
grandfather of Sarah Orne Jewett, the authoress.

The writer remembers his grandfather telling him of going to Hudson as
a boy to see the "steamboat" make its first trip, and how it had been
talked of for a long time as "Fulton's Folly." One thing is sure
it was a small cradle wherein to rock the "baby-giant" of a great
century. How Fulton would wonder if he could visit to-day the great
steamships born of his invention--successors of the "Clermont" of
"Twenty tons burthen." How he would marvel, standing on the deck of
the "Hendrick Hudson," to see the water fall away from the prow cut by
a rainbow scimitar of spray! at the great engines of polished steel,
working almost noiselessly, and wonder at the way the pilot lands at
the docks, even as a driver brings his buggy to a horse-block; for in
his day, and long afterwards, passengers were "slued" ashore in little
boats, as it was not regarded feasible to land a steamboat against a
wharf. It would surely be an "experience" for us to see the passengers
at West Point, Newburgh, or Poughkeepsie "slued ashore" to-day in
little rowboats.

=Tivoli=, above North Bay took its name from a pre-revolutionary
"Chateau," home of the late Colonel DePeyster. The "Callender Place"
to the southeast, was formerly the property of Johnston Livingston.
Two miles from the river is the home of Mr. J. N. Lewis, a morning view
from whose veranda is still remembered, and it is to him that the
writer is indebted for a pleasant trip to the ruins on Cruger's
Island. The residence of the late J. Watts DePeyster stands on a
commanding bluff north of the railway station and it was beside his
open fireside many years ago that he told the writer how his house was
saved from Vaughan's cannon. "Rose Hill," was mistaken for "Clermont,"
but a well-stocked cellar mollified the British captain.

       * * *

  O! stream of the mountains if answer of thine
  Could rise from thy waters to questions of mine,
  Methinks through the din of thy thronged banks a moan
  Of sorrow would come for the days that are gone.

  _Legends of the Hudson._

       * * *

It grew like one of the old English family houses, with the increase
of the family, until, in strange but picturesque outline--the
prevailing style being Italian, somewhat in the shape of a cross--it
is now 114 feet long by 87 feet deep. The tower in the rear, devoted
to library purposes, rises to the height of about sixty feet. This
library, first and last, has contained between twenty and thirty
thousand volumes. Such indefinite language is used, because the owner
donated over half this number to the New York Historical Society, the
New York Society Library, and a number of other similar organizations
in different parts of the United States. As a working library, replete
with dictionaries and cyclopaedias, in many tongues and on almost
every subject, it is a marvel. It is likewise very valuable for its
collections on military and several other special topics. From it was
selected and given to the New York Historical Society, one of the
finest possible collections on the History of Holland, from the
earliest period down to the present time. "Rose Hill" was left in his
will to the Leake and Watts Orphan Home.

A ferry from Tivoli to Saugerties affords communication between the
two villages. Glasco Landing, on the west bank, lies between the
residences of Henry Corse, on the south, and Mrs. Vanderpool (sister
of the late President Martin Van Buren), on the north.

In locating the residences along the river and dealing so often in the
words "north" and "south," we are reminded of a good story of Martin
Van Buren. It is said that it was as difficult to get a direct answer
from him as from Bismarck or Gladstone. Two friends were going up with
him one day on a river boat and one made a wager with the other that
a direct answer could not be secured on any question from the astute
statesman. They approached the ex-president and one of them said, "Mr.
Van Buren, my friend and I have had a little discussion; will you
tell us, does or does not the sun rise in the east?" The ex-president
calmly drew up a chair, and said, "You must remember that the east
and west are merely relative terms." "That settles it," said the
questioner, "I'll pay the bet."

       * * *

  How grateful is the sudden change
    From arid pavements to the grass,
  From narrow streets that thousands range
    To meadows where June zephyrs pass.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

    It is a drop for the old Hudson, and a merry time it
    has until it gets down off the mountains. I have thought
    how long it would be before that very water which was
    made for the wilderness will be under the bottom of a
    vessel and tossing in the salt sea.

    _James Fenimore Cooper._

       * * *

=Saugerties=, 101 miles from New York. From its location (being the
nearest of the river towns to the Catskills), it naturally hoped to
secure a large share of tourist travel, but Kingston and Catskill
presented easier and better facilities of access and materially
shortened the hours of arrival at the summit. Plaaterkill Clove,
wilder and grander than Kaaterskill Clove, about nine miles west of
the village, has Plaaterkill Mountain, Indian Head, Twin Mountains and
Sugar Loaf on the south, and High Peak and Round Top on the north. Its
eighteen waterfalls not only give great variety to a pedestrian trip,
but also ample field for the artist's brush. The Esopus, meeting
the Hudson at Saugerties, supplies unfailing waterpower for its
manufacturing industries, prominent among which are the Sheffield
Paper Company, the Barkley Fibre Company (wood pulp), the Martin
Company (card board) and a white lead factory. There are also large
shipments of blue stone, evidences of which are seen in many places
near at hand along the western bank. Many attractive strolls near
Saugerties invite the visitor, notably the walk to Barkley Heights
south of the Esopus. An extensive view is obtained from the _West
Shore Railroad_ station west of the village and the drive thereto.
North of Saugerties will be seen the docks and hamlets of Malden,
Evesport and West Camp, also the residences of J. G. Myers to the
northwest of the Rock islet, and of H. T. Coswell, near which the
steamer passes to the west of Livingston Flats. The west shore at West
Camp was settled by exiles from the Palatinate, about 1710, and one of
the old churches still stands a short distance inland. We are now in
the midst of--

=The Livingston Country=, whose names and memories dot the landscape
and adorn the history of the Hudson Valley. Dutchess and Columbia
Counties meet on the east bank opposite that part of Saugerties where
Sawyer's Creek flows into the Hudson. "Idele" was originally called
the Chancellor Place. "Clermont" is about half a mile to the north,
the home of Clermont Livingston, an early manor house built by Robert
R. Livingston, who, next to Hamilton, was the greatest New York
statesman during our revolutionary period. The manor church, not seen
from the river, is at the old village of Clermont, about five miles
due west from the mansion. The Livingstons are of Scotch ancestry and
have an illustrious lineage. Mary Livingston, one of the "four Marys"
who attended Mary Queen of Scots during her childhood and education in
France, was of the same family. Robert Livingston, born in 1654, came
to the Hudson Valley with his father, and in 1686 purchased from the
Indians a tract of country reaching east twenty-two miles to the
boundary of Massachusetts with a river frontage of twelve miles. This
purchase was created, "the Lordship and Manor of Livingston," by
Governor Thomas Dongan. In 1692 Robert built the manor house, but did
not reside in it for twenty years. He was a friend of Captain Kidd and
a powerful promoter of his enterprises. The manor consisted of 260,000
acres. The estate of 13,000 acres, given to his second son Robert, was
called Clermont. Philip, his first son, inherited 247,000 acres, by
old-time primogeniture succession. From each of these two families
sprang a line of vigorous and resolute men. Robert R. Livingston,
our revolutionary hero, descended from the smaller estate, owned
"Clermont" at the time it was burned by the British. It was soon
rebuilt and Lafayette was a guest at the mansion during his visit to
the United States in 1824.

       * * *

    Let us not then neglect to improve the advantages we
    possess; let us avail ourselves of the present moment to
    fix lasting peace upon the broad basis of natural union;
    let us while it is still in our power lay the foundation of
    our long happiness and the happiness of our posterity.

    _Robert R. Livingston._

       * * *

Above West Camp landing on the west side, is the boundary line between
Ulster and Greene Counties; Ulster having kept us company all the way
from Hampton Point opposite New Hamburgh. Throughout this long stretch
of the river one industry must not be overlooked, well described by
John Burroughs:

=The Shad Industry.=--"When the chill of the ice is out of the river
and the snow and frost out of the air, the fishermen along the shore
are on the lookout for the first arrival of shad. A few days of warm
south wind the latter part of April will soon blow them up; it is
true also, that a cold north wind will as quickly blow them back.
Preparations have been making for them all winter. In many a
farm-house or other humble dwelling along the river, the ancient
occupation of knitting of fish-nets has been plied through the long
winter evenings, perhaps every grown member of the household, the
mother and her daughters as well as the father and his sons, lending
a hand. The ordinary gill or drift-net used for shad fishing in the
Hudson is from a half to three-quarters of a mile long, and thirty
feet wide, containing about fifty or sixty pounds of fine linen twine,
and it is a labor of many months to knit one. Formerly the fish were
taken mainly by immense seines, hauled by a large number of men; but
now all the deeper part of the river is fished with the long, delicate
gill-nets that drift to and fro with the tide, and are managed by two
men in a boat. The net is of fine linen thread, and is practically
invisible to the shad in the obscure river current: it hangs suspended
perpendicularly in the water, kept in position by buoys at the top and
by weights at the bottom; the buoys are attached by cords twelve or
fifteen feet long, which allow the net to sink out of the reach of
the keels of passing vessels. The net is thrown out on the ebb tide,
stretching nearly across the river, and drifts down and then back on
the flood, the fish being snared behind the gills in their efforts to
pass through the meshes. I envy fishermen their intimate acquaintance
with the river. They know it by night as well as by day, and learn all
its moods and phases. The net is a delicate instrument that reveals
all the hidden currents and by-ways, as well as all the sunken snags
and wrecks at the bottom. By day the fisherman notes the shape and
position of his net by means of the line or buoys; by night he marks
the far end of it with a lantern fastened upon a board or block. The
night tides he finds differ from the day--the flood at night being
much stronger than at other times, as if some pressure had been
removed with the sun, and the freed currents found less hindrance. The
fishermen have terms and phrases of their own. The wooden tray upon
which the net is coiled, and which sits in the stern of the boat, is
called a 'cuddy.' The net is divided into 'shots.' If a passing sloop
or schooner catches it with her centre-board or her anchor, it gives
way where two or three shoots meet, and thus the whole net is not
torn. The top cord or line of the net is called a 'cimline.' One
fisherman 'plugs' another when he puts out from the shore and casts
in ahead of him, instead of going to the general starting place, and
taking his turn. This always makes bad blood. The luck of the born
fisherman is about as conspicuous with the gill-net as with the rod
and line, some boats being noted for their great catches the season
through. No doubt the secret is mainly through application to the
business in hand, but that is about all that distinguishes the
successful angler. The shad campaign is one that requires pluck and
endurance; no regular sleep, no regular meals; wet and cold, heat
and wind and tempest, and no great gains at last. But the sturgeon
fishers, who come later and are seen the whole summer through, have
an indolent, lazy time of it. They fish around the 'slack-water,'
catching the last of the ebb and the first of the flow, and hence
drift but little either way. To a casual observer they appear as if
anchored and asleep. But they wake up when they have a 'strike,' which
may be every day, or not once a week. The fishermen keep their eye on
the line of buoys, and when two or more of them are hauled under, he
knows his game has run foul of the net, and he hastens to the point.
The sturgeon is a pig, without the pig's obstinacy. He spends much of
the time rooting and feeding in the mud at the bottom, and encounters
the net, coarse and strong, when he goes abroad. He strikes, and is
presently hopelessly entangled, when he comes to the top and is pulled
into the boat, like a great sleepy sucker. For so dull and lubbery
a fish, the sturgeon is capable of some very lively antics; as, for
instance, his habit of leaping full length into the air and coming
down with a great splash. He has thus been known to leap unwittingly
into a passing boat, to his own great surprise, and to the alarm and
consternation of the inmates."

       * * *

  The swelling river, into his green gulfs,
  Unshadowed save by passing sails above,
  Takes the redundant glory, and enjoys
  The summer in his chilly bed.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

    I heard the plaintiff note of the Whip-poor-will from the
    mountain-side, or was startled now and then by the
    sudden leap and heavy splash of the sturgeon.

    _Washington Irving._

       * * *

=Germantown.=--Germantown Station is now seen on the east bank,
and between this and Germantown Dock, three miles to the north, is
obtained the best view of the "Man in the Mountain," readily traced by
the following outline: The peak to the south is the knee, the next to
the north is the breast, and two or three above this the chin, the
nose and the forehead. How often from the slope of Hillsdale, forty
miles away on the western trend of the Berkshires, when a boy, playing
by the fountain-heads of the Kinderhook and the Roeliffe Jansen's
Creek, have I looked out upon this mountain range aglow in the sunset,
and at even-tide heard my grandfather tell of his far-off journeys to
Towanda, Pennsylvania, when he drove through the great Cloves of the
Catskills, where twice he met "a bear" which retreated at the sound
of his old flint-lock, and then when I went to sleep at night how I
pulled the coverlet closer about my head, all on account of those two
bears that had been dead for more than forty years.

[Illustration: THE MAN IN THE MOUNTAIN.]

       * * *

  And, sister, now my children come
    To find the water just as cool,
  To play about our grandsire's home,
    To see our pictures in the pool.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

  Alps of the Hudson, whose bold summits rise
  Into the upper ether of the skies,
  Cleaving with calm content
  The cloudless crystal of the firmament.

  _Joel Benton._

       * * *

The Catskills were called by the Indians On-ti-o-ras, or mountains of
the sky, as they sometimes seem like clouds along the horizon. This
range of mountains was supposed by the Indians to have been originally
a monster who devoured all the children of the red men, until the
great spirit touched him when he was going down to the salt lake to
bathe, and here he remains. "Two little lakes upon the summit were
regarded the eyes of the monster, and these are open all the summer;
but in the winter they are covered with a thick crust or heavy film;
but whether sleeping or waking tears always trickle down his cheeks.
In these mountains, according to Indian belief, was kept the great
treasury of storm and sunshine, presided over by an old squaw spirit
who dwelt on the highest peak of the mountains. She kept day and
night shut up in her wigwam, letting out only one at a time. She
manufactured new moons every month, cutting up the old ones into
stars," and, like the old AEolus of mythology, shut the winds up in the
caverns of the hills:--

Where Manitou once lived and reigned,
  Great Spirit of a race gone by,
And Ontiora lies enchained
  With face uplifted to the sky.

The Catskill Mountains are now something more than a realm of romance
and poetry or a mountain range of beauty along our western horizon,
for, from this time forth the old squaw spirit will be kept busy with
her "Treasury of Tear Clouds," as the water supply of New York is to
come from these mountain sources.

=The Catskill Water Supply.=--The cost of this great undertaking is
estimated at $162,000,000. Four creeks: The Esopus, Rondout, Schoharie
and Catskill will constitute the main source of supply. The total area
of the entire watershed is over nine hundred square miles, and the
supply will exceed 800,000,000 gallons daily. The work projected will
bring to the city 500,000,000 gallons per day.

The Ashoken Reservoir, 12 miles long and two miles wide, will hold
120,000,000,000 gallons. The Catskill Aqueduct supply from Ashoken
Reservoir will deliver the water without pumping to Hill View
Reservoir in Yonkers high enough for gravity distribution. It will
take from ten to fifteen years to complete the work, which is begun
none too early, as the population of Greater New York will be over
5,000,000 in 1915, and its water consumption 1,000,000,000 gallons. In
1930 the population will be 7,000,000 and will call for a consumption
of 100,000,000,000 gallons daily. We are indeed "ancients of the earth
and in the morning of our times." From the far limits of the gathering
grounds some of the water will flow 130 miles to reach the city hall,
and 20 miles further to the southern extremity of Staten Island.

       * * *

  The majestic Hudson is on my left,
    The Catskills rise in my dream;
  The cataracts leap from the mountain cleft
    And the brooks in the sunlight gleam.

  _Minot F. Savage._

       * * *

Between Old Cro' Nest and Cold Spring the water will be syphoned under
the Hudson through a concrete tube six hundred feet below the surface
of the river.

The Croton Water Works, at a cost of about $14,000,000, completed in
1842, were regarded the greatest undertaking since the Roman Aqueduct.
Many improvements to meet increased demand have been made since that
time. Fifty years from now it is quite possible that the Catskill
System will seem like the Croton of to-day, as a small matter, and our
next step will be "An Adirondack System," making the successive steps
of our water supply the Croton, the Catskills and the Adirondacks.

It is fortunate that our city destined to be the world's emporium, has
everything at hand needed for comfort and safety.

John Bigelow, the literary and political link of the century, born at
Malden-on-the-Hudson, in 1817, was present at the inauguration of the
work at Cold Spring, June, 1907. It was the writer's privilege to meet
him often on the Hudson River steamers in the decade of 1870, and
to receive from him many graphic descriptions of the early life and
customs of the Hudson. What memories must have thronged upon him as he
contrasted the life of three generations!

=The Clover Reach.=--We are now in what is known as The Clover Reach
of the Hudson which extends to the Backerack near Athens. One mile
above Germantown Dock stood Nine Mile Tree, a landmark among old river
pilots so named on account of its marking a point nine miles from
Hudson. Above this the Roeliffe Jansen's Kill flows into the river,
known by the Indians as Saupenak, rising in Hillsdale within a few
feet of Greenriver Creek, immortal in Bryant's verse. The Greenriver
flows east into the Housatonic, the Jansen south into Dutchess County,
whence it takes a northerly course until it joins the Hudson. The
Burden iron furnaces above the mouth of the stream form an ugly
feature in the landscape. This is the southern boundary of the Herman
Livingston estate, whose house is one mile and a half further up the
river, near Livingston Dock, beneath Oak Hill. Greenville station is
now seen on the east bank, directly opposite Catskill Landing, which
the steamer is now approaching.

       * * *

    The fields and waters seem to us this Sabbath morning
    from the summit of the Catskills, no more truly
    property than the skies that shine upon them.

    _Harriet Martineau._

       * * *

=Catskill=, 111 miles from New York, was founded in 1678 by the
purchase of several square miles from the Indians. The landing is
immediately above the mouth of the Catskill or Kaaterskill Creek. It
is said that the creek and mountains derive their name as follows: It
is known that each tribe had a _totemic_ emblem, or rude banner; the
Mahicans had the wolf as their emblem, and some say that the word
Mahican means an enchanted wolf. (The Lenni Lenapes, or Delawares, had
the turkey as their totem.) Catskill was the southern boundary of the
Mahicans on the west bank, and here they set up their emblem. It is
said from this fact the stream took the name of Kaaterskill. The
large cat or wolf, similar in appearance, forms the mark of King
Aepgin on his deed to Van Rensselaer. Perhaps, however, the mountains
at one time abounded in these animals, and the name may be only a
coincidence. The old village, with its main street, lies along the
valley of the Catskill Creek, not quite a mile from the Catskill
Landing, and preserves some of the features of the days when
_Knickerbocker_ was accustomed to pay it an annual visit. The location
seems to have been chosen as a place of security--out of sight to one
voyaging up the river. The northern slope now reveals fine residences,
all of which command extensive views. Just out of the village proper,
on a beautiful outlook, stands the charming Prospect Park Hotel. The
drives and pedestrian routes in the vicinity of Catskill are well
condensed by Walton Van Loan, a resident of the village, whose guide
to the Catskills is the best on this region and will be of great
service to all who would like to understand thoroughly the mountain
district.

=The Northern Catskills.=--The northern and southern divisions have
been indicated not so much as mountain divisions, but in order to
better emphasize the two routes, which converge from Kingston
and Catskill toward each other, drawn by two principal points of
attraction, the Catskill Mountain House and the Hotel Kaaterskill.

       * * *

    Ah! how often when I have been abroad on the mountains
    has my heart risen in grateful praise to God that
    it was not my destiny to waste and pine among those
    noisome congregations of the city.

    _John James Audubon._

       * * *

=The Catskill Mountain House= has been widely known for almost a
century. The original proprietor had the choice of location in 1823,
when the entire range was a vast mountain wilderness, and he made
excellent selection for its site. It seems as if the rocky balcony
was especially reared two thousand feet above the valley for a grand
outlook and restful resort. "What can you see," exclaimed Natty
Bumppo, one of Cooper's favorite characters. "Why, all the world;" and
this is the feeling to-day of everyone looking down from this point
upon the Hudson Valley.

The Mountain House Park has a valley frontage of over three miles in
extent, and consists of 2,780 acres of magnificent forest and farming
lands, traversed in all directions by many miles of carriage roads
and paths, leading to various noted places of interest. The Crest,
Newman's Ledge, Bear's Den, Prospect Rock on North Mountain, and
Eagle Rock and Palenville Overlook on South Mountain, from which
the grandest views of the region are obtained, are contained in the
property. It also includes within its boundaries North and South
Lakes, both plentifully stocked with various kind of fish and well
supplied with boats and canoes. The atmosphere is delightful,
invigorating and pure; the great elevation and surrounding forest
render it free from malaria. The temperature is fifteen to twenty
degrees lower than at Catskill Village, New York City or Philadelphia.

       * * *

    Cooper's "Leatherstocking" is the one melodious synopsis
    of man and nature.

    _Thomas Carlyle._

       * * *

The =_Otis Elevating Railway_=, made possible by the enterprise of
the late Commodore Van Santvoord, extends from Otis Junction on the
_Catskill Mountain Railway_ to Otis Summit, a noble altitude of the
Catskill Range. The incline railway, 7,000 feet in length, ascends
1,600 feet and attains an elevation of 2,200 feet above the Hudson
River. "In length, elevation, overcome and carrying capacity it
exceeds any other incline railway in the world. It is operated by
powerful stationary engines and huge steel wire cables, and the method
employed is similar to that used by the Otis Elevator Company for
elevators in buildings. Every safeguard has been provided, so that an
accident of any kind is practically impossible. Should the machinery
break, the cables snap or track spread, an ingenious automatic device
would stop the cars at once. A passenger car and baggage car are
attached to each end of double cables which pass around immense drums
located at the top of the incline. While one train rises the other
descends, passing each other midway. By this arrangement trains
carrying from seventy-five to one hundred passengers can be run in
each direction every fifteen minutes when necessary, the time required
for a trip being only ten minutes. This is a vast improvement over the
old way of making the ascent of the mountains by stage, as it reduces
the time fully one and a half hours, besides adding greatly to the
pleasure of the trip. The ride up the mountains on the incline railway
is a novel and delightful experience, and is alone worth a visit to
the Catskills. As the train ascends, the magnificent panorama of the
valley of the Hudson, extending for miles and miles, is gradually
unfolded; while the river itself, like a ribbon of silver glistening
in the sun, and the Berkshire Hills in the distance seem to rise to
the view of the passenger. At the summit of the incline passengers for
the Laurel House, Haines Corners, Ontiora, Sunset, Twilight, Santa
Cruz, Elka Park, and Tannersville, take the trains of the _Kaaterskill
Railroad_, which connect with the _Otis Elevating Railway_."

       * * *

  The din of toil comes faintly swelling up
  From green fields far below, and all around
  The forest sea sends up its ceaseless roar
  Like the ocean's everlasting chime.

  _Bayard Taylor._

       * * *

Two miles from the summit landing are the Kaaterskill Falls. The upper
fall 175 feet, lower fall 85 feet. The amphitheatre behind the cascade
is the scene of one of Bryant's finest poems:

  "From greens and shades where the Kaaterskill leaps
  From cliffs where the wood flowers cling;"

and we recall the lines which express so beautifully the well-nigh
fatal dream

    "Of that dreaming one
  By the base of that icy steep,
    When over his stiffening limbs begun
  The deadly slumber of frost to creep."

About half-way up the old mountain carriage road, is the place said to
be the dreamland of Rip Van Winkle--the greatest character of American
mythology, more real than the heroes of Homer or the massive gods
of Olympus. The railway, however, has rather dispensed with Rip Van
Winkle's resting-place. The old stage drivers had so long pointed out
the identical spot where he slept that they had come to believe in it,
but his spirit still haunts the entire locality, and we can get along
without his "open air bed chamber." It will not be necessary to quote
from a recent guide-book that "no intelligent person probably believes
that such a character ever really existed or had such an experience."
The explanation is almost as humorous as the legend.

=The Hotel Kaaterskill=, whose name and fame went over a continent
even before it was fairly completed, is located on the summit of the
Kaaterskill Mountain, three miles by carriage or one by path from the
Catskill Mountain House. It is the largest mountain hotel at this
time in the world, accommodating 1,200 guests, and the Catskills have
reason to feel proud of this distinction. They have for many years had
the best-known legend--the wonderful and immortal Rip Van Winkle. They
have always enjoyed the finest valley views of any mountain outlook,
and they have a right to the best hotels.

       * * *

    There is a fall in the hills, where the water of two
    little ponds runs over the rocks into the valley. The
    first pitch is nigh two hundred feet and the water looks
    like flakes of driven snow before it touches the bottom.

    _James Fenimore Cooper._

       * * *

It may seem antiquated and old-fashioned in the midst of elevated
railroads to speak of mountain driveways, but that to Palenville, as
we last saw it, was a beautiful piece of engineering--as smooth as a
floor and securely built. It looks as if it were intended to last for
a century, the stone work is so thoroughly finished. The views from
this road are superior to anything we have seen in the Catskills, and
the great sweep of the mountain clove recalls a Sierra Nevada trip on
the way to the Yosemite.

The writer will never forget another Catskill drive fully twenty
years ago. Starting one morning with a pair of mustang ponies from
Phoenicia, we called at the Kaaterskill, the Catskill Mountain
House, and the Laurel House, took supper at Catskill Village, and
reached New York that evening at eleven o'clock. It is unnecessary to
say that we were on business--our book was on the press--and we went
as if one of the printers' best-known companions was on our trail.

Irving's description of his first voyage up the river brings us more
delicately and gracefully down from these mountains to the Hudson--the
level highway to the sea. "Of all the scenery of the Hudson, the
Kaatskill Mountains had the most witching effect on my boyish
imagination. Never shall I forget the effect upon me of my first view
of them, predominating over a wide extent of country--part wild, woody
and rugged; part softened away into all the graces of cultivation. As
we slowly floated along, I lay on the deck and watched them through a
long summer's day, undergoing a thousand mutations under the magical
effects of atmosphere; sometimes seeming to approach; at other times
to recede; now almost melting into hazy distance, now burnished by the
setting sun, until in the evening they printed themselves against the
glowing sky in the deep purple of an Italian landscape."

       * * *

  Limned upon the fair horizon,
    West from central Hudson's tide,
  The fair form of Ontiora
    Throughout ages shall abide.

  _Jared Barhete._

       * * *

=Catskill to Hudson.=

Leaving Catskill dock, the Prospect Park Hotel looks down upon us from
a commanding point on the west bank, while north of this can be seen
Cole's Grove, where Thomas Cole, the artist, lived, who painted the
well-known series, the Voyage of Life. On the east side is Rodger's
Island, where it is said the last battle was fought between the
Mahicans and Mohawks; and it is narrated that "as the old king of the
Mahicans was dying, after the conflict, he commanded his regalia to be
taken off and his successor put into the kingship while his eyes were
yet clear to behold him. Over forty years had he worn it, from the
time he received it in London from Queen Anne. He asked him to kneel
at his couch, and, putting his withered hand across his brow, placed
the feathery crown upon his head, and gave him the silver-mounted
tomahawk--symbols of power to rule and power to execute. Then, looking
up to the heavens, he said, as if in despair for his race, 'The hills
are our pillows, and the broad plains to the west our hunting-grounds;
our brothers are called into the bright wigwam of the Everlasting, and
our bones lie upon the fields of many battles; but the wisdom of the
dead is given to the living.'"

On the east bank of the Hudson, above this historic island, is the
residence of Frederick E. Church, whose glowing canvas has linked the
Niagara with the Hudson. It commands a wide view of the Berkshire
Hills to the eastward, and westward to the Catskills. The hill above
Rodgers' Island, on the east bank, is known as Mount Merino, one of
the first places to which Merino sheep were brought in this country.

=Hudson=, 115 miles from New York, was founded in the year 1784, by
thirty persons from Providence, R. I., and incorporated as a city in
1785. The city is situated on a sloping promontory, bounded by the
North and South Bays. Its main streets, Warren, Union and Allen, run
east and west a little more than a mile in length, crossed by Front
Street, First, Second, Third, etc. Main Street reaches from Promenade
Park to Prospect Hill. The park is on the bluff just above the
steamboat landing; we believe this city is the only one on the Hudson
that has a promenade ground overlooking the river. It commands a fine
view of the Catskill Mountains, Mount Merino, and miles of the river
scenery. The city has always enjoyed the reputation of hospitality.
It is the western terminus of the Hudson and Chatham division of the
_Boston & Albany Railroad_, and also of the _Kinderhook & Hudson
Railway_.

       * * *

  White fleecy clouds move slowly by.
    How cool their shadows fall to-day!
  A moment on the hills they lie
    And then like spirits glide away.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman._

       * * *

From an old-time English history we read that Hudson grew more rapidly
than any other town in America except Baltimore. Standing at the head
of ship navigation it would naturally have become a great port had it
not been for the railway and the steamboat which made New York the
emporium not only of the Hudson, but also of the continent.

Hudson had also a good sprinkling of Nantucket blood, and visitors
from that quaint old town recognize in portico, stoop and window a
familiar architecture.

=Columbia Springs=, an old-time resort with pleasant grove and white
sulphur water, is four miles northeast of Hudson. Its medicinal
qualities are attested by scores of physicians, and by hundreds who
have been benefited and cured. The drive is pleasant and the return
can be made through--

=Claverack=, three and a half miles east of Hudson, a restful
old-fashioned village situated at the crossing of the Old Post Road
and the Columbia turnpike and county seat of Columbia in Knickerbocker
days. The court house on its well-shaded street was for many years the
home of the late Peter Hoffman. The Dutch Reformed Church, built of
bricks brought from Holland, wears on its brow wrinkles of antiquity,
emphasized by the date 1767 on its walls. It is said that General
Washington encamped here, but there is no historical data to confirm
the tradition. Claverack Falls is well worth a visit, which can easily
be made in an afternoon stroll. Copake Lake, to the southeast, can be
reached by a drive of about twelve miles, a fine sheet of water ten
miles in circumference, with a picturesque island connected to the
main land by a causeway. Forty years ago a romantic ruin of a stone
mansion still stood on this island, where the writer, when a boy, used
to wander around the deserted rooms looking for ghosts, but the walls
were torn down July 4, 1866, as the place was frequented every summer
by a remnant of the old Stockbridge tribe. The neighbors thought the
best way of getting rid of the "noble red men" was to burn up the
hive. The mansion was built by a Miss Livingston, but she soon
exchanged her island home for Florence and the classic associations
of Italy. Bash-Bish, one mile from Copake Station on the _Harlem
Railroad_, one of the most romantic glens in our country, has been
visited and eulogized by Henry Ward Beecher, Bayard Taylor and many
distinguished writers and travelers. Soon after leaving Copake Station
a beautiful carriage road, but extremely narrow, strikes the left bank
of this mountain stream, and for a long distance follows its rocky
channel. On the right a thickly wooded hill rises abruptly more than a
thousand feet--a perfect wall of foliage from base to summit. A mile
brings one to the lower falls; the upper falls are about a quarter of
a mile farther up the gorge. The height of the falls, with the rapids
between, is about 300 feet above the little rustic bridge at the foot
of the lower falls. The glen between is a place of wild beauty, with
rocks and huge boulders "in random ruin piled."

       * * *

  I saw the green banks of the castle-crowned Rhine,
  Where the grapes drink the moonlight and change into wine,
  But my heart would still yearn for the sound of the waves
  That sing as they flow by my forefather's graves.

  _Oliver Wendell Holmes._

       * * *

=Hillsdale Village= has a beautiful location and affords a good
central point for visiting Mount Everett, with its wide prospect
(altitude 2,624 feet), Copake Lake six miles to the west, Bash-Bish
Falls six miles south, and Po-ka-no five miles to the northeast,
sometimes known as White's Hill. The Po-ka-no, Columbia County's
noblest outlook, 1,713 feet, commands the Hudson Valley for eighty
miles; and the owner says that he saw the fireworks from there the
night of the Newburgh centennial in 1883. From the summit can be seen
"Monument Mountain" and the Green Mountains of Vermont. At its base
glides the "Green River Creek," which flows into the Housatonic near
Great Barrington. From this point the drive can be continued to North
Egremont, South Egremont, Great Barrington and Monument Mountain.
Before the days of railroads the Columbia turnpike was the great trade
artery of the city of Hudson. It was interesting to hear William
Cullen Bryant recount his experiences in driving from his home in
Great Barrington over the well-known highway on his way to New York.
The _Housatonic_ and _Harlem Railroads_ tapped its life and have left
many a sleepy village along the route, once astir in staging days. The
stone for Girard College was drawn from Massachusetts quarries over
this route and shipped to Philadelphia from Hudson. The Lebanon
Valley, in the northeastern part of the county, is considered one of
the most beautiful in the State, and said by Sir Henry Vincent, the
English orator, to resemble the far-famed valley of Llangollen, in
Wales. The Wy-a-mon-ack Creek flows through the valley, joining its
waters with the Kinderhook. Quechee Lake is near at hand, where Miss
Warner was born, author of "Queechee" and the "Wide Wide World."

       * * *

  Welcome ye pleasant dales and hills,
    Where dream-like passed my early days!
  Ye cliffs and glens and laughing rills
    That sing unconscious hymns of praise!

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=Lindenwald=, a solid and substantial residence, home of President
Martin Van Buren, where he died in 1862, is two miles from the
pleasant village of Kinderhook. Columbia County just missed the proud
distinction of rearing two presidents, as Samuel J. Tilden was born in
the town of Lebanon. Elisha Williams, John Van Buren and many others
have given lustre to her legal annals.

       * * *

  Ever fonder, ever dearer
    Seems our youth that hastened by,
  And we love to live in memory
    When our fond hopes fade and die.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

=Hudson to Albany.=

=Athens.=--Directly opposite Hudson, and connected with it by ferry,
is the classically named village of Athens. An old Mahican settlement
known as Potick was located a little back from the river. We are now
in the midst of the great

="Ice Industry,"= which reaches from below Staatsburgh to Castleton
and Albany, well described by John Burroughs in his article on the
Hudson: "No man sows, yet many men reap a harvest from the Hudson. Not
the least important is the ice harvest, which is eagerly looked for,
and counted upon by hundreds, yes, thousands of laboring men along its
course. Ice or no ice sometimes means bread or no bread to scores of
families, and it means added or diminished comforts to many more. It
is a crop that takes two or three weeks of rugged winter weather to
grow, and, if the water is very roily or brackish, even longer. It is
seldom worked till it presents seven or eight inches of clear water
ice. Men go out from time to time and examine it, as the farmer goes
out and examines his grain or grass, to see when it will do to cut. If
there comes a deep fall of snow the ice is 'pricked' so as to let the
water up through and form snow ice. A band of fifteen or twenty men,
about a yard apart, each armed with a chisel-bar, and marching in
line, puncture the ice at each step, with a single sharp thrust. To
and fro they go, leaving a belt behind them that presently becomes
saturated with water. But ice, to be of first quality, must grow from
beneath, not from above. It is a crop quite as uncertain as any other.
A good yield every two or three years, as they say of wheat out west,
is about all that can be counted upon. When there is an abundant
harvest, after the ice houses are filled, they stack great quantities
of it, as the farmer stacks his surplus hay. Such a fruitful winter
was that of '74-5, when the ice formed twenty inches thick. The stacks
are given only a temporary covering of boards, and are the first ice
removed in the season. The cutting and gathering of the ice enlivens
these broad, white, desolate fields amazingly. My house happens to
stand where I look down upon the busy scene, as from a hill-top upon
a river meadow in haying time, only here figures stand out much
more sharply than they do from a summer meadow. There is the broad,
straight, blue-black canal emerging into view, and running nearly
across the river; this is the highway that lays open the farm. On
either side lie the fields, or ice meadows, each marked out by cedar
or hemlock boughs. The farther one is cut first, and when cleared,
shows a large, long, black parallelogram in the midst of the plain
of snow. Then the next one is cut, leaving a strip or tongue of ice
between the two for the horses to move and turn upon. Sometimes nearly
two hundred men and boys, with numerous horses, are at work at once,
marking, plowing, planing, scraping, sawing, hauling, chiseling; some
floating down the pond on great square islands towed by a horse, or
their fellow workmen; others distributed along the canal, bending to
their ice-hooks; others upon the bridges separating the blocks with
their chisel bars; others feeding the elevators; while knots and
straggling lines of idlers here and there look on in cold discontent,
unable to get a job. The best crop of ice is an early crop. Late in
the season or after January, the ice is apt to get 'sun-struck,' when
it becomes 'shaky,' like a piece of poor timber. The sun, when he
sets about destroying the ice, does not simply melt it from the
surface--that were a slow process; but he sends his shafts into it and
separates it into spikes and needles--in short, makes kindling-wood of
it, so as to consume it the quicker. One of the prettiest sights about
the ice harvesting is the elevator in operation. When all works well,
there is an unbroken procession of the great crystal blocks slowly
ascending this incline. They go up in couples, arm in arm, as it were,
like friends up a stairway, glowing and changing in the sun, and
recalling the precious stones that adorned the walls of the celestial
city. When they reach the platform where they leave the elevator, they
seem to step off like things of life and volition; they are still in
pairs and separate only as they enter upon the 'runs.' But here they
have an ordeal to pass through, for they are subjected to a rapid
inspection and the black sheep are separated from the flock; every
square with a trace of sediment or earth-stain in it, whose texture
is not perfect and unclouded crystal, is rejected and sent hurling
down into the abyss; a man with a sharp eye in his head and a sharp
ice-hook in his hand picks out the impure and fragmentary ones as they
come along and sends them quickly overboard. Those that pass the
examination glide into the building along the gentle incline, and are
switched off here and there upon branch runs, and distributed to all
parts of the immense interior."

       * * *

  But when in the forest bare and old
    The blast of December calls,
  He builds in the starlight clear and cold
    A palace of ice where his torrent falls.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

  Where the frost trees shoot with leaf and spray
  And frost gems scatter a silver ray.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

  How fair the thronging pictures run,
    What joy the vision fills--
  The star-glow and the setting sun
    Amid the northern hills.

  _Benjamin F. Leggett._

       * * *

Passing west of the Hudson Flats we see North Bay, crossed by the _New
York Central Railroad_. Kinderhook Creek meets the river about three
miles north of Hudson, directly above which is Stockport Station for
Columbiaville. Four Mile Light-house is now seen on the opposite bank.
Nutten Hook, or Coxsackie Station, is four miles above Stockport.
Opposite this point, and connected by a ferry, is the village of--

=Coxsackie= (name derived from Kaak-aki, or place of wild geese, "aki"
in Indian signifies place and it is singular to find the Indian word
"Kaak" so near to the English "cackle"). Two miles north Stuyvesant
Landing is seen on the east bank, the nearest station on the _New
York Central & Hudson River Railroad_, by carriage, to Valatie and
Kinderhook. The name Kinderhook is said to have had its origin from a
point on the Hudson prolific in children; as the children were always
out of doors to see the passing craft, it was known as Kinderhook, or
"children's point." Passing Bronk's Island, due west of which empties
Coxsackie Creek, we see Stuyvesant Light-house on our right, and
approach New Baltimore, a pleasant village on the west bank, with
sloop and barge industry. About a mile above the landing is the
meeting point of four counties: Greene and Albany on the west,
Columbia and Rensselaer on the east. Beeren Island, connected with
Coeyman's Landing by small steamer, now a picnic resort, lies near the
west bank, where it will be remembered the first white child was born
on the Hudson. Here was the Castle of Rensselaertein, before which
Antony Van Corlear read again and again the proclamation of Peter
Stuyvesant, and from which he returned with a diplomatic reply,
forming one of the most humorous chapters in Irving's "Knickerbocker."
Threading our way through low-lying islands and river flats, and
"slowing down" occasionally on meeting canal boats or other river
craft, we pass Coeyman's on our left and Lower Schodack Island on
our right, due east of which is the station of Schodack Landing. The
writer of this handbook remembers distinctly a winter's evening walk
from Schodack Landing, crossing the frozen Hudson and snow-covered
island on an ill-defined trail. He was on his way to deliver his first
lecture, February, 1868, and his subject was "The Legends and Poetry
of the Hudson." Since that time he has written and re-written many
guides to the river, so that the present handbook is not a thing of
yesterday. The next morning, on his return to Schodack, he had for
his companion a young man from twenty or thirty miles inland, who had
never seen a train of cars except in the distance. On reaching the
railway, one of the New York expresses swept by, and as he caught the
motion of the bell cord he turned and said: "Do they drive it with
that little string?" Lower Schodack Island, Mills Plaat (also an
island) and Upper Schodack Island reach almost to--

=Castleton=, a pleasant village on the eastern bank, with main street
lying close to the river. The cliffs, a few miles to the north, were
known to the Indians as Scoti-ack, or place of the ever-burning
council-fire, which gave the name of Schodack to the township, where
King Aepgin, on the 8th of April, 1680, sold to Van Rensselaer "all
that tract of country on the west side of the Hudson, extending from
Beeren Island up to Smack's Island, and in breadth two days' journey."

       * * *

    No spot in all the world where poetry and romance
    are so closely blended with the heroic in history as
    along the banks of our Hudson.

    _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

THE MAHICAN TRIBE originally occupied all the east bank of the Hudson
north of Roeliffe Jansen's Kill, near Germantown, to the head waters
of the Hudson; and on the west bank, from Cohoes to Catskill. The town
of Schodack was central, and a signal displayed from the hills near
Castleton could be seen for thirty miles in every direction. After the
Mahicans left the Hudson, they went to Westenhook, or Housatonic,
to the hills south of Stockbridge; and then, on invitation of the
Oneidas, removed to Oneida County, in 1785, where they lived until
1821, when, with other Indians of New York, they purchased a tract of
land near Fox River, Minnesota.

Domestic clans or families of the Mahicans lingered around their
ancient seats for some years after the close of the Revolution, but
of them, one after another, it is written, "They disappeared in the
night." In the language of Tamerund at the death of Uncas, "The
pale-faces are masters of the earth, and the time of the red men has
not yet come again. My day has been too long. In the morning I saw the
sons of Unami happy and strong; and yet before the night has come,
have I lived to see the last warrior of the race of the Mahicans."

       * * *

    Autumn had given uniformity of coloring to the woods.
    It varied now between copper and gold, and shone like
    an infinitely rich golden embroidery on the Indian veil
    of mist which rested upon the heights along the Hudson.

    _Harriet Martineau._

       * * *

According to Ruttenber, the names and location of the Indian tribes
were not ascertained with clearness by the early Dutch settlers, but
through documents, treaties and information, subsequently obtained,
it is now settled that the Mahicans held possession "under sub-tribal
organizations" of the east bank of the river from an undefined point
north of Albany to the sea, including Long Island; that their dominion
extended east to the Connecticut, where they joined kindred tribes;
that on the west bank of the Hudson they ran down as far as Catskill,
and west to Schenectady; that they were met on the west by the
territory of the Mohawks, and on the south by tribes of the Lenni
Lenapes or Delawares, whose territory extended thence to the sea, and
west to and beyond the Delaware River. The Mahicans had a castle at
Catskill and at Cohoes Falls. The western side of the Hudson, above
Cohoes, belonged to the Mohawks, a branch of the Iroquois. Therefore,
as early as 1630, three great nations were represented on the Hudson--

=The Mahicans, the Delawares and the Iroquois.= The early French
missionaries refer to the "nine nations of Manhinyans, gathered
between Manhattan and the environs of Quebec." These several nations
have never been accurately designated, although certain general
divisions appear under the titles of Mohegan, Wappinger, Sequins,
etc. "The government of the Mahicans was a democracy. The office was
hereditary by the lineage of the wife; that is, the selection of a
successor on the death of the chief, was confined to the female branch
of the family." According to Ruttenber, the precise relation between
the Mahicans of the Hudson and the Mohegans under Uncas, the Pequot
chief, is not known. In a foot-note to this statement, he says: "The
identity of name between the Mahicans and Mohegans, induces the belief
that all these tribes belonged to the same stock,--although they
differed in dialect, in territory, and in their alliances." The two
words, therefore, must not be confounded.

       * * *

  Round about the Indian village
  Spread the meadows and the cornfields,
  Stood the groves of singing pine trees,
  And beyond them stood the forest,

  _Henry W. Longfellow._

       * * *

It is also pleasant to remember that the Mahicans as a tribe were true
and faithful to us during the war of the Revolution, and when the six
nations met in council at Oswego, at the request of Guy Johnson and
other officers of the British army, "to eat the flesh and drink the
blood of a Bostonian," Hendrick, the Mahican, made the pledge for his
tribe at Albany, almost in the eloquent words of Ruth to Naomi, "Thy
people shall be our people, and whither thou goest we will be at your
side."

=The Mourdener's Kill=, with its sad story of a girl tied by Indians
to a horse and dragged through the valley, flows into the Hudson above
Castleton. Two miles above this near the steamer channel will be seen
Staats Island on the east, with an old stone house, said to be next in
antiquity to the old Van Rensselaer House, opposite Albany. It is also
a fact that this property passed directly to the ancestors of the
present family, the only property in this vicinity never owned by the
lord of the manor. Opposite the old stone house, the point on the west
bank is known as Parda Hook, where it is said a horse was once drowned
in a horse-race on the ice, and hence the name Parda, for the old
Hollanders along the Hudson seemed to have had a musical ear, and
delighted in accumulating syllables. (The word pard is used in Spenser
for spotted horse, and still survives in the word leopard.)

The Castleton Bar or "overslaugh," as it was known by the river
pilots, impeded for years navigation in low water. Commodore Van
Santvoord and other prominent citizens brought the subject before the
State legislature, and work was commenced in 1863. In 1868 the United
States Government very properly (as their jurisdiction extends over
tide-water), assumed the completing of the dykes, which now stretch
for miles along the banks and islands of the upper Hudson. Here and
there along our route between Coxsackie and Albany will be seen great
dredges deepening and widening the river channel. The plan provides
for a system of longitudinal dykes to confine the current sufficiently
to allow the ebb and flow of the tidal-current to keep the channel
clear. These dykes are to be gradually brought nearer together from
New Baltimore toward Troy, so as to assist the entrance of the
flood-current and increase its height.

       * * *

  Where Hudson winds his silver way
  And murmurs at the tardy stay,
      Impatient at delay.

  _William Crow._

       * * *

The engineers report that the greater part of the material carried in
suspension in the Hudson river above Albany is believed to come from
the Mohawk river, and its tributary the Schoharie river, while the
sands and gravel that form the heavy and obstinate bars near Albany
and chiefly between Albany and Troy, come from the upper Hudson.

The discharge of the Hudson between Troy and Albany at its lowest
stage may be taken at about 3,000 cubic feet per second. The river
supply, therefore, during that stage is inadequate in the upper part
of the river for navigation, independent of tidal flow.

The greatest number of bars is between Albany and Troy, where the
channel is narrow, and at least six obstructing bars, composed of fine
and coarse gravel and coarse and fine sand, are in existence. In many
places between Albany and Troy the navigable depth is reduced to 71/2
feet by the presence of these bars.

From Albany to New Baltimore the depths are variable, the prevailing
depth being 10 feet and over, with pools of greater depth separated by
long cross-over bars, over which the greatest depth does not exceed
9 or 10 feet. Passing many delightful homes on the west bank and the
mouth of the Norman's Kill (Indian name Ta-wa-sentha, place of many
dead) and the Convent of the Sacred Heart, we see Dow's Point on the
east and above this the--

=Van Rensselaer Place=, with its port holes on either side of the door
facing the river, showing that it was built in troublesome times.
It is the oldest of the Patroon manor houses, built in 1640 or
thereabouts. It has been said that the adaptation of the old tune now
known as "Yankee Doodle" was made near the well in the grounds of the
Van Rensselaer Place by Dr. Richard Shuckberg, who was connected with
the British army when the Colonial troops from New England marched
into camp at Albany to join the British regulars on their way to fight
the French. The tune was known in New England before the Revolution as
"Lydia Fisher's Jig," a name derived from a famous lady who lived
in the reign of Charles II, and which has been perpetuated in the
following rhyme:

  Lucy Locket lost her pocket,
    Lydia Fisher found it;
  Not a bit of money in it,
    Only binding 'round it.

The appearance of the troops called down the derision of the British
officers, the hit of the doctor became known throughout the army, and
the song was used as a method of showing contempt for the Colonials
until after Lexington and Concord.

       * * *

                  When life is old
  And many a scene forgot the heart will hold
  Its memory of this.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *

=Rensselaer=, on the east bank of the river, was incorporated in 1896
by the union of Greenbush and East Albany. The old name of Greenbush,
which still survives in East Greenbush, four miles distant, was given
to it by the old Dutch settlers, and it was probably a "green-bushed"
place in early days. Now pleasant residences and villas look out upon
the river from the near bank and distant hillsides. Two railroad
bridges and a carriage bridge cross the Hudson at this point. During
the French war in 1775, Greenbush was a military rendezvous, and in
1812 the United States Government established extensive barracks,
whence troops were forwarded to Canada.

=Albany=, 144 miles from New York. (_New York Central & Hudson River
Railroad_, _Boston & Albany_, _West Shore_, _Delaware and Hudson_, the
_Hudson River Day Line_ and _People's Line_.) Its site was called by
the Indians Shaunaugh-ta-da (Schenectady), or the Pine Plains. It
was next known by the early Dutch settlers as "Beverwyck," "William
Stadt," and "New Orange." The seat of the State Government was
transferred from New York to Albany in 1798. In 1714, when 100 years
old, it had a population of about 3,000, one-sixth of whom were
slaves. In 1786 it increased to about 10,000. In 1676, the city
comprised within the limits of Pearl, Beaver and Steuben streets, was
surrounded by wooden walls with six gates. They were 13 feet high,
made of timber a foot square. It is said that a portion of these walls
were remaining in 1812. The first railroad in the State and the second
in the United States was opened from Albany to Schenectady in 1831.
The pictures of these old coaches are very amusing, and the rate of
speed was only a slight improvement on a well-organized stage line.
From an old book in the State Library we condense the following
description, presenting quite a contrast to the city of to-day:
"Albany lay stretched along the banks of the Hudson, on one very wide
and long street, parallel to the Hudson. The space between the street
and the river bank was occupied by gardens. A small but steep hill
rose above the centre of the town, on which stood a fort. The wide
street leading to the fort (now State street) had a Market-Place,
Guard-House, Town Hall, and an English and Dutch Church, in the
centre."

       * * *

  I wandered afar from the land of my birth,
  I saw the old rivers renowned upon earth,
  But fancy still painted that wide-flowing stream
  With the many-hued pencil of infancy's dream.

  _Oliver Wendell Holmes._

       * * *

Tourists and others will be amply repaid in visiting the new Capitol
building, at the head of State Street. It is open from nine in the
morning until six in the evening. It is said to be larger than the
Capitol at Washington, and cost more than any other structure on the
American continent. The staircases, the wide corridors, the Senate
chamber, the Assembly chamber, and the Court of Appeals room, attest
the wealth and greatness of the Empire State. The visitor up State
Street will note the beautiful and commanding spire of "St. Paul." The
Cathedral is also a grand structure. The population of Albany is now
100,000, and its growth is due to three causes: First, the Capitol
was removed from New York to Albany in 1798. Then followed two great
enterprises, ridiculed at the time by every one as the _Fulton Folly
and Clinton's Ditch_--in other words, steam navigation, 1807, and the
Erie Canal, 1825. Its name was given in honor of the Duke of Albany,
although it is still claimed by some of the oldest inhabitants that,
in the golden age of those far-off times, when the good old burghers
used to ask the welfare of their neighbors, the answer was "All
bonnie," and hence the name of the hill-crowned city.

       * * *

  Canals, long winding, ope a watery flight,
  And distant streams and seas and lakes unite;
  From fair Albania toward the fading sun,
  Back through the midland lengthening channels run.

  _Joel Barlow._

       * * *

To condense from H. P. Phelps's careful handbook of "Albany and the
Capitol:" in 1614 a stockaded trading-house was erected on an island
below the city, well defended for trading with the Indians. In 1617
another was built on the hill, near Norman's Kill. The West Indian
Company erected a fort in 1623 near the present landing of the Day
Line. In 1664 the province fell into the hands of the English and the
name was changed to Albany. In 1686 it was incorporated into a city.
It was the meeting place of the Constitutional Congress 1754,
the proposed Constitution of which, however, was never ratified.
Washington visited it in 1783. The Erie Canal was opened in 1825,
a railroad to Schenectady in 1832, the _Hudson River_ in 1851, a
consolidated road to Buffalo in 1853, and the _Susquehanna Railroad_
to Binghamton in 1869. State Street at one time was said to be the
widest city thoroughfare in the country, after Pennsylvania Avenue in
Washington. The English and Dutch Churches and other public buildings,
once in the midst of it, but long since removed, account for its
extra width. The State Capitol has a commanding site. The old Capitol
building was completed in 1808. The corner-stone of the present
building was laid June 24, 1871, and it has been occupied since
January 7, 1879. According to Phelps, "the size of the structure
impresses the beholder at once. It is 300 feet north and south by 400
feet east and west, and with the porticoes will cover three acres and
seven square feet. The walls are 108 feet high from the water-table,
and all this worked out of solid granite brought, most of it, from
Hallowell, Me."

The impression produced varies with various persons. One accomplished
writer finds it "not unlike that made by the photographs of those
gigantic structures in the northern and eastern parts of India, which
are seen in full series on the walls of the South Kensington, and by
their barbaric profusion of ornamentation and true magnificence of
design give the stay-at-home Briton some faint inkling of the empire
which has invested his queen with another and more high-sounding
title. Yet when close at hand the building does not bear out this
connection with Indian architecture of the grand style; it might be
mere chance that at a distance there is a similarity; or it may be
that the smallness of size in the decorations as compared to the
structure itself explains fully why there is a tendency to confuse the
eye by the number of projections, arches, pillars, shallow recesses,
and what-not, which variegate the different facades. The confusion is
not entirely displeasing; it gives a sense of unstinted riches, and
represents the spirit that has reared the pile."

       * * *

  Nor let the dear love of its children grow cold
  Till the channel is dry where its waters have rolled.

  _Oliver Wendell Holmes._

       * * *

The Governor's room, the golden corridor, the Senate staircase, the
Senate chamber, the Assembly chamber, and the Court of Appeals room
are interesting alike for their architectural stone work, decorations
and general finish. The State Library, dating from 1818, contains
about 150,000 volumes. The Clinton papers, including Andre's documents
captured at Tarrytown, are the most interesting of many valuable
manuscripts. Here also are a sword and pistol once belonging to
General Washington. The Museum of Military Records and Relics contains
over 800 battle flags of State regiments, with several ensigns
captured from the enemy. Near the Capitol are the State Hall and City
Hall, and on the right, descending State Street, the Geological Hall,
well worthy an extended visit. The present St. Peter's Episcopal
Church, third upon the site, is of Schenectady blue stone with brown
trimmings. Its tower contains "a chime of eleven bells and another
bell marked 1751, which is used only to ring in the new year."
Washington Park, consisting of eighty acres and procured at a cost
of one million dollars, reached by a pleasant drive or by electric
railway, is a delightful resort. It is noted for its grand trees,
artistic walks and floral culture. Several fine statues are also
worthy of mention, notably that of Robert Burns (Charles Calverley,
sculptor), erected by money left for this purpose by Mrs. McPherson,
under the careful and tasteful supervision of one of Albany's
best-known citizens, Mr. Peter Kinnear. A view from Washington Park
takes in the Catskills and the Helderberg Mountains.

       * * *

    No wonder that his countrymen today, led by the
    Congress of this great Republic, celebrate the transaction
    and the scene where Washington refused to accept
    a crown.

    _William M. Evarts._

       * * *

And now, while waiting to "throw out the plank," which puts a period
to our Hudson River division, we feel like congratulating ourselves
that the various goblins which once infested the river have become
civilized, that the winds and tides have been conquered, and that
the nine-day voyage of Hendrick Hudson and the "Half Moon" has been
reduced to the _nine-hour system_ of the Hudson River Day Line.

Those who have traveled over Europe will certainly appreciate the
quiet luxury of an American steamer; and this first introduction to
American scenery will always charm the tourist from other lands. No
single day's journey in any land or on any stream can present such
variety, interest, and beauty, as the trip of one hundred and
forty-four miles from New York to Albany. The Hudson is indeed a
goodly volume, with its broad covers of green _lying open_ on either
side; and it might in truth be called a _condensed_ history, for there
is no other place in our country where poetry and romance are so
strangely blended with the heroic and the historic,--no river where
the waves of different civilizations have left so many waifs upon the
banks. It is classic ground, from the "wilderness to the sea," and
will always be the poets' corner of our country: the home of Irving,
Willis, and Morris,--of Fulton, Morse, and Field,--of Cole, Audubon,
and Church,--and of scores besides, whose names are household words.

       * * *

  The Hudson's cable-tow of yore
    Bound gallant sire and sturdy son
  With hearty grasp from shore to shore
    For Robert Burns and Washington.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *




THE UPPER HUDSON.


=Albany to Saratoga.=


_Delaware and Hudson Railway._

A pleasant tour awaits the traveler who continues his journey north
from Albany, where the _Delaware and Hudson_ train for Saratoga is
ready at the landing on the arrival of the steamer. A half hour's run
along the west bank gives us a glimpse of Troy across the river with
the classical named hills Mount Ida and Mount Olympus. Two streams,
the Poestenkill and the Wynant's Kill, approach the river on the east
bank through narrow ravines, and furnish excellent water power. In the
year 1786 it was called Ferryhook. In 1787, Rensselaerwyck. In the
fall of 1787 the settlers began to use the name of Vanderheyden, after
the family who owned a great part of the ground where the city now
stands. January 9, 1789 the freeholders of the town met and gave it
the name of Troy. The "Hudson," the "Erie," and the "Champlain" Canals
have contributed to its growth. The city, with many busy towns, which
have sprung up around it--Cohoes, Lansingburg, Waterford, etc., is
central to a population of at least 100,000 people. The Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, the oldest engineering school in America, has a
national reputation.

=Cohoes=, where the Mohawk joins the Hudson, has one of the finest
water powers in the country. Its name is of Indian origin and
signifies "the island at the falls." This was the division line
between the Mahicans and the Mohawks, and when the water is in full
force it suggests in graceful curve and sweep a miniature Niagara. The
view from the double-truss iron bridge (960 feet in length), looking
up or down the Mohawk, is impressive.

       * * *

  Oh, be my falls as bright as thine!
  May heaven's relenting rainbow shine
  Upon the mist that circles me,
  As soft as now it hangs o'er thee!

  _Thomas Moore._

       * * *

Passing through Waterford, and Mechanicville which lies partly in the
township of Stillwater, with its historic records of Bemis Heights and
burial place of Ellsworth, the first martyr of the Civil war, we come
to--

=Round Lake=, nineteen miles north of Troy, and thirteen south
of Saratoga, near a beautiful sheet of water, three miles in
circumference, called by the Indians Ta-nen-da-ho-wa, which
interpreted, signifies Round Lake. The camp-meeting and assembly
grounds consist of 200 acres. The air is pure and invigorating and the
grove and cottages inviting. The drives in the vicinity are delightful
to Saratoga Lake, to the Hudson River, to the historic battlefields of
Bemis Heights and Stillwater.

=Ballston Spa=, thirty-one miles from Albany, is the county seat of
Saratoga. Here are several well-known mineral springs, with chemical
properties similar to the springs of Saratoga. Over ninety years ago
Benjamin Douglas, father of Hon. Stephen A. Douglas, built a log
house, near the "Old Spring," for the accommodation of invalids and
travelers, and at one time it looked as if Saratoga would have a
vigorous rival at her very doors; but its hotel glory has departed and
the old "Sans Souci" of the days of Washington Irving is a thing of
the past.

       * * *

  A gallant army formed their last array
  Upon that field, in silence and deep gloom,
        And at their conqueror's feet,
        Laid their war-weapons down.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *

=Saratoga=, thirty-eight miles north of Albany, one hundred and
eighty-two miles from New York, is the greatest watering place of the
continent. Its development has been wonderful, and puts, as it were,
in large italics, the prosperity of our country. The first white man
to visit the place was Sir William Johnson, who, in 1767, was conveyed
there by his Mohawk friends, in the hope that the waters might afford
relief from the serious effects of a gunshot wound in the thigh,
received eight years before in the battle of Lake George, at which
time his army defeated the French legions under Baron Dieskau. It was
not until the year 1773, six years after Sir William Johnson's initial
visit, that the first clearing was made and the first cabin erected
by Derick Scowten. Owing, however, to misunderstandings with his red
neighbors, he shortly afterwards left. A year later, George Arnold,
from Rhode Island, took possession of the vacated Scowten House, and
conducted it with some degree of success for about two years. Arnold
was in turn followed by Samuel Norton, who failed to make the venture
successful, owing to the outbreak of the Revolution. Norton was
succeeded in 1783 by his son, who sold out in 1787 to Gideon Morgan,
who, in the same year, made the property over to Alexander Bryan.
Bryan became the first permanent settler after the close of the war.
The prosperity of the village began in 1789, with the advent of Gideon
Putnam, but the wooden inns and hotels of 1830, which seemed palatial
in those days, would get lost even in one of the parlors of the
mammoth hotels which now line the main street of the village. Chief
among these hotels, we mention the--

="United States,"= a grand and princely building of noble frontage
with a bright and spacious interior court, completed in June, 1874. It
constitutes one continuous line of buildings, six stories high, over
fifteen hundred feet in length, containing nine hundred and seventeen
rooms for guests, and is the largest hotel in the world.

=The American-Adelphi= near at hand, also fronting Broadway, always
cheery and delightful under the management of its popular owner and
proprietor, Mr. George A. Farnham, has one of the finest locations in
Saratoga, combining comfort, good attention, a fine table, and every
convenience of a first-class house. One thing is sure, those who go to
the "American" return again and again.

=The Speedway, the Race Track, and Driveways.=--Saratoga can justly
feel proud of her material growth and progress in many directions
during the last decade, and prominent among her varied attractions are
the Speedway and Race Track. Mr. W. C. Whitney and many other prominent
men have contributed liberally in this direction. _The Electric Line_
to Saratoga Lake is also one of the features of the village, and
furnishes a delightful forenoon or afternoon's outing.

       * * *

  And boyhood's love and fireside-listened tales
  Are rushing on your memories, as ye breathe
        That valley's storied name,--
        Field of the Grounded Arms.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *

=The Springs.=--The most prominent springs in and about Saratoga are
the Hathorn, the Patterson and the Congress. The popularity of the
Hathorn is attested by the universal sale of its bottled waters
throughout the United States. The Patterson has won a wide reputation
which its excellence deserves.

=Historic Saratoga.=--But in the midst of this throbbing, gay and
delightful Saratoga, we must not forget that it was here the fathers
of the Republic achieved their most decisive victory. The battle was
fought in the town of Stillwater, at Bemis Heights, two and a half
miles from the Hudson. The defeat of St. Leger and the triumph of
Stark at Bennington filled the American army with hope. Burgoyne's
army advanced September 19, 1777. The battle was sharply contested. At
night the Americans retired into their camp, and the British held the
field. From September 20th to October 7th the armies looked each other
in the face, each side satisfied from the first day's struggle
that their opponents were worthy foemen. The Americans had retaken
Ticonderoga and Lake George. Burgoyne had no place to retreat, and
the lines were slowly but surely closing in around him. October 7th
Burgoyne commenced the battle, but in half an hour his line was
broken. He attempted to rally his troops in person, but they could not
stand before the impetuous charge of the Americans. He was compelled
to order a full retreat, and fell back on the heights above
Schuylerville. The Americans surrounded him, and he surrendered. It
was a decisive victory, and cheered the friends of freedom, not only
in America, but in the English House of Commons.

       * * *

  The leaves were red with crimson
    And then brave Gates did cry,
  'Tis diamond now cut diamond,
    We'll beat them boys or die.

  _Ballads of the Revolution._

       * * *

=Mount McGregor=, where General Grant died, associates the Saratoga of
the Revolution with the story of our Civil War. Near the monument
to the old heroes at Schuylerville, where Burgoyne surrendered,
a monument to the Boys in Blue was dedicated in 1904. It was the
privilege of the writer to be the poet of the occasion, and in his
lines "The Flag They Bore," to bind the noble memorials of those who
made and those who saved the Republic.

  Two monuments in triumph stand
    To catch with joy the morning sun,
  One chorus joins them hand in hand--
    Heroes of Grant and Washington.

  And wider yet the chorus leaps!
    Two famous hills the song unites,
  As Mount MacGregor's anthem sweeps
    Across the plains to Bemis Heights.

In Nathaniel Bartlett Sylvester's book, entitled "Historical Sketches
of Northern New York and the Adirondack Wilderness," we learn that the
earliest date in which the word Saratoga appears in history is 1684,
and was then the name of an old hunting ground on both sides of the
Hudson. Its interpretations have been various. Some say "The Hillside
Country of the Great River;" others, the place of swift waters, while
Morgan, in his "League of the Iroquois," says the signification of
Saratoga is lost.

Whatever the origin of the name whether from the old High Rock spring
or a "reach of the river," one thing is sure: Saratoga is the most
attractive point in the country as a gathering place for conventions
and large meetings, and, in response to the growing demand for
adequate facilities, a splendid convention hall, with a seating
capacity for five thousand people, has been erected by the town
authorities. It is a striking architectural addition to Saratoga's
attractions.

In 1907 over fifty thousand "Knights" gathered here and were
hospitably entertained.

       * * *

  And such were Saratoga's victors--such
  The yeoman-brave, whose deeds and death have given
              A glory to her skies,
              A music to her name.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *

=Saratoga to the Adirondacks.=

The _Adirondack Railway_ division of the _Delaware and Hudson_
furnishes one of the pleasantest excursions to the north woods. The
traveler passes along the romantic and picturesque valley of the upper
Hudson--through King's, South Corinth, Jessup's Landing to Hadley (the
railroad station for Luzerne, a charming village at the junction of
the Hudson and the Sacandaga); then through Stony Creek, Thurman,
thirty-six miles from Saratoga Springs, at the junction of the Schroon
and the Hudson; the Glen, forty-four miles; Riverside, fifty miles
(for Schroon Lake), pleasurable throughout, to North Creek, where
"Concord coaches" and patent-covered spring buck-boards are in waiting
for Blue Mountain Lake--distance about thirty miles, through a
beautiful romantic country.

The water route from this point is as follows: Through Blue Mountain
Lake and Utowana to the outlet, a distance of seven miles, where a
"Railway Carry," something less than a mile, brings the traveler to a
fairy-like steamer on Marion River. The river trip is twelve miles to
Forked Lake.

Arriving at "Forked Lake Carry," one-half mile brings us to Forked
Lake, where the traveler gets his first real mountain bill of fare.
From this point we took a guide to Long Lake. There is a short cut
from this point over to the Tupper Lakes, which we can commend in
every particular, and the tourist can either return to Long Lake and
continue his route to the Saranacs, or go to the Saranacs direct from
Lake Tupper.

From this point we visit Keene Flats, a charming and healthful spot,
only five miles from the "Lower Ausable Pond." These ponds, the
"Lower" and "Upper," are unrivaled in beauty and grandeur. They lie at
the foot of Mount Marcy, Haystack, the Gothics, and Mount Bartlett.

       * * *

  'Twas in the mellow autumn time
  When I, an idler from the town,
  With gun and rod was lured to climb
  Those peaks where fresh the Hudson takes
  His tribute from an hundred lakes.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

=Saratoga to Lake George.=

The traveler will find trains and excursions to suit his convenience
from Saratoga to our fairest lake. His route takes him through
Gansevoort and Fort Edward to Glens Falls with the narrowing and
bright-flowing Hudson for a companion. About one mile beyond Fort
Edward Station, near the railway on the right, stood, until recently,
the tree where Jane McCrea was murdered by Indians during the
Revolution. From Glens Falls the tourist proceeds over the
well-conducted Lake George division of the _Delaware and Hudson_, and
soon finds himself in the midst of a historic and romantic region.
About half way to the lake stands a monument to Col. Ephraim Williams,
killed at the battle of Lake George in 1755, erected by the graduates
of Williams College, which he founded. Bloody Pond, a little farther
on, sleeps calm and blue in the sunlight in spite of its tragic name
and associations, and soon Lake George, girt-round by mountains,
greets our vision, stretching away in beauty to the north.

Near the railway station on the ninth of September, 1903, a monument
was unveiled commemorating the battle of Lake George one hundred and
forty-eight years before. The monument embodies the heroic figures of
Sir William Johnson and King Hendrick the Indian chief. It represents
the Indian chief demonstrating to General Johnson the futility of
dividing his forces. Governor Odell of New York, Governor Guild of
Massachusetts, Governor Chamberlain of Connecticut, and Governor
McCulloch of Vermont and others delivered appropriate addresses.

=The Trossachs of America.=--Capt. Wm. R. Lord, author of
"Reminiscences of a Sailor," in a recent article contributed to a
Scottish paper, has happily called Lake George and its surroundings
"The Trossachs of America." In writing of the autumn season he says:
"Its similarity to the Trossachs of Scotland impresses one most
vividly as seen at this season; the mountains are clothed in a garb,
the prevailing color of which is purple, reminding me of a previous
visit through the Scottish Highlands when the heather was in full
bloom. I at that time felt it to be impossible that any other place on
the face of the globe could equal the magnificently imposing grandeur
of the 'Trossachs.' I must, however, freely admit that in its power of
changing beauty this region of America fully equals, if it does
not surpass it. Deeds of 'derring-do,' enacted in these mountain
fastnesses in days gone by, still add to make the comparison more
close. Our path at times seemed to be literally strewn with roses,
for the different colored leaves that carpeted our way conveyed that
thought. The depth and variegated beauty of coloring that marks this
season of decaying foliage, would enrapture the heart of an artist.
In my vocation I have had occasion to visit the four quarters of the
globe, but never have I seen tints so strikingly beautiful."

       * * *

    The early fragments of our Colonial poetry and Revolutionary
    ballads are chanted in the midst of such profound
    silence and loneliness that they sound spectrally
    to our ears.

    _Bayard Taylor._

       * * *

=Lake George=, called by the French "Lac St. Sacrament," was
discovered by Father Jacques, who passed through it in 1646, on his
way to the Iroquois, by whom he was afterward tortured and burned. It
is thirty-six miles long by three miles broad. Its elevation is
two hundred and forty-three feet above the sea. The waters are of
remarkable transparency; romantic islands dot its surface, and elegant
villas line its shores. Fort William Henry and Ticonderoga, situated
at either end of the lake, were the salients respectively of the two
most powerful nations upon the globe. France and England sent great
armies, which crossed each other's track upon the ocean, the one
entering the St. Lawrence, the other the harbor of New York. Their
respective colonies sent their thousands to swell the number of
trained troops, while tribes of red men from the south and the north
were marshalled by civilized genius to meet in hostile array upon
these waters, around the walls of the forts, and at the base of the
hills. In 1755, General Johnston reached Lake St. Sacrament, to which
he gave the name of Lake George, "not only in honor of his Majesty,
but to assert his undoubted dominion here."

       * * *

    The progress of that October month had been like
    the stately march of an Orient army, with all the
    splendor of blazing banners. It looked as though the glories of the
    sunset had been distilled into it decked
    with the glowing hues of crimson, scarlet and gold.

    _John Henry Brandow._

       * * *

The village of Lake George is situated at the head of the lake.
It contains two churches, a court house, and a number of pretty
residences. Just behind the court house is the bay where Montcalm
landed his cannon, and where his entrenchments began. It ran across
the street to the rising ground beyond the Episcopal church.

=Fort William Henry Hotel= is the largest and best appointed hotel on
Lake George. It has a most beautiful and commanding location, and the
view from its great piazza is one long to be remembered. The piazza is
twenty-four feet in width and supported by a row of Corinthian columns
thirty feet high. The outlook from it at all times is enchanting,
commanding as it does the level reaches of the lake for miles, with
picturesque islands and promontories.

About twelve miles from the hotel is Fourteen-mile Island which, with
a number of others, form "The Narrows." The lake here is 400 feet
deep, much fishing is done, and in the right season hunting parties
start out. Black Mountain, the monarch of the lake, rises over two
thousand feet above its waters (being 2,661 feet above tide), and from
the summit a magnificent view is obtained of Lake Champlain, the Green
Mountains, the Adirondacks, and the distant course of the Hudson.

A carriage drive to Schroon Lake and conveyance from Schroon Village
to Adirondack resorts can be made from Lake George.

Those who have only a day can make a delightful excursion from
Saratoga to Caldwell by rail, then through the lake to Baldwin, and
thence by rail to Saratoga, or _via_ Baldwin and up the lake to
Caldwell, and so to Saratoga. But, to get the full beauty of this
unrivaled lake, the trip should be made with less haste, for there is
no more delightful place in the world to spend a week, a month, or an
entire summer. Its immediate surroundings present much to interest
the student of history and legend; and to lovers of the beautiful it
acknowledges no rivals. The elevation and absolute purity of air make
it a desirable place for the tourist. It is 346 feet above the level
of the sea, 247 feet above Lake Champlain, and is now brought within
six hours of New York City by the enterprise of the _Delaware & Hudson
Co_. It is a great question, and we talk it over every time we see the
genial Passenger Traffic Manager of this enterprising line, whether
Lake George or Lake Luzerne, in Switzerland, is the more beautiful. We
were just deciding last summer, on the steamer "Horicon," that Lake
George was more beautiful, but not so wild, when, as if the spirit
of the lake were roused, a great black squall suddenly came over the
mountains, and, the "crystal lake" for a few minutes, was as wild as
any one might desire. We all were glad to see her smile again as she
did half an hour afterward in the bright sunlight.

       * * *

  Oh the mystical glory that crowns them
    Reflected in river and lake,
  Like a fire that burns through the firs and ferns
    By the paths that the wild deer take.

  _Eben E. Rexford._

       * * *

"At its widest point Lake George measures about four miles, but at
other places it is less than one mile in width. It is dotted with
islands; how many we do not know exactly--nobody does; but tradition,
which passes among the people of the district for history and truth,
says there is exactly one island for every day in the year, or 365 in
all. Whatever their real number they all are beautiful, although some
of them are barely large enough to support a flagstaff, and they all
seem to fit into the scene so thoroughly that each one seems necessary
to complete the charm. On either side are high hills, in some places
rising gently from the shores, and in others beetling up from the
surface of the water with a rugged cliff, or time-worn mass of rocks,
which reminds one of the wild bits of rocky scenery that make up the
savage beauty of the Isle of Skye.

"Its clearness is something extraordinary. From a small boat, in many
places, the bottom can be seen. Indeed, so mysteriously beautiful is
the water that many visitors spend a day in a rowboat gazing into it
at different points."

       * * *

  Each islet of green which the bright waters hold
  Like emeralds fresh from their bosom rolled.

  _Charles Fenno Hoffman._

       * * *

Charles Dudley Warner says: "Bolton, among a host of attractive spots
on the lake, holds, in my opinion, a rank among the two or three most
interesting points. There is no point of Lake George where the views
are so varied or more satisfactory, excepting the one from Sabbath-day
Point. At Bolton the islets which dot the surface of the lake whose
waters are blue as the sea in the tropics, carry the eye to the
rosy-tinted range which includes Pilot, Buck and Erebus Mountains,
and culminates in the stateliness of Black Mountain. Or, looking
northwest, the superb masses of verdure on Green Island are seen
mirrored on the burnished surface of the lake. Behind rises the mighty
dividing wall called Tongue Mountain, which seems to separate the lake
in twain, for Ganouskie, or Northwest Bay, five miles long, is
in effect a lake by itself, with its own peculiar features." The
Champlain Transportation Company runs a regular line of steamboats
the entire length of the lake, making three round trips daily, except
Sunday. The "Horicon" is a fine side-wheel steamer, 203 feet long and
52 feet wide, and will accommodate, comfortably, 1,000 people.

At Fort Ti the tourist can continue his northern route _via_ the
_Delaware & Hudson_ to Hotel Champlain, Plattsburgh, Rouse's Point, or
Montreal, or through Lake Champlain by steamer. The ruins of Fort Ti,
like old Fort Putnam at West Point, are picturesque, and will well
repay a visit.

       * * *

  Far off the dreaming waters lie,
    White cascades leap in snowy foam,
  Lake Champlain mirrors cloud and sky,
    The Hudson seeks his ocean home.

  _Benjamin F. Leggett._

       * * *

=Lake George to the Adirondacks.=

The reader who does not visit Lake George may feel that he is switched
off on a side-track at Fort Edward; so, coming to his rescue, we
return and resume our northern journey _via_ the main line, through
Dunham's Basin, Smith's Basin, Fort Ann, and Comstock's Landing, to--

=Whitehall=, at the head of Lake Champlain. From this point north the
_Delaware & Hudson_ crosses all thresholds for the Adirondacks, and
shortens the journey to the mountain districts. It passes through
five mountain ranges, the most southerly, the Black Mountain range,
terminating in Mt. Defiance, with scattering spurs coming down to
the very shore of the lake. The second range is known as the
Kayaderosseras, culminating in Bulwagga Mountain. The third range
passes through the western part of Schroon, the northern part of
Moriah and centre of Westport, ending in Split Rock Mountain. The
fourth range, the Bouquet range, ends in high bluffs on Willsboro Bay.
Here the famous Red-Hook Cut is located, and the longest tunnel on the
line.

The fifth range, known as the Adirondack Range, as it includes the
most lofty of the Adirondack Mountains, viz.: McIntyre, Colden and
Tahawas, ends in a rocky promontory known as Tremblau Point, at Port
Kent.

       * * *

  Afar the misty mountains piled,
    The Adirondacks soaring free,
  The dark green ranges lone and wild,
    The Catskills looking toward the sea.

  _Benjamin F. Leggett._

       * * *

No wonder, with these mountain ranges to get through, that the subject
was agitated year after year, and it was only when the Delaware and
Hudson Company placed their powerful shoulder to the wheel, that the
work began to go forward. For these mountains meant tunnels, and rock
cuts, and bridges, and _cash_. Leaving Whitehall, we enter a tunnel
near the old steamboat landing, cross a marsh, which must have
suggested the beginning of the Pilgrim's Progress, for it seemed
almost bottomless, and pass along the narrow end of the lake, still
marked by light-houses, where steamers once struggled and panted "like
fish out of water," fulfilling the Yankee's ambition of running a boat
on a heavy dew. Then winding in and out along the shore, we proceed
to--

=Ticonderoga=, 23 miles from Whitehall. Here terminates the first
range of the Adirondacks, to which we have already referred, viz.:
Mount Defiance. Steamers connect with the train at this point on Lake
Champlain, also with a railroad for Lake George. Near the station we
get a view of old Port Ticonderoga, where Ethan Allen breakfasted
early one morning, and said grace in a brief and emphatic manner. The
lake now widens into a noble sheet of water; we cross the Lake George
outlet, enter a deep rock-cut, which extends a distance of about 500
feet, and reach Crown Point thirty-four miles north of Whitehall.
Passing along the shore of Bulwagga Bay we come to--

=Port Henry=, 40 miles from Whitehall. A few miles further the
railroad leaves the lake at Mullen Brook, the first departure since
we left Whitehall, and we are greeted with cultivated fields and a
charming landscape.

=Westport=, 51 miles from Whitehall, is the railroad station for--

=Elizabethtown=, the county seat of Essex. It is about eight miles
from the station, nestled among the mountains. A county consisting
mostly of mountain scenery could have no happier location for a
head-centre. Elizabethtown forms a most delightful gateway to the
Adirondacks either by stage route or pedestrian tour.

       * * *

  A health to Ethan Allen and our commander Gates;
  To Lincoln and to Washington whom every Tory hates;
  Likewise unto our Congress, God grant it long to reign,
  Our country's right and justice forever to maintain.

  _Saratoga Revolutionary Ballad._

       * * *

A short distance north of Westport we enter the well-cultivated
Bouquet Valley, and after a pleasant run come to Wellsboro Falls,
where we enter seven miles of rock cutting. The road is about 90 feet
above the lake, and the cuts in many places from 90 to 100 feet high.
After leaving Red-Rock cut, we pass through a tunnel 600 feet long.
Crossing Higby's Gorge and rounding Tremblau Mountain, we reach--

=Port Kent=, the connecting point for the progressive village of
Keeseville.

=Ausable Chasm=, is only three miles from the station of Port Kent. It
is many years since we visited the Chasm, but its pictures are still
stamped upon our mind clearly and definitely--the ledge at Birmingham
Falls, the Flume, the Devil's Pulpit, and the boat ride on the swift
current. Indeed, the entire rock-rift, almost two miles in length,
left an impression never to be effaced. The one thing especially
peculiar, on account of the trend of the rock-layers was the illusion
that we were floating up stream, and that the river compressed in
these narrow limits, had "got tired" of finding its way out, until it
thought that the easiest way was to run up hill and get out at the
top.

       * * *

  Hear what the gray-haired woodmen tell
  Of this wild stream and its rocky dell.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

=Bluff Point.=--On a commanding site 200 feet above the lake some
three miles south of Plattsburgh, stands the superb "Hotel Champlain"
commanding a view far-reaching and magnificent, from the Green
Mountains on the east to the Adirondacks on the west. The hotel
grounds comprise the same number of acres as the islands of Lake
George, 365. The hotel is 400 feet long. We condense the following
description from the "Delaware and Hudson Guide-book," which we can
heartily endorse from many personal visits:

"Resolute has been the struggle here with nature, where rocks, tangled
forest and matted roots crowned the chosen spot; but upon the broad,
smooth plateau finally created the Hotel Champlain has been placed,
and all the surrounding forest, its solitudes still untamed, has been
converted into a superb park, threaded with drives and bridle paths.
At the foot of the gradual western slope of the ridge the handsome
station of Bluff Point has been located beside the main line of the
_Delaware & Hudson Railroad_, the chief highway of pleasure and
commercial travel between New York, Saratoga, Lake George, the
Adirondacks and Canada.

"From the station where the coaches of the hotel await expected
guests, a winding pike, the very perfection of a road, leads up the
hill. From the carriage, as it rises to the crest, a wondrous outlook
to the westward is opened to view. Nearly a thousand square miles of
valley, lake and mountain are within range of the eye or included in
the area encircled by visible peaks. As the porch of the hotel
is reached, the view, enhanced by the fine foreground, is indeed
beautiful, but still finer is the grandeur of the scene from the
arches of the tall central dome of the house.

"To the southward we see Whiteface, showing, late in spring and early
in autumn, its coronet of almost perpetual snow; and in a grand circle
still more southward we see in succession McIntyre, Marcy (both over
5,000 feet high), Haystack, Dix, the Gothic peaks, Hurricane and the
Giant. This noble sisterhood of mountains rises from the very heart of
the wilderness, and yet the guests at the Hotel Champlain may reach
any portion of their environment within a few hours."

The fine equipment and frequent train service of the _Delaware &
Hudson_ between New York and Bluff Point without change, by daylight
or at night, and the direct connection of the same line with the
Hudson River steamboats, places this resort high upon the list of
available summering points in the dry and healthful north for families
from the metropolis. Travel from the west, coming down the St.
Lawrence River, or through Canada _via_ Montreal, will find Bluff
Point easy to reach; while from the White Mountains and New England
seashore resorts it is accessible by through trains _via_ St. Albans
or Burlington.

The western shore of Lake Champlain forms the margin of the most
varied and altogether delightful wilderness to be found anywhere upon
this continent east of the Rocky Mountains. The serried peaks to the
westward are in plain view from its shores, their foot-hills ending
in lofty and often abrupt ridges where they meet the lake. Three
impetuous rivers, the Saranac, the Salmon and the Ausable, flow down
from the cool, clear lakes, hidden away in the wildwood, and, breaking
through this barrier at and in the vicinity of Plattsburgh, contribute
not only to the lucid waters of Lake Champlain but greatly to the
picturesque variety of the region.

       * * *

  There lie broad acres laced with rills
    And gemmed with lake and pond
  Behind a wave of wooded hills
    And mountain peaks beyond.

  _Benjamin F. Leggett._

       * * *

=Plattsburgh=, 168 miles from Albany, at the mouth of the Saranac, is
a delightful threshold to the Adirondacks. The northern part of Lake
Champlain offers special attractions to camping parties. The shores
and islands abound in excellent sites. Lake Champlain is also replete
with interest to the historian. The ruins of Fort St. Anne are still
seen on the north end of the Isle La Mott, built by the French in
1660. Valcour Strait, where one of the battles of '76 was fought;
Valcour's Island, where lovers came from far and near, built air
castles, wandered through these shady groves for a season or two, and
then vanished from sight, bankrupt in everything but mutual affection;
Cumberland Bay, with its victory, September, 1814, when the British
were driven back to Canada; and many other points which can be visited
by steamer or yacht.

It is thirty years since I made my first trip to the Saranacs and I
remember well the long journey of those early days, but now we can
step aboard a well equipped train at Plattsburgh and in five or six
hours stand by the bright waters of the Lower Saranac, which might
to-day be called the centre and starting point for all resorts and
camping grounds in the eastern lake district of the Adirondacks.
Floating about the Saranac Islands of a summer evening, roaming among
forest trees, strolling over to the little village one mile distant,
and absorbing the rich exhilaration of a life of untrammeled freedom,
with a perfect hotel, and blazing fire-places if the weather happens
to be unpleasant, form a grand combination, alike for tourists or
seekers after rest.

       * * *

  Where rosy zephyr lingers
    All the livelong day,
  With health upon his pinions
    And gladness on his way.

  _George P. Morris._

       * * *




SOURCE OF THE HUDSON.


In our journey from Albany to Plattsburgh, we have indicated various
routes to the Adirondacks: By way of Saratoga and North Creek to Blue
Mountain Lake following the course of the Hudson which might therefor
be called "The Hudson Gateway;" _via_ Lake George, Westport, and
Elizabethtown, suited for carriage and pedestrian trips, and _via_
Plattsburgh, which might be termed "The Northern Portal." In addition
to these it has been my lot to make several trips up the valley of the
Sacandaga to Lake Pleasant and Indian Lake, and _via_ Schroon Lake
to Sanford and Lake Henderson--and four times to ascend the mountain
trail of Tahawas to the tiny rills and fountains of the Hudson, but
one trip abides in memory distinct and unrivalled, which may be of
service to those who wish to visit in fact or fancy the head waters of
the Hudson.

=The Tahawas Club.=--We took the cars one bright August morning from
Plattsburgh to Ausable Forks, a distance of twenty miles, hired a team
to Beede's, some thirty miles distant from the "Forks;" took dinner at
Keene, and pursued our route up the beautiful valley of the Ausable.

From this point we visited Roaring-Brook Falls, some four hundred feet
high, a very beautiful waterfall in the evening twilight. The next
morning we started, bright and early, for the Ausable Ponds. Four
miles brought us to the Lower Ausable. The historic guide, "old
Phelps," rowed us across the lower lake, pointing out, from our slowly
moving and heavily laden scow, "Indian Head" on the left, and the
"Devil's Pulpit" on the right, lifted about eight hundred feet above
the level of the lake. "Phelps" remarked with quaint humor, that
he was frequently likened to his Satanic Majesty, as he often took
clergymen "up thar." The rocky walls of this lake rise from one
thousand to fifteen hundred feet high, in many places almost
perpendicular. A large eagle soared above the cliffs, and circled in
the air above us, which we took as a good omen of our journey.

       * * *

                    The rills
  That feed thee rise among the storied rocks
  Where Freedom built her battle-tower.

  _William Wallace._

       * * *

After reaching the southern portion of the lake, a trail of a mile and
a quarter leads to the Upper Ausable--the gem of the Adirondacks. This
lake, over two thousand feet above the tide, is surrounded on all
sides by lofty mountains. Our camp was on the eastern shore, and I can
never forget the sunset view, as rosy tints lit up old Skylight, the
Haystack and the Gothics; nor can I ever forget the evening songs from
a camp-fire across the lake, or the "bear story" told by Phelps, a
tale never really finished, but made classic and immortal by Stoddard,
in his spicy and reliable handbook to the North Woods.

The next morning we rowed across the lake and took the Bartlett trail,
ascending Haystack, some five thousand feet high, just to get an
appetite for dinner; our guide encouraging us on the way by saying
that there never had been more than twenty people before "on that air
peak." In fact, there was no trail, and in some places it was so steep
that we were compelled to go up on all fours; or as Scott puts it more
elegantly in the "Lady of the Lake":

              "The foot was fain
  Assistance from the hand to gain."

The view from the summit well repaid the toil. We saw Slide Mountain,
near by to the north, and Whiteface far beyond, perhaps twenty-five
miles distant; northeast, the Gothics; east, Saw-teeth, Mt. Colvin,
Mt. Dix, and the lakes of the Ausable. To the southeast, Skylight;
northwest, Tahawas, still foolishly styled on some of our maps,
Mt. Marcy. The descent of Haystack was as easy as Virgil's famous
"Descensus Averni." We went down in just twenty minutes. The one
that reached the bottom first simply possessed better adaptation for
rolling.

       * * *

  Eagles still claim the loftiest heights: from there
    They scan with solemn eyes the scenes below--
  The river and the hills which shall endure
    While man's frail generations come and go.

  _E. A. Lente._

       * * *

One mile from the foot of Haystack brought us to Panther Gorge Camp,
appropriately named, one of the wildest spots in the Adirondacks. We
remained there that night and slept soundly, although a dozen of us
were packed so closely in one small camp that no individual could turn
over without disarranging the whole mass. Caliban and Trinculo were
not more neighborly, and Sebastian, even sober, would have been fully
justified in taking us for "a rare monster" with twenty legs.

The next morning we ascended Tahawas, but saw nothing save whirling
clouds on its summit. Twice since then we have had better fortune, and
looked down from this mountain peak, five thousand three hundred and
forty-four feet above the sea, upon the loveliest mountain landscape
that the sun ever shone upon. We went down the western slope of
Tahawas, through a driving rain, to Camp Colden, where, with clothes
hung up to dry, we looked like a party of New Zealanders preparing
dinner, hungry enough, too, to make an orthodox meal of each other.
The next day the weather cleared up, and we made a trip of two miles
over a rough mountain trail to Lake Avalanche, whose rocky and
precipitous walls form a fit christening bowl, or baptistery-font for
the infant Hudson.

Returning to Camp Colden and resuming our western march, two miles
brought us to Calamity Pond, where a lone monument marks the spot of
David Henderson's death, by the accidental discharge of a pistol. Five
miles from this point brought us to the "Deserted Village," or the
Upper Adirondack Iron Works, with houses and furnaces abandoned,
and rapidly falling into decay. Here we found a cheery fireside and
cordial welcome.

       * * *

  All the sad story of forest and flower,
  All the red glory of sunsetting hour,
  Comes till I seem to lie lapped in bright dreams
  Lulled by the lullaby murmur of streams.

  _James Kennedy._

       * * *

Had I time to picture this level, grass-grown street, with ten or
fifteen square box-looking houses, windowless, empty and desolate; a
school-house with its long vacation of twenty-three years; a bank with
heavy shutters and ponderous locks, whose floor, Time, the universal
burglar, had undermined; two large furnaces with great rusty wheels,
whose occupation was gone forever; a thousand tons of charcoal,
untouched for a quarter of a century; thousands of bricks waiting for a
builder; a real haunted house, whose flapping clap-boards contain
more spirits than the Black Forests of Germany--a village so utterly
desolate, that it has not even the vestige of a graveyard--if I could
picture to you this village, as it appeared to me that weird midnight,
lying so quiet,

  "under the light of the solemn moon,"

you would realize as I did then, that truth is indeed stranger than
fiction, and that Goldsmith in _his_ "Deserted Village" had not
overdrawn the description of desolate Auburn.

By special request, we were permitted to sleep that night in the
Haunted House and no doubt listened to the first crackling that the
old fire-place had known for years. Many bedsteads in the old building
were still standing, so we only needed bedding from the hotel to
make us comfortable. As we went to sleep we expressed a wish to be
interviewed in the still hours of the night by any ghosts or spirits
who might happen to like our company; but the spirits must have been
absent on a visit that evening, for we slept undisturbed until the old
bell, suspended in a tree, rang out the cheery notes of "trout and
pickerel." We understand that the Haunted House from that night
lost its old-time reputation, and is now frequently brought into
requisition as an "Annex," whenever the hotel or "Club House," as it
is now called, happens to be full. The "Deserted Village" is rich in
natural beauty. Lakes Henderson and Sanford are near at hand, and the
lovely Preston Ponds are only five miles distant.

       * * *

    Stately and awful was the form of Tahawas, the old
    scarred warrior king of the mountains, and yet it owns
    pines that sing like the sea, brooks that warble like the
    robin, and flowers that scent the air like the orange-blossoms
    of Italy.

    _Alfred B. Street._

       * * *

Resuming our march through Indian Pass, under old Wall-Face Mountain,
we reached a comfortable farmhouse at sunset, near North Elba, known
by the name of Scott's. The next morning we visited John Brown's house
and grave by the old rock, and read the beautiful inscription, "Bury
me by the Old Rock, where I used to sit and read the word of God."

From this point we went to Lake Placid, engaged a lad to row us across
the lake--some of our party had gone on before--and strapped our
knapsacks for another mountain climb. We were fortunate in having a
lovely day, and from its sparkling glacier-worn summit we could look
back on all the mountains of our pleasant journey, and far away across
Lake Champlain to Mount Mansfield and Camel's Hump of the Green
Mountains, and farther still to the faint outlines of Mount
Washington. We reached Wilmington that night, drove the next morning
to Ausable Forks, and took the cars for Plattsburgh. The ten days'
trip was finished, and at this late hour I heartily thank the Tahawas
Club of Plattsburgh for taking me under their generous care and
guidance. We took Phelps, our guide, back with us to Plattsburgh. When
he reached the "Forks," and saw the cars for the first time in his
life, he stooped down and, examining the track, said, "What tarnal
little wheels." I suppose he concluded that if the ordinary cart had
two large wheels, that real car wheels would resemble the Rings of
Saturn. He saw much to amuse and interest him during his short stay
in Plattsburgh, but after all he thought it was rather lonesome, and
gladly returned to his lakes and mountains, where he slept in peace,
with the occasional intrusion of a "Bar" or a "Painter." He knew the
region about Tahawas as an engineer knows his engine, or as a Greek
professor knows the pages of his lexicon. He had lived so closely with
nature that he seemed to understand her gentlest whispers, and he had
more genuine poetry in his soul than many a man who chains weak ideas
in tangled metre.

       * * *

  Lake Avalanche with rocky wall
    And Henderson's dark-wooded shore,
  Your echoes linger still and call
    Unto my soul forevermore.

  _Wallace Bruce_.

       * * *

[Illustration: INDIAN HEAD.]

Since that first delightful trip I have visited the Adirondacks many
times, and I hope this summer to repeat the excursion. To me Tahawas
is the grand centre. It remains unchanged. In fact, the route I have
here traced is the same to-day as then. Even the rude camps are
located in the same places, with the exception that the trail has been
shortened over Tahawas, and a camp established on Skylight. With good
guides the route is not difficult for ladies in good health,--say
sufficient health to endure half a day's shopping. Persons
contemplating the mountain trip need blankets, a knapsack, and a
rubber cloth or overcoat; food can be procured at the hotels or farm
houses.

       * * *

    The old English ballads have all the sparkle, the
    energy and the rhythm of our mountain streams, but
    Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare and Bunyan are the
    crystal lakes from which flow the river, ay, the Hudson
    of our language.

    _Wallace Bruce_.

       * * *

In this hasty sketch I have had little space to indulge in
picture-painting. I passed Bridal-Veil Fall without a reference. I
was tempted to loiter on the banks of the Feld-spar and the bright
Opalescent, but I passed by without even picking a pebble from the
clear basins of its sparkling cascades. I passed the "tear of the
clouds," four thousand feet above the tide--that fountain of the
Hudson nearest to the sky, without being beguiled into poetry. I have
not ventured upon a description of a sunrise view from the summit of
Tahawas, of the magic effect of light above clouds that clothe the
surrounding peaks in garments wrought, it seems, of softest wool,
until mist and vapor dissolve in roseate colors, and the landscape
lies before us like an open book, which many glad eyes have looked
upon again and again. I have left it for your guides to tell you, by
roaring camp-fires, long stories of adventure in trapping and hunting,
of wondrous fishes that grow longer and heavier every season, although
captured and broiled many and many a year ago--trout and pickerel
literally pickled in fiction, served and re-served in the piquant
sauce of mountain vocabulary. In brief, I have kept my imagination and
enthusiasm under strict control. But, after all, the Adirondacks are
a wonderland, and we, who dwell in the Hudson and Mohawk valleys, are
happy in having this great park of Nature's making at our very doors.

It has charms alike for the hunter, the angler, the artist, the
writer, and the scientist. Let us rejoice, therefore, that the State
of New York is waking at last to the fact, that these northern
mountains were intended by nature to be something more than lumber
ranches, to be despoiled by the axe, and finally revert to the State
for "taxes" in the shape of bare and desolate wastes. Nor can the most
practical legislator charge those, who wish to preserve the Adirondack
woods, with idle sentiment; as it is now an established scientific
fact that the rainfall of a country is largely dependent upon its
forest land. If the water supply of the north were cut off, to any
perceptible degree, the Hudson, during the months of July and August,
would be a mere sluice of salt water from New York to Albany; and the
northern canals, dependent on this supply, would become empty and
useless ditches. Our age is intensely practical, but we are fortunate
in this, that so far as the preservation of the Adirondacks is
concerned, utility, common sense, and the appreciation of the
beautiful are inseparably blended.

       * * *

  Wild umbrage far around me clings
    To breezy knoll and hushed ravine,
  And o'er each rocky headland flings
    Its mantle of refreshing green.

  _Henry T. Tuckerman_.

       * * *

To those persons who do not desire long mountain jaunts, who simply
need some quiet place for rest and recuperation, I would suggest this:
Select some place near the base of these clustered mountains, like the
tasty Adirondack Lodge at Clear Pond, only seven miles from the summit
of Tahawas, or Beede's pleasant hotel, high and dry above Keene Flats,
near to the Ausable Ponds, or some pleasant hotel or quiet farm-house
in the more open country near Lake Placid and the Saranacs. But
I prophesy that the spirit of adventure will come with increased
strength, and men and women alike will be found wandering off on
long excursions, sitting about great camp-fires, ay, listening like
children to tales which have not gathered truth with age. If you have
control of your time you will find no pleasanter months than July,
August and September, and when you return to your firesides with
new vigor to fight the battle of life, you will feel, I think, like
thanking the writer for having advised you to go thither.

       * * *

    To shut up a glen or a waterfall for one man's exclusive
    enjoying; to fence out a genial eye from any
    corner of the earth which nature has lovingly touched;
    to lock up trees and glades shady paths and haunts
    along rivulets, would be an embezzlement by one man
    of God's gifts to all.

    _N. P. Willis._

       * * *

I have written in this article the Indian name, Tahawas, in the place
of Mt. Marcy, and for this reason: There is no justice in robbing the
Indian of his keen, poetic appreciation, by changing a name, which
has in itself a definite meaning, for one that means nothing in its
association with this mountain. We have stolen enough from this
unfortunate race, to leave, at least, those names in our woodland
vocabulary that chance to have a musical sound to our imported Saxon
ears. The name Tahawas is not only beautiful in itself, but also
poetic in its interpretation--signifying "I cleave the clouds."
Coleridge, in his glorious hymn, "Before sunrise in the vale of
Chamouni," addresses Mount Blanc:

          "Around thee and above
  Deep is the air and dark, substantial, black--
  An ebon mass. Methinks thou piercest it.
  _As with a wedge!_"

The name or meaning of Tahawas was never made known to the great
English poet, who died sixty years ago. Is it not remarkable that
the untutored Indian, and the keenist poetic mind which England has
produced for a century, should have the same idea in the uplifted
mountains? There is also another reason why we, as a State, should
cherish the name Tahawas. While the Sierra Nevadas and the Alps
slumbered beneath the waves of the ocean, before the Himalayas or the
Andes had asserted their supremacy, scientists say, that the high
peaks of the Adirondacks stood alone above the waves, "the cradle of
the world's life;" and, as the clouds then encircled the vast waste
of water, Tahawas then rose--"Cleaver" alike of the waters and the
clouds.

       * * *

  Tahawas, rising stern and grand,
    "Cloud-sunderer" lift thy forehead high,
  Guard well thy sun-kissed mountain land
    Whose lakes seem borrowed from the sky.

  _Wallace Bruce_.

       * * *




GEOLOGY OF THE HUDSON.


In addition to various geological references scattered through these
pages the following facts from an American Geological Railway Guide,
by James Macfarlane, Ph.D., will be of interest.

"The State of New York is to the geologist what the Holy Land is
to the Christian, and the works of her Palaeontologist are the Old
Testament Scriptures of the science. It is a Laurentian, Cambrian,
Silurian and Devonian State, containing all the groups and all the
formations of these long ages, beautifully developed in belts
running nearly across the State in an east and west direction, lying
undisturbed as originally laid down.

"The rock of New York Island is gneiss, except a portion of the north
end, which is limestone. The south portion is covered with deep
alluvial deposits, which in some places are more than 100 feet in
depth. The natural outcroppings of the gneiss appeared on the surface
about 16th Street, on the east side of the city, and run diagonally
across to 31st Street on 10th Avenue. North of this, much of the
surface was naked rock. It contains a large proportion of mica, a
small proportion of quartz and still less feldspar, but generally an
abundance of iron pyrites in very minute crystals, which, on
exposure, are decomposed. In consequence of these ingredients it soon
disintegrates on exposure, rendering it unfit for the purposes
of building. The erection of a great city, for which this island
furnishes a noble site, has very greatly changed its natural
condition. The geological age of the New York gneiss is undoubtedly
very old, not the Laurentian or oldest, nor the Huronian, but it
belongs to the third or White Mountain series, named by Dr. Hunt the
Montalban. It is the same range which is the basis rock of nearly all
the great cities of the Atlantic coast. It crosses New Jersey where it
is turned to clay, until it appears under Trenton, and it extends to
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington and Richmond, Va., and probably
Boston, Massachusetts, is founded on this same formation.

       * * *

  Oh, river! darkling river! what a voice
  Is that thou utterest while all else is still!

  _William Cullen Bryant_.

       * * *

"On the opposite side of the river may here be seen for many miles the
Palisades, a long, rough mountain ridge close to the water's edge. Its
upper half is a perpendicular precipice of bare rock of a columnar
structure from 100 to 200 feet in height, the whole height of the
mountain being generally from 400 to 600 feet, and the highest point
in the range opposite Sing Sing 800 feet above the Hudson, and known
as the High Torn. The width of the mountain is from a half mile to a
mile and a half, the western slope being quite gentle. In length it
extends from Bergen Point below Jersey City to Haverstraw, and then
westward in all 48 miles, the middle portion being merely a low ridge.
The lower half of the ridge on the river side is a sloping mound of
detritus, of loose stones which has accumulated at the base of the
cliff, from its weathered and wasted surface.

"Viewed from the railroad or from a steamboat on the river, this lofty
mural precipice with its huge weathered masses of upright columns of
bare rock, presenting a long, straight unbroken ridge overlooking the
beautiful Hudson River, is certainly extremely picturesque. Thousands
of travelers gaze at it daily without knowing what it is. This entire
ridge consists of no other rock than trap traversing the Triassic
formation in a huge vertical dike. The red sandstone formation of New
Jersey is intersected by numerous dikes of this kind, but this is much
the finest. The materials of this mountain have undoubtedly burst
through a great rent or fissure in the strata, overflowing while in a
melted or plastic condition the red sand-stone, not with the violence
of a volcano, for the adjoining strata are but little disturbed in
position, although often greatly altered by the heat, but forced up
very slowly and gradually, and probably under pressure. Subsequent
denudation has laid bare the part of the mountain now exposed along
the river. The rock is columnar basalt, sometimes called greenstone,
and is solid, not stratified like water-formed rocks, but cracked in
cooling and of a crystalline structure. Here is a remarkable but not
uncommon instance of a great geological blank. On the east side of
this river the formations belong to the first or oldest series of
Primary or Crystalline rocks, while on the west side they are
all Triassic, the intermediate Cambrian, Silurian, Devonian and
Carboniferous formations being wanting. This state of things continues
all along the Atlantic coast to Georgia, the Cretaceous or Jurassic
taking the place of the Triassic farther south.

       * * *

  Like thine, O, be my course--nor turned aside,
  While listening to the soundings of a land,
  That like the ocean call invites me to its strand.

  _Mrs. Seba Smith._

       * * *

"Montrose to Cornwall. This celebrated passage of the Hudson through
the Highlands, is a gorge nearly 20 miles long from 3 miles south of
Peekskill to Fishkill, and is worn out of the Laurentian rocks far
below mean tide water. The hills on its sides rise in some instances
as much as 1,800 feet, and in many places the walls are very
precipitous. The rock is gneiss, of a kind that is not easily
disintegrated or eroded, nor is there any evidence of any convulsive
movement. It is clearly a case of erosion, but not by the present
river, which has no fall, for tide water extends 100 miles up the
river beyond the Highlands. This therefore was probably a work mainly
performed in some past period when the continent was at a higher
level. Most likely it is a valley of great antiquity.

"Opposite Fishkill is Newburgh, which is in the great valley of Lower
Silurian or Cambrian limestone and slate. North of that, on the west
side of the river, the formations occur in their usual order, their
outcrops running northeast and southwest. On the _N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R._,
on the east side, the same valley crosses, and the slates from
Fishkill to Rhinebeck are about the same place in the series;
but being destitute of fossils and very much faulted, tilted and
disturbed, their precise geology is uncertain. See the exposures in
the cuts at Poughkeepsie. The high ground to the east is commonly
called the Quebec group.

       * * *

  Amid thy forest solitudes one climbs
    O'er crags, that proudly tower above the deep,
  Along the verge of the cliff, and he can hear
  The low dash of the wave with startled ear.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *

"A series of great dislocations with upthrows on the east side
traverse eastern North America from Canada to Alabama. One of these
great faults has been traced from near the mouth of the St. Lawrence
River, keeping mostly under the water up to Quebec just north of the
fortress, thence by a gently curving line to Lake Champlain or through
western Vermont across Washington County, N. Y., to near Albany. It
crosses the river near Rhinebeck 15 miles north of Poughkeepsie and
continues on southward into New Jersey and runs into another series of
faults probably of a later date, which extends as far as Alabama. It
brings up the rocks of the so called Quebec group on the east side of
the fracture to the level of the Hudson River and Trenton.

"Catskill Mountains. For many miles on this railroad are beautiful
views of the Catskill Mountains, 3,800 feet high, several miles
distant on the opposite or west side of the river, and which furnish
the name for the Catskill formation. The wide valley between them
and the river is composed of Chemung, Hamilton, Lower Helderberg and
Hudson River. The geology on the east or railroad side is entirely
different.

"Albany. The clay beds at Albany are more than 100 feet thick, and
between that city and Schenectady they are underlaid by a bed of
sand that is in some places more than 50 feet thick. There is an
old glacial clay and boulder drift below the gravel at Albany, but
Professor Hall says it is not the estuary stratified clay."

       * * *

    There has that little stream of water been playing among the hills
    since He made the world, and none know how often the hand of God
    is seen in a wilderness but them that rove it for a man's life.

    _James Fenimore Cooper._

       * * *




THE HUDSON TIDE.

(_Condensed from article by permission of writer._)

The tide in the Hudson River is the continuation of the tide-wave,
which comes up from the ocean through New York Bay, and is carried
by its own momentum one hundred and sixty miles, growing, of course,
constantly smaller, until it is finally stopped by the dam at Troy.
The crest of this wave, or top high water, is ten hours going from New
York to Troy. A steamer employing the same time (ten hours) for the
journey, and starting at high water in New York, would carry a flood
tide and highest water all the way, and have an up-river current of
about three miles an hour helping her. On the other hand, the same
steamer starting six hours later, or at low tide, would have dead low
water and an ebb tide current of about three miles against her the
entire way. The average rise and fall of the tides in New York is five
and one-half feet, and in Troy, about two feet.

Flood tide may carry salt water, under the most favorable
circumstances, so that it can be detected at Poughkeepsie; ordinarily
the water is fresh at Newburgh.

To those who have not studied the tides the following will also be of
interest.

The tides are the semi-diurnal oscillations of the ocean, caused by
the attraction of the moon and sun.

The influence of the moon's attraction is the preponderating one in
the tide rising force, while that of the sun is about two-fifths as
much as that of the moon. The tides therefore follow the motion of the
moon, and the average interval between the times of high water is the
half length of the lunar day, or about twelve hours and twenty-five
minutes.

       * * *

  Nor lives there one whose boyhood's days
  Of happiness were passed beneath that sun,
  That in his manhood-prime can calmly gaze
  Upon that Bay, or on that mountain stand,
  Nor feel the prouder of his native land.

  _Fitz-Greene Halleck._

       * * *




CONDENSED POINTS.

_As Seen on the Hudson River Day Line Steamers._

_Desbrosses Street Pier._ On leaving landing a charming view is
obtained of New York Harbor with Bartholdi Statue to the south.

_Stevens Castle._ Above Jersey City docks on the west, crowning a
commanding site.

_St. Michael's Monastery_, or Monastery of the Passionist Fathers, on
west bank above Elysian Fields; distinguished by large dome and towers
of the St. Paul (London) style of architecture. This dome is 300 feet
high, and its summit is 515 feet above the Hudson.

_42d Street Pier._ Midway to the dwellers of Greater New York and
convenient to all Elevated, Subway and Trolley Lines.

_Weehawken_, on the west bank, about opposite 50th Street. Near the
river bank was the scene of the Hamilton and Burr duel, 1804.

_Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument_, 89th Street, New York. Dedicated
May 30, 1902. Corner stone laid in 1900 by President Roosevelt when
Governor.

_Columbia University._ Stately buildings on east bank.

_St. Luke's Hospital._ Beautiful dome in the distance southeast of
college.

_The Cathedral of St. John the Divine_, now in construction, will be
one of the finest structures in the world.

_General Grant's Tomb_ at Riverside Drive and 123d Street.

_129th Street Pier._ Above this landing is the Steel Viaduct of the
Boulevard Drive.

       * * *

  The land that from the rule of kings
    In freeing us itself made free,
  Our old world sister to us brings
    Her sculptured dream of liberty.

  _John G. Whittier._

       * * *

_Carmansville_ (where Audubon, the ornithologist lived), a city suburb
at 152d Street.

_Trinity Cemetery_, 152d Street, and above this Audubon Park.

_Old Fort Washington_ once crowned the hills on the east bank. Fort
Lee was almost opposite on the southern point of the Palisades.

_Stewart Castle_, east bank, formerly owned by A. T. Stewart.

_University of City of New York_ with dome, in distance.

_Inwood._ Station on the Hudson River Railroad, above the heights.
Place once known as Tubbie Hook.

_Palisades_, on west bank, extend fifteen miles from Fort Lee to
Piermont, a sheer wall of trap rock from 300 to 500 feet high.

_Spuyten Duyvil_, on east bank northern boundary of Manhattan Island.

_Site of Fort Independence_, east bank, on height north of Spuyten
Duyvil.

_Riverdale Station._ Station on the Hudson River Railroad above
Spuyten Duyvil. Yonkers rising on the green slope to the north; and
the Palisades blending in the far distance with green headlands of the
Ramapo Range.

_Convent of Mount St. Vincent._ The gray, castle-like structure in
front, was once the home of Edwin Forrest.

_Yonkers_, seventeen miles from Battery.

_Greystone_, on east bank, crowning hill, about one and a half miles
north of Yonkers. Once property of Samuel J. Tilden.

_Hastings_, pleasant village on east bank.

_Indian Head_ (510 feet), opposite Hastings, highest point of
Palisades.

_Dobb's Ferry_, on east bank, named after an old Swedish ferryman.

_Cottinet Place_, on east bank, built of stone brought from France.
Easily distinguished by light shade through trees.

_George L. Schuyler's Residence_, near east bank. The late Col. James
A. Hamilton's house almost east of Mr. Schuyler's. Stiner's place
distinguished by its large dome.

       * * *

  From this brow of rock
  That overlooks the Hudson's western marge,
  I gaze upon the long array of groves,
  The piles and gulfs of verdure drinking in the grateful heat.

  _William Cullen Bryant._

       * * *

_Ardsley_, on east bank, just above Dobb's Ferry.

_Ardsley Club_ and Golf Links.

_Irvington_, 24 miles from New York, named after Washington Irving.

_Piermont_, on west bank, with pier almost one mile in length
extending into river.

_Sunnyside_, home of Washington Irving, east bank, one-half mile north
of Irvington Station, close to river bank and scarcely seen through
the trees.

_Helen M. Gould's Residence_, east bank, prominent Abbey-like
structure, known as "Lyndehurst."

_Tarrytown_, east bank, 26 miles from New York.

_Nyack_, west bank, opposite Tarrytown.

_J. D. Rockefeller's New Home_ on Kykuit or Kake-out Mt. back of
Tarrytown.

_Tappan Zee_, reaching from Dobb's Ferry to Croton Point, is about
three miles wide at Tarrytown.

_Sleepy Hollow_, east bank, north of Tarrytown; burial place of
Washington Irving. The tall shaft visible from steamer, erected by the
Delavan family, is near his grave.

_Kingsland Point_, east bank, above lighthouse.

_Rockwood_, home of William Rockefeller. One of the most imposing
residences on the river.

_Mrs. Elliot F. Shepard's Residence_, on east bank.

_Ramapo Mountains_, on west side above Nyack, known as "Point No
Point."

_Ossining_, on east bank, six miles north of Tarrytown. Prison
buildings are near the river below the village.

_Rockland Lake_, opposite Sing Sing, between two hills; source of the
Hackensack River.

_Croton River_, on east bank, meets the Hudson one mile above Sing
Sing; crossed by drawbridge of the Hudson River Railroad.

_Teller's Point._ That part of Croton Point which juts into the Hudson.
This point separates Tappan Zee from Haverstraw Bay.

       * * *

  O Tappan Zee! with peaceful hills,
    And slumbrous sky and drowsy air,
  Thy calm and restful spirit stills
    The heart weighed down with weary care.

  _Wallace Bruce_.

       * * *

_Haverstraw Bay_, widest part of the river; over four miles in width.

_West Shore R. R. Tunnel_ under mountain.

_West Shore Railroad_, west bank, meets the Hudson south of
Haverstraw.

_Haverstraw_, on west bank, with two miles of brickyards.

_Treason Hill_, where Arnold and Andre met at the house of Joshua Hett
Smith, northwest of Haverstraw.

_Stony Point_, west bank. Lighthouse built on site and from the
material of old fort captured from British by Anthony Wayne in 1778.

_Verplank's Point_, on east shore, full of brickyards. It was here
Baron Steuben drilled the soldiers of '76.

_Tompkin's Cove_, on west bank. Lime kilns and quarries.

_Peekskill_, east bank, pleasantly located on Peekskill Bay.

_New York State Encampment_, on bluff north of Peekskill Creek.

_Kidd's Point_, on west bank, where steamer enters Highlands almost at
a right angle.

_Dunderberg Mountain_, west bank, forming with Manito Mountain on the
east southern portal of Highlands.

_Iona Island_, former pleasure resort for excursions, now converted to
Government use.

_The Race._ The river channel is so termed by navigators, between Iona
Island and the east bank.

_Anthony's Nose_, east bank, with railroad tunnel.

_Montgomery Creek_, on west side, empties into the Hudson about
opposite the point of Anthony's Nose. _Fort Clinton_ was on the south
side of this creek, and _Fort Montgomery_ on the north side.

_J. Pierpont Morgan's Residence_, on west bank.

_Sugar-Loaf_, east bank, resembling an old "sugar-loaf" to one looking
north from Anthony's Nose.

       * * *

  From Stony Point to Bemis Height,
    From Saratoga to the sea,
  We trace the lines, now dark, now bright,
    From seventy-six to eighty-three.

  _Wallace Bruce._

       * * *

_Beverley Dock_, at foot of Sugar-Loaf, from which point Arnold fled
to the "Vulture."

_Lady-Cliff Academy_, (west side) on bluff.

_Hamilton Fish's Residence_, on hill, east side.

_William H. Osborne's Residence_, on east bank; house with pointed
tower north of Sugar-Loaf.

_Sam Sloan's_ lookout tower, east side, on top of mountain. Residence
on hillside below.

_Buttermilk Falls_, on west bank.

_West Point_, 50 miles from New York, Academy Buildings and Parade
Grounds.

_Memorial Hall_, building on bluff above landing.

_Kosciusko's Garden_ with monument and spring below Memorial.

_Garrison_, opposite West Point on east bank.

_Fort Putnam_ (596 feet), above the Hudson on west.

_West Point Hotel_, west bank, wide outlook to the north.

_Battle Monument_, surmounted by Statue of "Victory."

_Constitution Island_, on east bank; chain was thrown across the river
at this point during the Revolution.

_Old Cro' Nest_, picturesque mountain north of West Point on west
bank.

_Cold Spring_, on east bank, opposite Old Cro' Nest.

_Undercliff_, once the home of George P. Morris, on slope north of
Cold Spring.

_Break Neck Mountain_, on east bank, from which point the Highlands
trend away to the northeast, known as the Beacon Mountains or the
Fishkill Range.

_Storm King_, on west bank, marking northern portal of the Highlands.

_Cornwall_, under the slope of Storm King.

_Pollopel's Island_, at northern portal of the Highlands.

_Idlewild_, above Cornwall, former home of N. P. Willis.

_Washington's Headquarters_, Newburgh, seen as the boat approaches the
city. A flag-staff marks the point.

_Newburgh_, west bank, 59 miles from New York.

_Fishkill Landing_, on east bank, opposite Newburgh.

       * * *

  Let us toast our foster-father, the Republic as you know--
  Who in the path of science taught us upward for to go--
  And the maidens of our native land whose cheeks like roses glow,
  They're oft remembered in our songs, at Benny Havens--oh!

  _Benny Havens, West Point._

       * * *

_Low Point_ or _Carthage_, 4 miles above Fishkill.

_Devil's Dans Kammer_, point on west bank covered with cedars.

_New Hamburg_, above Low Point, on the east side.

_Hampton Point_, opposite New Hamburgh. Here are the finest white
cedars on the river.

_Irving Grinnell's Residence, "Netherwood,"_ east bank, just
distinguished through the trees.

_Shawangunk Mountains_, on the west side, reach away in the distance
toward the Catskills.

_Marlborough_ and _Milton_, on west bank.

_Locust Grove._ Home of the late Prof. S. F. B. Morse on east bank, with
square central tower.

_The Lookout_, a wooded hill owned by Poughkeepsie Cemetery.

_Livingston Place_, now occupied by a rolling mill.

_Vassar Brothers Hospital_, brick building on the hillside.

_Poughkeepsie_, 74 miles from New York.

_Poughkeepsie Bridge_, 12,608 feet in length. Track 212 feet above
tide-water.

_Mrs. John F. Winslow's Residence_, seen through opening of trees on
east bank.

_Hudson River State Hospital._ Large red buildings on east bank, two
miles north of Poughkeepsie.

_Hyde Park_, on the east side.

_Residence of Frederick W. Vanderbilt_, with white marble Corinthian
columns.

_Manresa Institute_, large building above Crum Elbow, on west side.

_A. R. Frothingham._ Grecian portico with columns.

_John Burrough's_ brown stone cottage, north of Frothingham's.

_The Novitiate of the Redemption Fathers_, a large new building on
west bank at Esopus.

_Staatsburgh, on east side._ Dock and ice houses in foreground.

       * * *

  While fashion seeks the islands
    Encircled by the sea,
  Taste finds the Hudson Highlands
    More beautiful to see.

  _George P. Morris._

       * * *

_D. O. Mills' Mansion_, palatial residence on the east bank above
Staatsburgh.

_Dinsmore's Residence_, a large building charmingly located on
Dinsmore Point, east bank.

_Ellerslie_, residence of Ex-Vice-President Levi P. Morton, below
Rhinecliff.

_Rhinecliff_, on east bank.

_City of Kingston_, embraces Kingston and Rondout.

_Kingston Point._ Delightful park and picnic grounds near the landing.

_Old Beekman Place_, on east bank, a short distance above Rhinecliff.
One of the old Revolutionary houses.

_Ferncliff, Residence of John Jacob Astor._ Fine villa with pointed
tower.

_Out-of-Door Sports._ A large building on east bank, erected by Mr.
Astor.

_Garretson Place_, north of Ferncliff, on east bank.

_"Leacote," Douglas Merritt's Residence_, north of Clifton Point.

_Flatbush_, on west bank opposite Clifton Point.

_Rokeby, Residence of late William B. Astor_, above Astor's Point.

_Barrytown_, on east side.

_Aspinwall Place_, north of Barrytown, formerly John R. Livingston's
place.

_Montgomery Place_, east bank, among the trees.

"_Annandale_," name of John Bard's place. East of this is St.
Stephen's College, a training school for the ministry.

_Cruger's Residence_, on Cruger's Island--once called Lower Red Hook
Island.

_Tivoli_, on east side, 100 miles from New York.

_Glasco_, south of Tivoli on the west side.

_Saugerties_, on the west side.

_Idele_, property of Miss Clarkson, known as the old Chancellor Place,
on east bank.

_Hotel Kaaterskill_ is plainly seen from this point.

       * * *

  O would that she were here,
    Sure Eden's garden-plot,
  Did not embrace more varied charms
    Than this romantic spot.

  _George P. Morris._

       * * *

_Malden_, above Saugerties, on west side.

_Clermont_, above Tivoli. The original Livingston manor.

_West Camp_, on west side, above Malden.

_Four County Island._ The "meeting point" of Dutchess, Columbia,
Greene and Ulster.

_Germantown_, on east side, 105 miles from New York.

_Man in the Mountain._ Between Germantown and Catskill we get a fine
view of the reclining giant, traced by the following outline:--the
peak to the south is the _knee_; the next to the north is the
_breast_; and two or three above this, the _chin_, the _nose_, and the
_forehead_.

_Roeliff Jansen's Kill_ meets the Hudson on east bank above what is
known by the pilots as Nine Mile Tree.

_Herman Livingston's Residence_, on point above.

_Catskill Creek_ joins the Hudson south of Catskill.

_Catskill_, 110 miles from New York. Route from this point to Catskill
Mountains, via Catskill Mountain Railroad.

_Prospect Park Hotel_, on west bank, north of Catskill.

_Cole's Grove_, north of Catskill. Here was the residence of Thomas
Cole, the artist.

_Frederick E. Church's Residence._ One of the most commanding sites
and finest residences, opposite Catskill.

_Rodger's Island_, on the east side, where the last battle was fought
between the Mohawks and the Mahicans.

_Mount Merino_, two miles north of Roger's Island.

_State Reformatory for Women_, on bluff south of Hudson.

_Hudson_, 115 miles from New York. Promenade Hill just north of
landing.

_Athens_, quiet village, on the west bank.

_Stockport._ On east side, four miles north of Hudson, near the mouth
of Columbiaville Creek, formed by the union of the Kinderhook and
Claverack Creeks.

_Four-mile Point._ On west side, about 125 feet high; four miles from
Hudson and four from Coxsackie.

_Coxsackie._ On west side, 8 miles from Hudson.

       * * *

  For while the beautiful moon arose,
    And drifted the boat in the yellow beams,
  My soul went down the river of thought
    That flows in the mystic land of dreams.

  _Richard Henry Stoddard._

       * * *

_Newtown Hook_, opposite Coxsackie. The wooded point is called
Prospect Grove.

_Stuyvesant._ On the east side. Once called Kinderhook Landing.

_Schodack Island._ On east side, about two miles above Stuyvesant. The
island is about 3 miles long.

_New Baltimore._ About opposite the centre of Schodack Island; fifteen
miles from Hudson and fifteen from Albany. The Government dykes begin
opposite New Baltimore.

_Berren Island._ Site of the famous "Castle of Rensselaerstien."

_Coeymans._ Right above Berren Island. Above Coeymans is what is known
as the Coeyman's Cross Over.

_Shad Island._ The first island to the westward above Coeymans; 3
miles long; old Indian fishing ground.

_Castleton_, on east bank, in the town of Schodack.

_Mourdeners Kill_, a small stream which empties into the Hudson above
Castleton.

_Sunnyside Island_ near east bank.

_Cedar Hill_, above, on west bank.

_Staats Island_, settled by the Staats family before the arrival of
the Van Rensselaers.

_The Overslaugh_ reaches from Van Wies' Point (the first point above
Cedar Hill), on east bank, about two miles up the river.

_Albany_, 142 miles from New York, is now near at hand, and we see to
the south the Convent of the Sacred Heart; to the north the Cathedral,
the Capitol, the State House, the City Hall, etc.

_Rensselaer_, opposite. Connected with Albany by ferries two railroad
bridges, and carriage bridge.

_Old Van Rensselaer Place._ One of the Van Rensselaer houses on the
east bank, built before the Revolution. The tourist will note the port
holes on either side of the door as defense against Indians.

       * * *

  In love to the deep-bosomed stream of the west
  I fling this loose blossom to float on its breast.

  _Oliver Wendell Holmes._

       * * *

       *       *       *       *       *



[Transcriber's Note--Errata (Old Typos) and Corrections

   TOC:--
      Entries for "New Amsterdam" and "The Dutch and the English"
        reversed, and page number for New Amsterdam changed from 25 to 23.
      Page number for "New York" changed from 26 to 27.
      Page number for "Yonkers to West Point" changed from 59 to 60.
      Changed: '97-104' to '97-103', to match entry.
      Changed: '152' (1st listing) to '151', to match entry.
      Page number for "Source of the Hudson" changed from 201 to 202.
      Changed: 'Colombia County' to 'Columbia Springs', to match entry.
   Page 9: Restored missing period and missing half of closing quote.
     [Illustration: Hendrick Hudson's "Half Moon."]
   Page 35: added 's' to 'landing' (...steamers make their various
      landings.)
   Page 43: removed extraneous closing quote.
   Page 46: added comma after 'erection' (..., now in process of
      erection, ...)
   Page 55: added 's' to 'make' (forgetting even, as Bryant did, that a
     vertical line from the top of the cliff on account of the crumbling
     debris of ages make(s) it impossible for even the strongest arm to
     hurl a stone from the summit to the margin of the river).
   Page 59: missing closing quote, and possibly also missing text in
     paragraph?
      (one narrator says: "remarkable disappearances ...)
   Page 76: changed 'materal' to 'material'.
   Page 80: changed 'Revoluton'to 'Revolution'.
   Page 94: added missing comma after 'library': "The Library, founded
     in 1812, has about 50,000 volumes."
   Page 95: changed 'Seige' to 'Siege'"... Siege Battery on the slope...."
   Page 96: changed 'pictureque' to 'picturesque'.
   Page 107: changed (Major Tench) 'Tighlman' to 'Tilghman'.
   Page 107: added opening quote ..."the proclamation of Congress and
      the farewell orders of Washington were read, and the last word
      of command given."
   Page 108/9: changed 'proclams' to 'proclaims'.
   Page 110: changed: 'The Marquis De Chastelleaux' to 'The Marquis De
     Chastellux' (ref.: google)
   Page 113: changed: 'The Marquis De Chastelleux' to 'The Marquis De
     Chastellux'
   Page 125: added 's' to 'thousand' (thousands of young men)
   Page 129: (While sunset gilds) 'theee', to 'thee',
   Page 139: changed 'openng' to 'opening'.
   Page 145: changed 'Sofly' to 'Softly'.
   Page 153: changed 'communicaton' to 'communication'.
   Page 153: added closing quote (in about 32 hours.")
   Page 155: changed 'wth' to 'with'
   Page 173: changed 'thousand' to 'thousands' (...thousands of
     laboring men... )
   Page 205: added 's' to 'brick' (thousands of bricks)
   Page 212: added " to para beginning ("Viewed from the railroad ...)
   Page 212: added 's' to 'thousand' (Thousands of travellers ...)

Also added: Periods and commas, various (in the poetry footnotes). The
text appears worn; there is space for a period (and a couple of letters
are missing), so I am assuming that the missing punctuation may have
been rubbed off the page.

I have also encountered a number of instances throughout the book where
the author quoted from an external source and omitted either the opening
or closing quotation mark, and it is not obvious from the text just
where the quote began or ended. In a couple of instances I have hazarded
a guess, but have otherwise left the single quotaton mark in place, as it
appears in the original.]







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hudson, by Wallace Bruce

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUDSON ***

***** This file should be named 17823.txt or 17823.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/8/2/17823/

Produced by Curtis Weyant, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
eeaidhmai
START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10519 ***

MERCY PHILBRICK'S CHOICE.


1876




I.

_To one who found us on a starless night,
All helpless, groping in a dangerous way,
Where countless treacherous hidden pitfalls lay,
And, seeing all our peril, flashed a light
To show to our bewildered, blinded sight,
By one swift, clear, and piercing ray,
The safe, sure path,--what words could reach the height
Of our great thankfulness? And yet, at most,
The most he saved was this poor, paltry life
Of flesh, which is so little worth its cost,
Which eager sows, but may not stay to reap,
And so soon breathless with the strain and strife,
Its work half-done, exhausted, falls asleep._

II.

_But unto him who finds men's souls astray
In night that they know not is night at all,
Walking, with reckless feet, where they may fall
Each moment into deadlier deaths than slay
The flesh,--to him whose truth can rend away
From such lost souls their moral night's black pall,--
Oh, unto him what words can hearts recall
Which their deep gratitude finds fit to say?
No words but these,--and these to him are best:--
That, henceforth, like a quenchless vestal flame,
His words of truth shall burn on Truth's pure shrine;
His memory be truth worshipped and confessed;
Our gratitude and love, the priestess line,
Who serve before Truth's altar, in his name._




Mercy Philbrick's Choice.




Chapter I.



It was late in the afternoon of a November day. The sky had worn all day
that pale leaden gray color, which is depressing even to the least
sensitive of souls. Now, at sunset, a dull red tint was slowly stealing
over the west; but the gray cloud was too thick for the sun to pierce, and
the struggle of the crimson color with the unyielding sky only made the
heavens look more stern and pitiless than before.

Stephen White stood with his arms folded, leaning on the gate which shut
off, but seemed in no wise to separate, the front yard of the house in
which he lived from the public highway. There is something always pathetic
in the attempt to enforce the idea of seclusion and privacy, by building a
fence around houses only ten or twelve feet away from the public road, and
only forty or fifty feet from each other. Rows of picketed palings and
gates with latches and locks seem superfluous, when the passer-by can
look, if he likes, into the very centre of your sitting-room, and your
neighbors on the right hand and on the left can overhear every word you
say on a summer night, where windows are open.

One cannot walk through the streets of a New England village, without
being impressed by a sense of this futile semblance of barrier, this
touching effort at withdrawal and reticence. Often we see the tacit
recognition of its uselessness in an old gate shoved back to its farthest,
and left standing so till the very grass roots have embanked themselves on
each side of it, and it can never again be closed without digging away the
sods in which it is wedged. The gate on which Stephen White was leaning
had stood open in that way for years before Stephen rented the house; had
stood open, in fact, ever since old Billy Jacobs, the owner of the house,
had been carried out of it dead, in a coffin so wide that at first the
bearers had thought it could not pass through the gate; but by huddling
close, three at the head and three at the feet, they managed to tug the
heavy old man through without taking down the palings. This was so long
ago that now there was nobody left who remembered Billy Jacobs distinctly,
except his widow, who lived in a poor little house on the outskirts of the
town, her only income being that derived from the renting of the large
house, in which she had once lived in comfort with her husband and son.
The house was a double house; and for a few years Billy Jacobs's twin
brother, a sea captain, had lived in the other half of it. But Mrs. Billy
could not abide Mrs. John, and so with a big heart wrench the two
brothers, who loved each other as only twin children can love, had
separated. Captain John took his wife and went to sea again. The ship was
never heard of, and to the day of Billy Jacobs's death he never forgave
his wife. In his heart he looked upon her as his brother's murderer. Very
much like the perpetual presence of a ghost under her roof it must have
been to the woman also, the unbroken silence of those untenanted rooms,
and that never opened door on the left side of her hall, which she must
pass whenever she went in or out of her house. There were those who said
that she was never seen to look towards that door; and that whenever a
noise, as of a rat in the wall, or a blind creaking in the wind, came from
that side of the house, Mrs. Billy turned white, and shuddered. Well she
might. It is a fearful thing to have lying on one's heart in this life the
consciousness that one has been ever so innocently the occasion, if not
the cause, of a fellow-creature's turning aside into the path which was
destined to take him to his death.

The very next day after Billy Jacobs's funeral, his widow left the house.
She sold all the furniture, except what was absolutely necessary for a
very meagre outfitting of the little cottage into which she moved. The
miserly habit of her husband seemed to have suddenly fallen on her like a
mantle. Her life shrank and dwindled in every possible way; she almost
starved herself and her boy, although the rent of her old homestead was
quite enough to make them comfortable. In a few years, to complete the
poor woman's misery, her son ran away and went to sea. The sea-farer's
stories which his Uncle John had told him, when he was a little child,
had never left his mind; and the drearier his mother made life for him on
land, the more longingly he dwelt on his fancies of life at sea, till at
last, when he was only fifteen, he disappeared one day, leaving a note,
not for his mother, but for his Sunday-school teacher,--the only human
being he loved. This young woman carried the note to Mrs. Jacobs. She read
it, made no comment, and handed it back. Her visitor was chilled and
terrified by her manner.

"Can I do any thing for you, Mrs. Jacobs?" she said. "I do assure you I
sympathize with you most deeply. I think the boy will soon come back. He
will find the sea life very different from what he has dreamed."

"No, you can do nothing for me," replied Mrs. Jacobs, in a voice as
unmoved as her face. "He will never come back. He will be drowned." And
from that day no one ever heard her mention her son. It was believed,
however, that she had news from him, and that she sent him money; for,
although the rents of her house were paid to her regularly, she grew if
possible more and more penurious every year, allowing herself barely
enough food to support life, and wearing such tattered and patched clothes
that she was almost an object of terror to children when they met her in
lonely fields and woods, bending down to the ground and searching for
herbs like an old witch. At one time, also, she went in great haste to a
lawyer in the village, and with his assistance raised three thousand
dollars on a mortgage on her house, mortgaging it very nearly to its full
value. In vain he represented to her that, in case the house should chance
to stand empty for a year, she would have no money to pay the interest on
her mortgage, and would lose the property. She either could not
understand, or did not care for what he said. The house always had brought
her in about so many dollars a year; she believed it always would; at any
rate, she wanted this money. And so it came to pass that the mortgage on
the old Jacobs house had come into Stephen White's hands, and he was now
living in one half of it, his own tenant and landlord at once, as he often
laughingly said.

These old rumors and sayings about the Jacobs's family history were
running in Stephen's head this evening, as he stood listlessly leaning on
the gate, and looking down at the unsightly spot of bare earth still left
where the gate had so long stood pressed back against the fence.

"I wonder how long it'll take to get that old rut smooth and green like
the rest of the yard," he thought. Stephen White absolutely hated
ugliness. It did not merely irritate and depress him, as it does everybody
of fine fastidiousness: he hated not only the sight of it, he hated it
with a sort of unreasoning vindictiveness. If it were a picture, he wanted
to burn the picture, cut it, tear it, trample it under foot, get it off
the face of the earth immediately, at any cost or risk. It had no business
to exist: if nobody else would make way with it, he must. He often saw
places that he would have liked to devastate, to blot out of existence if
he could, just because they were barren and unsightly. Once, when he was a
very little child, he suddenly seized a book of his father's,--an old,
shabby, worn dictionary,--and flung it into the fire with uncontrollable
passion; and, on being asked why he did it, had nothing to say in
justification of his act, except this extraordinary statement: "It was an
ugly book; it hurt me. Ugly books ought to go in the fire." What the child
suffered, and, still more, what the man suffered from this hatred of
ugliness, no words could portray. Ever since he could remember, he had
been unhappy from the lack of the beautiful in the surroundings of his
daily life. His father had been poor; his mother had been an invalid; and
neither father nor mother had a trace of the artistic temperament. From
what long-forgotten ancestor in his plain, hard-working family had come
Stephen's passionate love of beauty, nobody knew. It was the despair of
his father, the torment of his mother. From childhood to boyhood, from
boyhood to manhood, he had felt himself needlessly hurt and perversely
misunderstood on this one point. But it had not soured him: it had only
saddened him, and made him reticent. In his own quiet way, he went slowly
on, adding each year some new touch of simple adornment to their home.
Every dollar he could spare out of his earnings went into something for
the eye to feast on; and, in spite of the old people's perpetual grumbling
and perpetual antagonism, it came about that they grew to be, in a surly
fashion, proud of Stephen's having made their home unlike the homes of
their neighbors.

"That's Stephen's last notion. He's never satisfied without he's sticking
up suthin' new or different," they would say, as they called attention to
some new picture or shelf or improvement in the house. "It's all
tom-foolery. Things was well enough before." But in their hearts they were
secretly a little elate, as in latter years they had come to know, by
books and papers which Stephen forced them to hear or to read, that he was
really in sympathy with well-known writers in this matter of the adornment
of homes, the love of beautiful things even in every-day life.

A little more than a year before the time at which our story begins,
Stephen's father had died. On an investigation of his affairs, it was
found that after the settling of the estate very little would remain for
Stephen and his mother. The mortgage on the old Jacobs house was the
greater part of their property. Very reluctantly Stephen decided that
their wisest--in fact, their only--course was to move into this house to
live. Many and many a time he had walked past the old house, and thought,
as he looked at it, what a bare, staring, hopeless, joyless-looking old
house it was. It had originally been a small, square house. The addition
which Billy Jacobs had made to it was oblong, running out to the south,
and projecting on the front a few feet beyond the other part. This
obtrusive jog was certainly very ugly; and it was impossible to conceive
of any reason for it. Very possibly, it was only a carpenter's blunder;
for Billy Jacobs was, no doubt, his own architect, and left all details of
the work to the builders. Be that as it may, the little, clumsy,
meaningless jog ruined the house,--gave it an uncomfortably awry look,
like a dining-table awkwardly pieced out for an emergency by another table
a little too narrow.

The house had been for several years occupied by families of mill
operatives, and had gradually acquired that indefinable, but unmistakable
tenement-house look, which not even neatness and good repair can wholly
banish from a house. The orchard behind the house had so run down for want
of care that it looked more like a tangle of wild trees than like any
thing which had ever been an orchard. Yet the Roxbury Russets and Baldwins
of that orchard had once been Billy Jacobs's great pride, the one point of
hospitality which his miserliness never conquered. Long after it would
have broken his heart to set out a generous dinner for a neighbor, he
would feast him on choice apples, and send him away with a big basket full
in his hands. Now every passing school-boy helped himself to the wan,
withered, and scanty fruit; and nobody had thought it worth while to mend
the dilapidated fences which might have helped to shut them out.

Even Mrs. White, with all her indifference to externals, rebelled at first
at the idea of going to live in the old Jacobs house.

"I'll never go there, Stephen," she said petulantly. "I'm not going to
live in half a house with the mill people; and it's no better than a barn,
the hideous, old, faded, yellow thing!"

If it crossed Stephen's mind that there was a touch of late retribution
in his mother's having come at last to a sense of suffering because she
must live in an unsightly house, he did not betray it.

He replied very gently. He was never heard to speak other than gently to
his mother, though to every one else his manner was sometimes brusque and
dictatorial.

"But, mother, I think we must. It is the only way that we can be sure of
the rent. And, if we live ourselves in one half of it, we shall find it
much easier to get good tenants for the other part. I promise you none of
the mill people shall ever live there again. Please do not make it hard
for me, mother. We must do it."

When Stephen said "must," his mother never gainsaid him. He was only
twenty-five, but his will was stronger than hers,--as much stronger as his
temper was better. Persons judging hastily, by her violent assertions and
vehement statements of her determination, as contrasted with Stephen's
gentle, slow, almost hesitating utterance of his opinions or intentions,
might have assumed that she would always conquer; but it was not so. In
all little things, Stephen was her slave, because she was a suffering
invalid and his mother. But, in all important decisions, he was the
master; and she recognized it, and leaned upon it in a way which was
almost ludicrous in its alternation with her petulance and perpetual
dictating to him in trifles.

And so they went to live in the old Jacobs house. They took the northern
half of it, the part in which the sea captain and his wife had lived.
This half of the house was not so pleasant as the other, had less sun, and
had no door upon the street; but it was smaller and better suited to their
needs, and moreover, Stephen said to his mother,--

"We must live in the half we should find it hardest to rent to a desirable
tenant."

For the first six months after they moved in, the "wing," as Mrs. White
persisted in calling it, though it was larger by two rooms than the part
she occupied herself, stood empty. There would have been plenty of
applicants for it, but it had been noised in the town that the Whites had
given out that none but people as good as they were themselves would be
allowed to rent the house. This made a mighty stir among the mill
operatives and the trades-people, and Stephen got many a sour look and
short answer, whose real source he never suspected.

"Ahem! there he goes with his head in the clouds, damn him!" muttered
Barker the grocer, one day, as Stephen in a more than ordinarily
absent-minded fit had passed Mr. Barker's door without observing that Mr.
Barker stood in it, ready to bow and smile to the whole world. Mr.
Barker's sister had just married an overseer in the mill; and they had
been very anxious to set up housekeeping in the Jacobs house, but had been
prevented from applying for it by hearing of Mrs. White's determination to
have no mill people under the same roof with herself.

"Mill people, indeed!" exclaimed Jane Barker, when her lover told her, in
no very guarded terms, the reason they could not have the house on which
she had set her heart.

"Mill people, indeed! I'd like to know if they're not every whit's good's
an old shark of a lawyer like Hugh White was! I'll be bound, if poor old
granny Jacobs hadn't lost what little wit she ever had, it 'ud be very
soon seen whether Madam White's got the right to say who's to come and
who's to go in that house. It's a nasty old yaller shell anyhow, not to
say nothin' o' it's bein' haunted, 's like 's not. But there ain't no
other place so handy to the mill for us, an' I guess our money's good ez
any lawyer's money, o' the hull on 'em any day. Mill people, indeed! I'll
jest give Steve White a piece o' my mind, the first time I see him on the
street."

Jane and her lover were sitting on the tops of two barrels just outside
the grocery door, when this conversation took place. Just as the last
words had left her lips, she looked up and saw Stephen approaching at a
very rapid pace. The unusual sight of two people perched on barrels on the
sidewalk roused Stephen from the deep reverie in which he habitually
walked. Lifting his hat as courteously as if he were addressing the most
distinguished of women, he bowed, and said smiling, "How do you do, Miss
Jane?" and "Good-morning, Mr. Lovejoy," and passed on; but not before Jane
Barker had had time to say in her gentlest tones, "Very well, thank you,
Mr. Stephen," while an ugly sneer spread over the face of Reuben Lovejoy.

"Woman all over!" he muttered. "Never saw one on ye yet thet wasn't
caught by a bow from a palaverin' fool."

Jane laughed nervously. She herself felt ashamed of having so soon given
the lie to her own words of bravado; but she was woman enough not to admit
her mortification.

"I know he's a palaverin' fool's well's you do; but I reckon I've got some
manners o' my own, 's well's he. When a man bids me a pleasant
good-mornin', I ain't a-goin' to take that time to fly out at him, however
much I've got agin him."

And Reuben was silenced. The under-current of ill-feeling against Stephen
and his mother went steadily on increasing. There is a wonderful force in
these slow under-currents of feeling, in small communities, for or against
individuals. After they have once become a steady tide, nothing can check
their force or turn their direction. Sometimes they can be traced back to
their spring, as a stream can: one lucky or unlucky word or deed, years
ago, made a friend or an enemy of one person, and that person's influence
has divided itself again and again, as brooks part off and divide into
countless rivulets, and water whole districts. But generally one finds it
impossible to trace the like or dislike to its beginning. A stranger,
asking the reason of it, is answered in an off-hand way,--"Oh,
everybody'll tell you the same thing. There isn't a soul in the town but
hates him;" or, "Well, he's just the most popular man in the town. You'll
never hear a word said against him,--never; not if you were to settle
right down here, and live."

It was months before Stephen realized that there was slowly forming in the
town a dislike to him. He was slow in discovering it, because he had
always lived alone; had no intimate friends, not even when he was a boy.
His love of books and his passionate love of beauty combined with his
poverty to hedge him about more effectually than miles of desert could
have done. His father and mother had lived upon fairly good terms with all
their neighbors, but had formed no very close bonds with any. In the
ordinary New England town, neighborhood never means much: there is a
dismal lack of cohesion to the relations between people. The community is
loosely held together by a few accidental points of contact or common
interest. The individuality of individuals is, by a strange sort of
paradox, at once respected and ignored. This is indifference rather than
consideration, selfishness rather than generosity; it is an unsuspected
root of much of our national failure, is responsible for much of our
national disgrace. Some day there will come a time when it will have
crystallized into a national apathy, which will perhaps cure itself, or
have to be cured, as indurations in the body are, by sharp crises or by
surgical operations. In the mean time, our people are living, on the
whole, the dullest lives that are lived in the world, by the so-called
civilized; and the climax of this dulness of life is to be found in just
such a small New England town as Penfield, the one of which we are now
speaking.

When it gradually became clear to Stephen that he and his mother were
unpopular people, his first feeling was one of resentment, his second of
calm acquiescence: acquiescence, first, because he recognized in a measure
the justice of it,--they really did not care for their neighbors; why
should their neighbors care for them? secondly, a diminished familiarity
of intercourse would have to him great compensations. There were few
people in the town, whose clothes, whose speech, whose behavior, did not
jar upon his nerves. On the whole, he would be better content alone; and
if his mother could only have a little more independence of nature, more
resource within herself, "The less we see of them, the better," said
Stephen, proudly.

He had yet to learn the lesson which, sooner or later, the proudest, most
scornful, most self-centred of human souls must learn, or must die of
loneliness for the want of learning, that humanity is one and indivisible;
and the man who shuts himself apart from his fellows, above all, the man
who thus shuts himself apart because he thinks of his fellows with pitying
condescension as his inferiors, is a fool and a blasphemer,--a fool,
because he robs himself of that good-fellowship which is the leaven of
life; a blasphemer, because he virtually implies that God made men unfit
for him to associate with. Stephen White had this lesson yet to learn.

The practical inconvenience of being unpopular, however, he began to feel
keenly, as month after month passed by, and nobody would rent the other
half of the house in which he and his mother lived. Small as the rent
was, it was a matter of great moment to them; for his earnings as clerk
and copyist were barely enough to give them food. He was still retained by
his father's partner in the same position which he had held during his
father's life. But old Mr. Williams was not wholly free from the general
prejudice against Stephen, as an aristocratic fellow, given to dreams and
fancies; and Stephen knew very well that he held the position only as it
were on a sort of sufferance, because Mr. Williams had loved his father.
Moreover, law business in Penfield was growing duller and duller. A
younger firm in the county town, only twelve miles away, was robbing them
of clients continually; and there were many long days during which Stephen
sat idle at his desk, looking out in a vague, dreamy way on the street
below, and wondering if the time were really coming when Mr. Williams
would need a clerk no longer; and, if it did come, what he could possibly
find to do in that town, by which he could earn money enough to support
his mother. At such times, he thought uneasily of the possibility of
foreclosing the mortgage on the old Jacobs house, selling the house, and
reinvesting the money in a more advantageous way. He always tried to put
the thought away from him as a dishonorable one; but it had a fatal
persistency. He could not banish it.

"Poor, half-witted old woman! she might a great deal better be in the
poor-house."

"There is no reason why we should lose our interest, for the sake of
keeping her along."

"The mortgage was for too large a sum. I doubt if the old house could
sell to-day for enough to clear it, anyhow." These were some of the
suggestions which the devil kept whispering into Stephen's ear, in these
long hours of perplexity and misgiving. It was a question of casuistry
which might, perhaps, have puzzled a finer moral sense than Stephen's. Why
should he treat old Mrs. Jacobs with any more consideration than he would
show to a man under the same circumstances? To be sure, she was a helpless
old woman; but so was his own mother, and surely his first duty was to
make her as comfortable as possible.

Luckily for old Mrs. Jacobs, a tenant appeared for the "south wing." A
friend of Stephen's, a young clergyman living in a seaport town on Cape
Cod, had written to him, asking about the house, which he knew Stephen was
anxious to rent. He made these inquiries on behalf of two women,
parishioners of his, who were obliged to move to some inland town on
account of the elder woman's failing health. They were mother and
daughter, but both widows. The younger woman's marriage had been a
tragically sad one, her husband having died suddenly, only a few days
after their marriage. She had returned at once to her mother's house,
widowed at eighteen; "heart-broken," the young clergyman wrote, "but the
most cheerful person in this town,--the most cheerful person I ever knew;
her smile is the sunniest and most pathetic thing I ever saw."

Stephen welcomed most gladly the prospect of such tenants as these. The
negotiations were soon concluded; and at the time of the beginning of our
story the two women were daily expected.

A strange feverishness of desire to have them arrive possessed Stephen's
mind. He longed for it, and yet he dreaded it. He liked the stillness of
the house; he felt a sense of ownership of the whole of it: both of these
satisfactions were to be interfered with now. But he had a singular
consciousness that some new element was coming into his life. He did not
define this; he hardly recognized it in its full extent; but if a
bystander could have looked into his mind, following the course of his
reverie distinctly, as an unbiassed outsider might, he would have said,
"Stephen, man, what is this? What are these two women to you, that your
imagination is taking these wild and superfluous leaps into their
history?"

There was hardly a possible speculation as to their past history, as to
their looks, as to their future life under his roof, that Stephen did not
indulge in, as he stood leaning with his folded arms on the gate, in the
gray November twilight, where we first found him. His thoughts, as was
natural, centred most around the younger woman.

"Poor thing! That was a mighty hard fate. Only nineteen years old
now,--six years younger than I am; and how much more she must know of life
than I do. I suppose she can't be a lady, exactly,--being a sea captain's
wife. I wonder if she's pretty? I think Harley might have told me more
about her. He might know I'd be very curious.

"I wonder if mother'll take to them? If she does, it will be a great
comfort to her. She 's so alone." And Stephen's face clouded, as he
reflected how very seldom the monotony of the invalid's life was broken
now by a friendly visit from a neighbor.

"If they should turn out really social, neighborly people that we liked,
we might move away the old side-board from before the hall door, and go in
and out that way, as the Jacobses used to. It would be unlucky though, I
reckon, to use that door. I guess I'll plaster it up some day." Like all
people of deep sentiment, Stephen had in his nature a vein of something
which bordered on superstition.

The twilight deepened into darkness, and a cold mist began to fall in
slow, drizzling drops. Still Stephen stood, absorbed in his reverie, and
unmindful of the chill.

The hall door opened, and an old woman peered out. She held a lamp in one
hand; the blast of cold air made the flame flicker and flare, and, as she
put up one hand to shade it, the light was thrown sharply across her
features, making them stand out like the distorted features of a hideous
mask.

"Steve! Steve!" she called, in a shrill voice. "Supper's been waitin' more
'n half an hour. Lor's sake, what's the boy thinkin' on now, I wonder?"
she muttered in an impatient lower tone, as Stephen turned his head
slowly.

"Yes, yes, Marty. Tell my mother I will be there in a moment," replied
Stephen, as he walked slowly toward the house; even then noting, with the
keen and relentless glance of a beauty-worshipper, how grotesquely ugly
the old woman's wrinkled face became, lighted up by the intense
cross-light. Old Marty's face had never looked other than lovingly into
Stephen's since he first lay in her arms, twenty-five years ago, when she
came, a smooth-cheeked, rosy country-woman of twenty-five, to nurse his
mother at the time of his birth. She had never left the home since. With a
faithfulness and devotion only to be accounted for by the existence of
rare springs of each in her own nature, surely not by any uncommon
lovableness in either Mr. or Mrs. White, or by any especial comforts in
her situation, she had stayed on a quarter of a century, in the hard
position of woman of all work in a poor family. She worshipped Stephen,
and, as I said, her face had never once looked other than lovingly into
his; but he could not remember the time when he had not thought her
hideous. She had a big brown mole on her chin, out of which grew a few
bristling hairs. It was an unsightly thing, no doubt, on a woman's chin;
and sometimes, when Marty was very angry, the hairs did actually seem to
bristle, as a cat's whiskers do. When Stephen could not speak plain, he
used to point his little dimpled finger at this mole and say, "Do doe
away,--doe away;" and to this day it was a torment to him. His eyes seemed
morbidly drawn toward it at times.. When he was ill, and poor Marty bent
over his bed, ministering to him as no one but a loving old nurse can, he
saw only the mole, and had to make an effort not to shrink from her.
To-night, as she lingered on the threshold, affectionately waiting to
light his path, he was thinking only of her ugliness. But when she
exclaimed, with the privileged irritability of an old servant,--

"Jest look at your feet, Steve! they're wet through, an' your coat too, a
standin' out in that drizzle. Anybody 'ud think you hadn't common sense,"
he replied with perfect good nature, and as heartily loving a tone as if
he had been feasting on her beauty, instead of writhing inwardly at her
ugliness,--

"All right, Marty,--all right. I'm not so wet as I look. I'll change my
coat, and come in to supper in one minute. Don't you fidget about me so,
good Marty." Never was Stephen heard to speak discourteously or even
ungently to a human being. It would have offended his taste. It was not a
matter of principle with him,--not at all: he hardly ever thought of
things in that light. A rude or harsh word, a loud, angry tone, jarred on
his every sense like a discord in music, or an inharmonious color; so he
never used them. But as he ran upstairs, three steps at a time, after his
kind, off-hand words to Marty, he said to himself, "Good heavens! I do
believe Marty gets uglier every day. What a picture Rembrandt would have
made of her old face peering out into the darkness there to-night! She
would have done for the witch of Endor, watching to see if Samuel were
coming up." And as he went down more slowly, revolving in his mind what
plausible excuse he could give to his mother for his tardiness, he
thought, "Well, I do hope she'll be at least tolerably good-looking."

Already the younger of the two women who were coming to live under his
roof was "she," in his thoughts.




Chapter II.



In the mean time, the young widow, Mercy Philbrick, and her old and almost
childish mother, Mercy Carr, were coming by slow and tiring stage journeys
up the dreary length of Cape Cod. For thirty years the elder woman had
never gone out of sight of the village graveyard in which her husband and
four children were buried. To transplant her was like transplanting an old
weather-beaten tree, already dead at the top. Yet the physicians had said
that the only chance of prolonging her life was to take her away from the
fierce winds of the sea. She herself, while she loved them, shrank from
them. They seemed to pierce her lungs like arrows of ice-cold steel, at
once wounding and benumbing. Yet the habit and love of the seashore life
were so strong upon her that she would never have been able to tear
herself away from her old home, had it not been for her daughter's
determined will. Mercy Philbrick was a woman of slight frame, gentle,
laughing, brown eyes, a pale skin, pale ash-brown hair, a small nose; a
sweet and changeful mouth, the upper lip too short, the lower lip much too
full; little hands, little feet, little wrists. Not one indication of
great physical or great mental strength could you point out in Mercy
Philbrick; but she was rarely ill; and she had never been known to give
up a point, small or great, on which her will had been fully set. Even the
cheerfulness of which her minister, Harley Allen, had written to Stephen,
was very largely a matter of will with Mercy. She confronted grief as she
would confront an antagonist force of any sort: it was something to be
battled with, to be conquered. Fate should not worst her: come what might,
she would be the stronger of the two. When the doctor said to her,--

"Mrs. Philbrick, I fear that your mother cannot live through another
winter in this climate," Mercy looked at him for a moment with an
expression of terror. In an instant more, the expression had given place
to one of resolute and searching inquiry.

"You think, then, that she might be well in a different climate?"

"Perhaps not well, but she might live for years in a dryer, milder air.
There is as yet no actual disease in her lungs," the doctor replied.

Mercy interrupted him.

"You think she might live in comparative comfort? It would not be merely
prolonging her life as a suffering invalid?" she said; adding in an
undertone, as if to herself, "I would not subject her to that."

"Oh, yes, undoubtedly," said the doctor. "She need never die of
consumption at all, if she could breathe only inland air. She will never
be strong again, but she may live years without any especial liability to
suffering."

"Then I will take her away immediately," replied Mercy, in as confident
and simple a manner as if she had been proposing only to move her from one
room into another. It would not seem so easy a matter for two lonely
women, in a little Cape Cod village, without a male relative to help them,
and with only a few thousand dollars in the world, to sell their house,
break up all their life-long associations, and go out into the world to
find a new home. Associations crystallize around people in lonely and out
of the way spots, where the days are all alike, and years follow years in
an undeviating monotony. Perhaps the process might be more aptly called
one of petrifaction. There are pieces of exquisite agate which were once
soft wood. Ages ago, the bit of wood fell into a stream, where the water
was largely impregnated with some chemical matter which had the power to
eat out the fibre of the wood, and in each spot thus left empty to deposit
itself in an exact image of the wood it had eaten away. Molecule by
molecule, in a mystery too small for human eye to detect, even had a
watchful human eye been lying in wait to observe, the marvellous process
went on; until, after the lapse of nobody knows how many centuries, the
wood was gone, and in its place lay its exact image in stone,--rings of
growth, individual peculiarities of structure, knots, broken slivers and
chips; color, shape, all perfect. Men call it agatized wood, by a feeble
effort to translate the mystery of its existence; but it is not wood,
except to the eye. To the touch, and in fact, it is stone,--hard, cold,
unalterable, eternal stone. The slow wear of monotonous life in a set
groove does very much such a thing as this to human beings. To the eye
they retain the semblance of other beings; but try them by touch, that is
by contact with people, with events outside their groove, and they are
stone,--agatized men and women. Carry them where you please, after they
have reached middle or old age, and they will not change. There is no
magic water, a drop of which will restore to them the vitality and
pliability of their youth. They last well, such people,--as well, almost,
as agatized wood on museum shelves; and the most you can do for them is to
keep them well dusted.

Old Mrs. Carr belonged, in a degree, to this order of persons. Only the
coming of Mercy's young life into the feeble current of her own had saved
it from entire stagnation. But she was already past middle age when Mercy
was born; and the child with her wonderful joyousness, and the maiden with
her wondrous cheer, came too late to undo what the years had done. The
most they could do was to interrupt the process, to stay it at that point.
The consequence was that Mrs. Carr at sixty-five was a placid sort of
middle-aged old lady, very pleasant to talk with as you would talk with a
child, very easy to take care of as you would take care of a child, but,
for all purposes of practical management or efficient force, as helpless
as a baby.

When Mercy told her what the doctor had said of her health, and that they
must sell the house and move away before the winter set in, she literally
opened her mouth too wide to speak for a minute, and then gasped out like
a frightened child,--

"O Mercy, don't let's do it!"

As Mercy went on explaining to her the necessity of the change, and the
arrangements she proposed to make, the poor old woman's face grew longer
and longer; but, some time before Mercy had come to the end of her
explanation, the childish soul had accepted the whole thing as fixed, had
begun already to project itself in childish imaginations of detail; and to
Mercy's infinite relief and half-sad amusement, when she ceased speaking,
her mother's first words were, eagerly,--

"Well, Mercy, if we go 'n the stage, 'n' I s'pose we shall hev to, don't
ye think my old brown merino'll do to wear?"

Fortune favored Mercy's desire to sell the house. Stephen's friend, the
young minister, had said to himself many times, as he walked up to its
door between the quaint, trim beds of old-fashioned pinks and ladies'
delights and sweet-williams which bordered the little path, "This is the
only house in this town I want to live in." As soon as he heard that it
was for sale, he put on his hat, and fairly ran to buy it. Out of breath,
he took Mercy's hands in his, and exclaimed,--

"O Mercy, do you really want to sell this house?"

Very unworldly were this young man and this young woman, in the matter of
sale and purchase. Adepts in traffic would have laughed, had they
overheard the conversation.

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Allen, I do. I must sell it; and I am afraid I shall
have to sell it for a great deal less than it is worth," replied Mercy.

"No, you sha'n't, Mercy! I'll buy it myself. I've always wanted it. But
why in the world do you want to sell it? Where will you live yourself?
There isn't another house in the village you'd like half so well. Is it
too large for you?" continued Mr. Allen, hurriedly. Then Mercy told him
all her plans, and the sad necessity for her making the change. The young
minister did not speak for some moments. He seemed lost in thought. Then
he exclaimed,--

"I do believe it's a kind of Providence!" and drew a letter from his
pocket, which he had only two days before received from Stephen White.
"Mercy," he went on, "I believe I've got the very thing you want right
here;" and he read her the concluding paragraph of the letter, in which
Stephen had said: "Meantime, I am waiting as patiently as I can for a
tenant for the other half of this house. It seems to be very hard to find
just the right sort of person. I cannot take in any of the mill
operatives. They are noisy and untidy; and the bare thought of their being
just the other side of the partition would drive my mother frantic. I wish
so much I could get some people in that would be real friends for her. She
is very lonely. She never leaves her bed; and I have to be away all day."

Mercy's face lighted up. She liked the sound of each word that this
unknown man wrote. Very eagerly she questioned Mr. Allen about the town,
its situation, its healthfulness, and so forth. As he gave her detail
after detail, she nodded her head with increasing emphasis, and finally
exclaimed: "That is precisely such a spot as Dr. Wheeler said we ought to
go to. I think you're right, Mr. Allen. It's a Providence. And I'd be so
glad to be good to that poor old woman, too. What a companion she'd be for
mother! that is, if I could keep them from comparing notes for ever about
their diseases. That's the worst of putting invalid old women together,"
laughed Mercy with a kindly, merry little laugh.

Mr. Allen had visited Penfield only once. When he and Stephen were boys at
school together, he had passed one of the short vacations at Stephen's
house. He remembered very little of Stephen's father and mother, or of
their way of life. He was at the age when house and home mean little to
boys, except a spot where shelter and food are obtained in the enforced
intervals between their hours of out-door life. But he had never forgotten
the grand out-look and off-look from the town. Lying itself high up on the
western slope of what must once have been a great river terrace, it
commanded a view of a wide and fertile meadow country, near enough to be a
most beautiful feature in the landscape, but far enough away to prevent
any danger from its moisture. To the south and south-west rose a fine
range of mountains, bold and sharp-cut, though they were not very high,
and were heavily wooded to their summits. The westernmost peak of this
range was separated from the rest by a wide river, which had cut its way
through in some of those forgotten ages when, if we are to believe the
geologists, every thing was topsy-turvy on this now meek and
well-regulated planet.

The town, although, as I said, it lay on the western slope of a great
river terrace, held in its site three distinctly marked plateaus. From the
two highest of these, the views were grand. It was like living on a
mountain, and yet there was the rich beauty of coloring of the river
interval. Nowhere in all New England was there a fairer country than this
to look upon, nor a goodlier one in which to live.

Mr. Allen's enthusiasm in describing the beauties of the place, and
Mercy's enthusiasm in listening, were fast driving out of their minds the
thought of the sale, which had been mentioned in the beginning of their
conversation. Mercy was the first to recall it. She blushed and hesitated,
as she said,--

"But, Mr. Allen, we can't go, you know, until I have sold this house. Did
you really want to buy it? And how much do you think I ought to ask for
it?"

"To be sure, to be sure!" exclaimed the young minister. "Dear me, what
children we are! Mercy, I don't honestly know what you ought to ask for
the house. I'll find out."

"Deacon Jones said he thought, taking in the cranberry meadow, it was
worth three thousand dollars," said Mercy; "but that seems a great deal to
me: though not in a good cranberry year, perhaps," added she, ingenuously,
"for last year the cranberries brought us in seventy-five dollars, besides
paying for the picking."

"And the meadow ought to go with the house, by all means," said Mr. Allen.
"I want it for color in the background, when I look at the house as I
come down from the meeting-house hill. I wouldn't like to have anybody
else own the canvas on which the picture of my home will be oftenest
painted for my eyes. I'll give you three thousand dollars for the house,
Mercy. I can only pay two thousand down, and pay you interest on the other
thousand for a year or two. I'll soon clear it off. Will that do?"

"Oh, thank you, thank you, Mr. Allen. It will more than do," said poor
Mercy, who could not believe in such sudden good fortune; "but do you
think you ought to buy it so quick? Perhaps it wouldn't bring so much
money as that. I had not asked anybody except Deacon Jones."

Mr. Allen laughed. "If you don't look out for yourself sharper than this,
Mercy," he said, "in the new place 'where you're going to live, you'll
fare badly. Perhaps it may be true, as you say, that nobody else would
give you three thousand dollars for the house, because nobody might happen
to want to live in it. But Deacon Jones knows better than anybody else the
value of property here, and I am perfectly willing to give you the price
he set on the place. I had laid by this two thousand dollars towards my
house; and I could not build such a house as this, to-day, for three
thousand dollars. But really, Mercy, you must look 'out for yourself
better than this."

"I don't know," replied Mercy, looking out of the window, with an earnest
gaze, as if she were reading a writing a great way off,--"I don't know
about that. I doubt very much if looking out for one's self, as you call
it, is the best way to provide for one's self."

That very night Mr. Allen wrote to Stephen; in two weeks, the whole matter
was settled, and Mercy and her mother had set out on their journey. They
carried with them but one small valise. The rest of their simple wardrobe
had gone in boxes, with the furniture, by sailing vessel, to a city which
was within three hours by rail of their new home. This was the feature of
the situation which poor Mrs. Carr could not accept. In the bottom of her
heart, she fully believed that they would never again see one of those
boxes. The contents of some which she had herself packed were of a most
motley description. In the beginning of the breaking up, while Mercy was
at her wits' end, with the unwonted perplexities of packing the whole
belongings of a house, her mother had tormented her incessantly by
bringing to her every few minutes some utterly incongruous and frequently
worthless article, and begging her to put it in at once, whatever she
might be packing. Any one who has ever packed for a long journey, with an
eager and excited child running up every minute with more and more
cumbrous toys, dogs, cats, Noah's arks, and so on, to be put in among
books and under-clothing, can imagine Mercy's despair at her mother's
restless activity.

"Oh, mother, not in this box! Not in with the china!" would groan poor
Mercy, as her mother appeared with armfuls of ancient relics from the
garret, such as old umbrellas, bonnets, bundles of old newspapers, broken
spinning-wheels, andirons, and rolls of remains of old wall-paper, the
last of which had disappeared from the walls of the house, long before
Mercy was born. No old magpie was ever a more indiscriminate hoarder than
Mrs. Carr had been; and, among all her hoardings, there was none more
amusing than her hoarding of old wall-papers. A scrap a foot square seemed
to her too precious to throw away. "It might be jest the right size to
cover suthin' with," she would say; and, to do her justice, she did use in
the course of a year a most unexampled amount of such fragments. She had a
mania for papering and repapering and papering again every shelf, every
box, every corner she could get hold of. The paste and brush were like
toys to her; and she delighted in gay combinations, sticking on old bits
of borders in fantastic ways, in most inappropriate situations.

"I do believe you'll paper the pigsty next, mother," said Mercy one day:
"there's nothing left you can paper except that." Mrs. Carr took the
suggestion in perfect good faith, and convulsed Mercy a few days later by
entering the kitchen with the following extraordinary remark,--

"I don't believe it's worth while to paper the pigsty. I've been looking
at it, and the boards they're so rough, the paper wouldn't lay smooth,
anyhow; and I couldn't well get at the inside o' the roof, while the pig's
in. It would look real neat, though. I'd like to do it."

Mercy endured her mother's help in packing for one day. Then the
desperateness of the trouble suggested a remedy. Selecting a large, strong
box, she had it carried into the garret.

"There, mother," she said, "now you can pack in this box all the old
lumber of all sorts which you want to carry. And, if this box isn't large
enough, you shall have two more. Don't tire yourself out: there's plenty
of time; and, if you don't get it all packed by the time I am done, I can
help you."

Then Mercy went downstairs feeling half-guilty, as one does when one has
practised a subterfuge on a child.

How many times that poor old woman packed and unpacked that box, nobody
could dream. All day long she trotted up and down, up and down; ransacking
closets, chests, barrels; sorting and resorting, and forgetting as fast as
she sorted. Now and then she would come across something which would rouse
an electric chain of memories in the dim chambers of her old, worn-out
brain, and she would sit motionless for a long time on the garret floor,
in a sort of trance. Once Mercy found her leaning back against a beam,
with her knees covered by a piece of faded blue Canton crape, on which her
eyes were fastened. She did not speak till Mercy touched her shoulder.

"Oh, my! how you scared me, child!" she exclaimed. "D'ye see this ere blue
stuff? I hed a gown o' thet once: it was drefful kind o' clingy stuff. I
never felt exzackly decent in it, somehow: it hung a good deal like a
night-gownd; but your father he bought it for the color. He traded off
some shells for it in some o' them furrin places. You wouldn't think it
now, but it used to be jest the color o' a robin's egg or a light-blue
'bachelor's button;' and your father he used to stick one o' them in my
belt whenever they was in blossom, when I hed the gownd on. He hed a heap
o' notions about things matchin'. He brought me that gownd the v'yage he
made jest afore Caleb was born; and I never hed a chance to wear it much,
the children come so fast. It warn't re'ly worn at all, 'n' I hed it dyed
black for veils arterwards."

It was from this father who used to "stick" pale-blue flowers in his
wife's belt, and whose love of delicate fabrics and tints made him
courageous enough to lead her draped in Canton crape into the unpainted
Cape Cod meeting-house, where her fellow-women bristled in homespun, that
Mercy inherited all the artistic side of her nature. She knew this
instinctively, and all her tenderest sentiment centred around the vague
memory she retained of a tall, dark-bearded man, who, when she was only
three years old, lifted her in his arms, called her his "little Mercy,"
and kissed her over and over again. She was most loyally affectionate to
her mother, but the sentiment was not a wholly filial one. There was too
much reversal of the natural order of the protector and the protected in
it; and her life was on too different a plane of thought, feeling, and
interest from the life of the uncultured, undeveloped, childish, old
woman. Yet no one who saw them together would have detected any trace of
this shortcoming in Mercy's feeling towards her mother. She had in her
nature a fine and lofty fibre of loyalty which could never condescend even
to parley with a thought derogatory to its object; was lifted above all
consciousness of the possibility of any other course. This is a sort of
organic integrity of affection, which is to those who receive it a tower
of strength, that is impregnable to all assault except that of death
itself. It is a rare type of love, the best the world knows; but the men
and the women whose hearts are capable of it are often thought not to be
of a loving nature. The cheaper and less lasting types of love are so much
louder of voice and readier of phrase, as in cloths cheap fabrics, poor to
wear, are often found printed in gay colors and big patterns.

The day before they left home, Mercy, becoming alarmed by a longer
interval than usual without any sound from the garret, where her mother
was still at work over her fantastic collections of old odds and ends, ran
up to see what it meant.

Mrs. Carr was on her knees before a barrel, which had held rags and
papers. The rags and papers were spread around her on the floor. She had
leaned her head on the barrel, and was crying bitterly.

"Mother! mother! what is the matter?" exclaimed Mercy, really alarmed; for
she had very few times in her life seen her mother cry. Without speaking,
Mrs. Carr held up a little piece of carved ivory. It was of a creamy
yellow, and shone like satin: a long shred of frayed pink ribbon hung from
it. As she held it up to Mercy, a sunbeam flashed in at the garret window,
and fell across it, sending long glints of light to right and left.

"What a lovely bit of carving! What is it, mother? Why does it make you
cry?" asked Mercy, stretching out her hand to take the ivory.

"It's Caley's whistle," sobbed Mrs. Carr. "We allus thought Patience
Swift must ha' took it. She nussed me a spell when he was a little feller,
an' jest arter she went away we missed the whistle. Your father he brought
that hum the same v'yage I told ye he brought the blue crape. He knowed I
was a expectin' to be sick, and he was drefful afraid he wouldn't get hum
in time; but he did. He jest come a sailin' into th' harbor, with every
mite o' sail the old brig 'd carry, two days afore Caley was born. An' the
next mornin',--oh, dear me! it don't seem no longer ago 'n
yesterday,--while he was a dressin', an' I lay lookin' at him, he tossed
that little thing over to me on the bed, 'n' sez he,--"

"T 'll be a boy, Mercy, I know 'twill; an' here's his bos'u'n's whistle
all ready for him,' an' that night he bought that very yard o' pink
rebbin, and tied it on himself, and laid it in the upper drawer into one
o' the little pink socks I'd got all ready. Oh, it don't seem any longer
ago 'n yesterday! An' sure enough it was a boy; an' your father he allus
used to call him 'Bos'u'n,' and he'd stick this ere whistle into his mouth
an' try to make him blow it afore he was a month old. But by the time he
was nine months old he'd blow it ez loud ez I could. And his father he'd
just lay back 'n his chair, and laugh 'n' laugh, 'n' call out, 'Blow away,
my hearty!' Oh, my! it don't seem any longer ago'n yesterday. I wish I'd
ha' known. I wa'n't never friends with Patience any more arter that. I
never misgave me but what she'd got the whistle. It was such a curious
cut thing, and cost a heap o' money. Your father wouldn't never tell what
he gin for 't. Oh, my! it don't seem any longer ago 'n yesterday," and the
old woman wiped her eyes on her apron, and struggling up on her feet took
the whistle again from Mercy's hands.

"How old would my brother Caley be now, if he had lived, mother?" said
Mercy, anxious to bring her mother gently back to the present.

"Well, let me see, child. Why, Caley--Caley, he'd be--How old am I, Mercy?
Dear me! hain't I lost my memory, sure enough, except about these ere old
things? They seem's clear's daylight."

"Sixty-five last July, mother," said Mercy. "Don't you know I gave you
your new specs then?"

"Oh, yes, child,--yes. Well, I'm sixty-five, be I? Then Caley,--Caley,
he'd be, let me see--you reckon it, Mercy. I wuz goin' on nineteen when
Caley was born."

"Why, mother," exclaimed Mercy, "is it really so long ago? Then my brother
Caleb would be forty-six years old now!" and mercy took again in her hand
the yellow ivory whistle, and ran her fingers over the faded and frayed
pink ribbon, and looked at it with an indefinable sense of its being a
strange link between her and a distant past, which, though she had never
shared it, belonged to her by right. Hardly thinking what she did, she
raised the whistle to her lips, and blew a loud, shrill whistle on it. Her
mother started. "O Mercy, don't, don't!" she cried. "I can't bear to hear
it."

"Now, mother, don't you be foolish," said Mercy, cheerily. "A whistle's a
whistle, old or young, and made to be whistled with. We'll keep this to
amuse children with: you carry it in your pocket. Perhaps we shall meet
some children on the journey; and it'll be so nice for you to pop this out
of your pocket, and give it to them to blow."

"So it will, Mercy, I declare. That 'ud be real nice. You're a
master-piece for thinkin' o' things." And, easily diverted as a child, the
old woman dropped the whistle into her deep pocket, and, forgetting all
her tears, returned to her packing.

Not so Mercy. Having attained her end of cheering her mother, her own
thoughts reverted again and again all day long, and many times in after
years, whenever she saw the ivory whistle, to the strange picture of the
lonely old woman in the garret coming upon her first-born child's first
toy, lost for forty years; the picture, too, of the history of the quaint
piece of carving itself; the day it was slowly cut and chiselled by a
patient and ill-paid toiler in some city of China; its voyage in the
keeping of the ardent young husband hastening home to welcome his first
child; its forty years of silence and darkness in the old garret; and then
its return to life and light and sound, in the hands and lips of new
generations of children.

The journey which Mercy had so much dreaded was unexpectedly pleasant.
Mrs. Carr proved an admirable traveller with the exception of her
incessant and garrulous anxiety about the boxes which had been left behind
on the deck of the schooner "Maria Jane," and could not by any
possibility overtake them for three weeks to come. She was, in fact, so
much of a child that she was in a state of eager delight at every new
scene and person. Her childishness proved the best of claims upon every
one's courtesy. Everybody was ready to help "that poor sweet old woman;"
and she was so simply and touchingly grateful for the smallest kindness
that everybody who had helped her once wanted to help her again. More than
one of their fellow-travellers remembered for a long time the bright-faced
young woman with her childish mother, and wondered where they could have
been going, and what was to be their life.

On the fourth day, just as the sun was sinking behind the hills, they
entered the beautiful river interval, through which the road to their new
home lay. Mercy sat with her face almost pressed against the panes of the
car-windows, eagerly scanning every feature of the landscape, to her so
new and wonderful. To the dweller by the sea, the first sight of mountains
is like the sight of a new heavens and a new earth. It is a revelation of
a new life. Mercy felt strangely stirred and overawed. She looked around
in astonishment at her fellow-passengers, not one of whom apparently
observed that on either hand were stretching away to the east and the west
fields that were, even in this late autumn, like carpets of gold and
green. Through these fertile meadows ran a majestic river, curving and
doubling as if loath to leave such fair shores. The wooded mountains
changed fast from green to purple, from purple to dark gray; and almost
before Mercy had comprehended the beauty of the region, it was lost from
her sight, veiled in the twilight's pale, indistinguishable tints. Her
mother was fast asleep in her seat. The train stopped every few moments at
some insignificant station, of which Mercy could see nothing but a narrow
platform, a dim lantern, and a sleepy-looking station-master. Slowly, one
or two at a time, the passengers disappeared, until she and her mother
were left alone in the car. The conductor and the brakeman, as they passed
through, looked at them with renewed interest: it was evident now that
they were going through to the terminus of the road.

"Goin' through, be ye?" said the conductor. "It'll be dark when we get in;
an' it's beginnin' to rain. 'S anybody comin' to meet ye?"

"No," said Mercy, uneasily. "Will there not be carriages at the depot? We
are going to the hotel. I believe there is but one."

"Well, there may be a kerridge down to-night, an' there may not: there's
no knowin'. Ef it don't rain too hard, I reckon Seth'll be down."

Mercy's sense of humor never failed her. She laughed heartily, as she
said,--

"Then Seth stays away, does he, on the nights when he would be sure of
passengers?"

The conductor laughed too, as he replied,---

"Well, 'tisn't quite so bad's that. Ye see this here road's only a piece
of a road. It's goin' up through to connect with the northern roads; but
they 've come to a stand-still for want o' funds, an' more 'n half the
time I don't carry nobody over this last ten miles. Most o' the people
from our town go the other way, on the river road. It's shorter, an' some
cheaper. There isn't much travellin' done by our folks, anyhow. We're a
mighty dead an' alive set up here. Goin' to stay a spell?" he continued,
with increasing interest, as he looked longer into Mercy's face.

"Probably," said Mercy, in a grave tone, suddenly recollecting that she
ought not to talk with this man as if he were one of her own village
people. The conductor, sensitive as are most New England people, spite of
their apparent familiarity of address, to the least rebuff, felt the
change in Mercy's tone, and walked away, thinking half surlily, "She
needn't put on airs. A schoolma'am, I reckon. Wonder if it can be her
that's going to teach the Academy?"

When they reached the station, it was, as the conductor had said, very
dark; and it was raining hard. For the first time, a sense of her
unprotected loneliness fell upon Mercy's heart. Her mother, but
half-awake, clung nervously to her, asking purposeless and incoherent
questions. The conductor, still surly from his fancied rebuff at Mercy's
hands, walked away, and took no notice of them. The station-master was
nowhere to be seen. The two women stood huddling together under one
umbrella, gazing blankly about them.

"Is this Mrs. Philbrick?" came in clear, firm tones, out of the darkness
behind them; and, in a second more, Mercy had turned and looked up into
Stephen White's face.

"Oh, how good you were to come and meet us!" exclaimed Mercy. "You are Mr.
Allen's friend, I suppose."

"Yes," said Stephen, curtly. "But I did not come to meet you. You must not
thank me. I had business here. However, I made the one carriage which the
town boasts, wait, in case you should be here. Here it is!" And, before
Mercy had time to analyze or even to realize the vague sense of
disappointment she felt at his words, she found herself and her mother
placed in the carriage, and the door shut.

"Your trunks cannot go up until morning," he said, speaking through the
carriage window; "but, if you will give me your checks, I will see that
they are sent."

"We have only one small valise," said Mercy: "that was under our seat. The
brakeman said he would take it out for us; but he forgot it, and so did
I."

The train was already backing out of the station. Stephen smothered some
very unchivalrous words on his lips, as he ran out into the rain, overtook
the train, and swung himself on the last car, in search of the "one small
valise" belonging to his tenants. It was a very shabby valise: it had made
many a voyage with its first owner, Captain Carr. It was a very little
valise: it could not have held one gown of any of the modern fashions.

"Dear me," thought Stephen, as he put it into the carriage at Mercy's
feet, "what sort of women are these I've taken under my roof! I expect
they'll be very unpleasing sights to my eyes. I did hope she'd be
good-looking." How many times in after years did Stephen recall with
laughter his first impressions of Mercy Philbrick, and wonder how he could
have argued so unhesitatingly that a woman who travelled with only one
small valise could not be good-looking.

"Will you come to the house to-morrow?" he asked.

"Oh, no," replied Mercy, "not for three or four weeks yet. Our furniture
will not be here under that time."

"Ah!" said Stephen, "I had not thought of that. I will call on you at the
hotel, then, in a day or two."

His adieus were civil, but only civil: that most depressing of all things
to a sensitive nature, a kindly indifference, was manifest in every word
he said, and in every tone of his voice.

Mercy felt it to the quick; but she was ashamed of herself for the
feeling. "What business had I to expect that he was going to be our
friend?" she said in her heart. "We are only tenants to him."

"What a kind-spoken young man he is, to be sure, Mercy!" said Mrs. Carr.

So all-sufficient is bare kindliness of tone and speech to the unsensitive
nature.

"Yes, mother, he was very kind," said Mercy; "but I don't think we shall
ever know him very well."

"Why, Mercy, why not?" exclaimed her mother. "I should say he was most
uncommon friendly for a stranger, running back after our valise in the
rain, and a goin' to call on you to oncet."

Mercy made no reply. The carriage rolled along over the rough and muddy
road. It was too dark to see any thing except the shadowy black shapes of
houses, outlined on a still deeper blackness by the light streaming from
their windows. There is no sight in the world so hard for lonely, homeless
people to see, as the sight of the lighted windows of houses after
nightfall. Why houses should look so much more homelike, so much more
suggestive of shelter and cheer and companionship and love, when the
curtains are snug-drawn and the doors shut, and nobody can look in, though
the lights of fires and lamps shine out, than they do in broad daylight,
with open windows and people coming and going through open doors, and a
general air of comradeship and busy living, it is hard to see. But there
is not a lonely vagabond in the world who does not know that they do. One
may see on a dark night many a wistful face of lonely man or lonely woman,
hurrying resolutely past, and looking away from, the illumined houses
which mean nothing to them except the keen reminder of what they are
without. Oh, the homeless people there are in this world! Did anybody ever
think to count up the thousands there are in every great city, who live in
lodgings and not in homes; from the luxurious lodger who lodges in the
costliest rooms of the costliest hotel, down to the most poverty-stricken
lodger who lodges in a corner of the poorest tenement-house? Homeless all
of them; their common vagabondage is only a matter of degrees of decency.
All honor to the bravery of those who are homeless because they must be,
and who make the best of it. But only scorn and pity for those who are
homeless because they choose to be, and are foolish enough to like it.

Mercy had never before felt the sensation of being a homeless wanderer.
She was utterly unprepared for it. All through the breaking up of their
home and the preparations for their journey, she had been buoyed up by
excitement and anticipation. Much as she had grieved to part from some of
the friends of her early life, and to leave the old home in which she was
born, there was still a certain sense of elation in the prospect of new
scenes and new people. She had felt, without realizing it, a most
unreasonable confidence that it was to be at once a change from one home
to another home. In her native town, she had had a position of importance.
Their house was the best house in the town; judged by the simple standards
of a Cape Cod village, they were well-to-do. Everybody knew, and everybody
spoke with respect and consideration, of "Old Mis' Carr," or, as she was
perhaps more often called, "Widder Carr." Mercy had not thought--in her
utter inexperience of change, it could not have occurred to her--what a
very different thing it was to be simply unknown and poor people in a
strange place. The sense of all this smote upon her suddenly and keenly,
as they jolted along in the noisy old carriage on this dark, rainy night.
Stephen White's indifferent though kindly manner first brought to her the
thought, or rather the feeling, of this. Each new glimmer of the
home-lights deepened her sense of desolation. Every gust of rain that beat
on the carriage roof and windows made her feel more and more like an
outcast. She never forgot these moments. She used to say that in them she
had lived the whole life of the loneliest outcast that was ever born. Long
years afterward, she wrote a poem, called "The Outcast," which was so
intense in its feeling one could have easily believed that it was written
by Ishmael. When she was asked once how and when she wrote this poem, she
replied, "I did not write it: I lived it one night in entering a strange
town." In vain she struggled against the strange and unexpected emotion. A
nervous terror of arriving at the hotel oppressed her more and more;
although, thanks to Harley Allen's thoughtfulness, she knew that their
rooms were already engaged for them. She felt as if she would rather drive
on and on, in all the darkness and rain, no matter where, all night long,
rather than enter the door of the strange and public house, in which she
must give her name and her mother's name on the threshold.

When the carriage stopped, she moved so slowly to alight that her mother
exclaimed petulantly,--

"Dear me, child, what's the matter with you? Ain't you goin' to git out?
Ain't this the tavern?"

"Yes, mother, this is our place," said Mercy, in a low voice, unlike her
usual cheery, ringing tones, as she assisted her mother down the clumsy
steps from the old-fashioned, high vehicle. "They're expecting us: it is
all right." But her voice and face belied her words. She moved all
through the rest of the evening like one in a dream. She said little, but
busied herself in making her mother as comfortable as it was possible to
be in the dingy and unattractive little rooms; and, as soon as the tired
old woman had fallen asleep, Mercy sat down on the floor by the window,
and leaning her head on the sill cried hard.




Chapter III.



The next morning the sun shone, and Mercy was herself again. Her
depression of the evening before seemed to her so causeless, so
inexplicable, that she recalled it almost with terror, as one might a
temporary insanity. She blushed to think of her unreasonable sensitiveness
to the words and tones of Stephen White. "As if it made any sort of
difference to mother and to me whether he were our friend or not. He can
do as he likes. I hope I'll be out when he calls," thought Mercy, as she
stood on the hotel piazza, after breakfast, scanning with a keen and eager
glance every feature of the scene. To her eyes, accustomed to the broad,
open, leisurely streets of the Cape Cod hamlet, its isolated little houses
with their trim flower-beds in front and their punctiliously kept fences
and gates, this somewhat untidy and huddled town looked unattractive. The
hotel stood on the top of one of the plateaus of which I spoke in the last
chapter. The ground fell away slowly to the east and to the south. A
poorly kept, oblong-shaped "common," some few acres in extent, lay just in
front of the hotel: it had once been fenced in; but the fences were sadly
out of repair, and two cows were grazing there this morning, as
composedly as if there were no town ordinance forbidding all running of
cattle in the streets. A few shabby old farm-wagons stood here and there
by these fences; the sleepy horses which had drawn them thither having
been taken out of the shafts, and tethered in some mysterious way to the
hinder part of the wagons. A court was in session; and these were the
wagons of lawyers and clients, alike humble in their style of equipage. On
the left-hand side of the hotel, down the eastern slope of the hill ran an
irregular block of brick buildings, no two of a height or size, The block
had burned down in spots several times, and each owner had rebuilt as much
or as little as he chose, which had resulted in as incoherent a bit of
architecture as is often seen. The general effect, however, was of a
tendency to a certain parallelism with the ground line: so that the block
itself seemed to be sliding down hill; the roof of the building farthest
east being not much above the level of the first story windows in the
building farthest west. To add to the queerness of this "Brick Row," as it
was called, the ingenuity of all the sign-painters of the region had been
called into requisition. Signs alphabetical, allegorical, and symbolic;
signs in black on white, in red on black, in rainbow colors on tin; signs
high up, and signs low down; signs swung, and signs posted,--made the
whole front of the Row look at a little distance like a wall of
advertisements of some travelling menagerie. There was a painted yellow
horse with a fiery red mane, which was the pride of the heart of Seth
Nims, the livery-stable keeper; and a big black dog's head with a gay
collar of scarlet and white morocco, which was supposed to draw the custom
of all owners of dogs to "John Locker, harness-maker." There was a
barber's pole, and an apothecary's shop with the conventional globes of
mysterious crimson and blue liquids in the window; and, to complete the
list of the decorations of this fantastic front, there had been painted
many years ago, high up on the wall, in large and irregular letters, the
sign stretching out over two-thirds of the row, "Miss Orra White's
Seminary for Young Ladies." Miss Orra White had been dead for several
years; and the hall in which she had taught her school, having passed
through many successive stages of degradation in its uses, had come at
last to be a lumber-room, from which had arisen many a waggish saying as
to the similarity between its first estate and its last.

On the other side of the common, opposite the hotel, was a row of
dwelling-houses, which owing to the steep descent had a sunken look, as if
they were slipping into their own cellars. The grass was too green in
their yards, and the thick, matted plantain-leaves grew on both edges of
the sodden sidewalk.

"Oh, dear," thought Mercy to herself, "I am sure I hope our house is not
there." Then she stepped down from the high piazza, and stood for a moment
on the open space, looking up toward the north. She could only see for a
short distance up the winding road. A high, wood-crowned summit rose
beyond the houses, which seemed to be built higher and higher on the
slope, and to be much surrounded by trees. A street led off to the west
also: this was more thickly built up. To the south, there was again a
slight depression; and the houses, although of a better order than those
on the eastern side of the common, had somewhat of the same sunken air.
Mercy's heart turned to the north with a sudden and instinctive
recognition. "I am sure that is the right part of the town for mother,"
she said. "If Mr. White's house is down in that hollow, we'll not live in
it long." She was so absorbed in her study of the place, and in her
conjectures as to their home, that she did not realize that she herself
was no ordinary sight in that street: a slight, almost girlish figure, in
a plain, straight, black gown like a nun's, with one narrow fold of
transparent white at her throat, tied carelessly by long floating ends of
black ribbon; her wavy brown hair blown about her eyes by the wind, her
cheeks flushed with the keen air, and her eyes bright with excitement.
Mercy could not be called even a pretty woman; but she had times and
seasons of looking beautiful, and this was one of them. The hostler, who
was rubbing down his horses in the door of the barn, came out
wide-mouthed, and exclaimed under his breath,--

"Gosh! who's she?" with an emphasis on that feminine, personal pronoun
which was all the bitterer slur on the rest of womankind in that
neighborhood, that he was so unconscious of the reflection it conveyed.
The cook and the stable-boy also came running to the kitchen door, on
hearing the hostler's exclamation; and they, too, stood gazing at the
unconscious Mercy, and each, in their own way, paying tribute to her
appearance.

"That's the gal thet comed last night with her mother. Darned sight
better-lookin' by daylight than she wuz then!" said the stable-boy.

"Hm! boys an' men, ye 're all alike,--all for looks," said the cook, who
was a lean and ill-favored spinster, at least fifty years old. "The gal
isn't any thin' so amazin' for good looks, 's I can see; but she's got
mighty sarchin' eyes in her head. I wonder if she's a lookin' for somebody
they're expectin'."

"Steve White he was with 'em down to the depot," replied the stable-boy.
"Seth sed he handed on 'em into the kerridge, 's if they were regular
topknots, sure enough."

"Hm! Seth Quin 's a fool, 'n' always wuz," replied the cook, with a
seemingly uncalled-for acerbity of tone. "I've allus observed that them
that hez the most to say about topknots hez the least idea of what
topknots really is. There ain't a touch o' topknot about that ere girl:
she's come o' real humbly people. Anybody with half an eye can see that.
Good gracious! I believe she's goin' to stand still, and let old man
Wheeler run over her. Look out there, look out, gal!" screamed the cook,
and pounded vigorously with her rolling-pin on the side of the door to
rouse Mercy's attention. Mercy turned just in time to confront a stout,
red-faced, old gentleman with a big cane, who was literally on the point
of walking over her. He was so near that, as she turned, he started back
as if she had hit him in the breast.

"God bless my soul, God bless my soul, miss!" he exclaimed, in his
excitement, striking his cane rapidly against the ground. "I beg your
pardon, beg pardon, miss. Bad habit of mine, very bad habit,--walk along
without looking. Walked on a dog the other day; hurt dog; tumbled down
myself, nearly broke my leg. Bad habit, miss,--bad habit; too old to
change, too old to change. Beg pardon, miss."

The old gentleman mumbled these curt phrases in a series of inarticulate
jerks, as if his vocal apparatus were wound up and worked with a crank,
but had grown so rusty that every now and then a wheel would catch on a
cog. He did not stand still for a moment, but kept continually stepping,
stepping, without advancing or retreating, striking his heavy cane on the
ground at each step, as if beating time to his jerky syllables. He had
twinkling blue eyes, which were half hid under heavy, projecting eyebrows,
and shut up tight whenever he laughed. His hair was long and thin, and
white as spun glass. Altogether, except that he spoke with an unmistakable
Yankee twang, and wore unmistakable Yankee clothes, you might have fancied
that he was an ancient elf from the Hartz Mountains.

Mercy could not refrain from laughing in his face, as she retreated a few
steps towards the piazza, and said,--

"It is I who ought to beg your pardon. I had no business to be standing
stock-still in the middle of the highway like a post."

"Sensible young woman! sensible young woman! God bless my soul! don't know
your face, don't know your face," said the old gentleman, peering out
from under the eaves of his eyebrows, and scrutinizing Mercy as a child
might scrutinize a new-comer into his father's house. One could not resent
it, any more than one could resent the gaze of a child. Mercy laughed
again.

"No, sir, you don't know my face. I only came last night," she said.

"God bless my soul! God bless my soul! Fine young woman! fine young woman!
glad to see you,--glad, glad. Girls good for nothing, nothing, nothing at
all, nowadays," jerked on the queer old gentleman, still shifting rapidly
from one foot to the other, and beating time continuously with his cane,
but looking into Mercy's face with so kindly a smile that she felt her
heart warm with affection towards him.

"Your father come with you? Come to stay? I'd like to know ye, child. Like
your face,--good face, good face, very good face," continued the
inexplicable old man. "Don't like many people. People are wolves, wolves,
wolves. 'D like to know you, child. Good face, good face."

"Can he be crazy?" thought Mercy. But the smile and the honest twinkle of
the clear blue eye were enough to counterbalance the incoherent talk: the
old man was not crazy, only eccentric to a rare degree. Mercy felt
instinctively that she had found a friend, and one whom she could trust
and lean on.

"Thank you, sir," she said. "I'm very glad you like my face. I like yours,
too,--you look so merry. I think I and my mother will be very glad to know
you. We have come to live here in half of Mr. Stephen White's house."

"Merry, merry? Nobody calls me merry. That's a mistake, child,--mistake,
mistake. Mistake about the house, too,--mistake. Stephen White hasn't any
house,--no, no, hasn't any house. My name's Wheeler, Wheeler. Good enough
name. 'Old Man Wheeler' some think's better. I hear 'em: my cane don't
make so much noise but I hear 'em. Ha! ha! wolves, wolves, wolves! People
are all wolves, all alike, all alike. Got any money, child?" With this
last question, the whole expression of his face changed; the very features
seemed to shrink; his eyes grew dark and gleaming as they fastened on
Mercy's face.

Even this did not rouse Mercy's distrust. There was something inexplicable
in the affectionate confidence she felt in this strange, old man.

"Only a little, sir," she said. "We are not rich; we have only a little."

"A little's a good deal, good deal, good deal. Take care of it, child.
People'll git it away from you. They're nothing but wolves, wolves,
wolves;" and, saying these words, the old man set off at a rapid pace down
the street, without bidding Mercy good-morning.

As she stood watching him with an expression of ever-increasing
astonishment, he turned suddenly, planted his stick in the ground, and
called,--

"God bless my soul! God bless my soul! Bad habit, bad habit. Never do say
good-morning,--bad habit. Too old to change, too old to change. Bad habit,
bad habit." And with a nod to Mercy, but still not saying good-morning,
he walked away.

Mercy ran into the house, breathless with amusement and wonder, and gave
her mother a most graphic account of this strange interview.

"But, for all his queerness, I like him, and I believe he'll be a great
friend of ours," she said, as she finished her story.

Mrs. Carr was knitting a woollen stocking. She had been knitting woollen
stockings ever since Mercy could remember. She always kept several on hand
in different stages of incompletion: some that she could knit on in the
dark, without any counting of stitches; others that were in the process of
heeling or toeing, and required the closest attention. She had been
setting a heel while Mercy was speaking, and did not reply for a moment.
Then, pushing the stitches all into a compact bunch in the middle of one
needle, she let her work fall into her lap, and, rolling the disengaged
knitting-needle back and forth on her knee to brighten it, looked at Mercy
reflectively.

"Mercy," said she, "queer people allers do take to each other. I don't
believe he's a bit queerer 'n you are, child." And Mrs. Carr laughed a
little laugh, half pride and half dissatisfaction. "You're jest like your
father: he'd make friends with a stranger, any day, on the street, in two
jiffeys, if he took a likin' to him; and there might be neighbors a livin'
right long 'side on us, for years an' years, thet he'd never any more 'n
jest pass the time o' day with, 'n' he wa'n't a bit stuck up, either. I
used ter ask him, often 'n' often, what made him so offish to sum folks,
when I knew he hadn't the least thing agin 'em; and he allers said, sez
he, 'Well, I can't tell ye nothin' about it, only jest this is the way 't
is: I can't talk to 'em; they sort o' shet me up, like. I don't feel
nateral, somehow, when they're round!'"

"O mother!" exclaimed Mercy, "I think I must be just like father. That is
exactly the way I feel so often. When I get with some people, I feel just
as if I had been changed into somebody else. I can't bear to open my
mouth. It is like a bad dream, when you dream you can't move hand nor
foot, all the time they're in the room with me."

"Well, I thank the Lord, I don't never take such notions about people,"
said Mrs. Carr, settling herself back in her chair, and beginning to make
her needles fly. "Nobody don't never trouble me much, one way or the
other. For my part, I think folks is alike as peas. We shouldn't hardly
know 'em apart, if 't wa'n't for their faces."

Mercy was about to reply, "Why, mother, you just said that I was queer;
and this old man was queer; and my father must have been queer, too." But
she glanced at the placid old face, and forbore. There was a truth as well
as an untruth in the inconsistent sayings, and both lay too deep for the
childish intellect to grasp.

Mercy was impatient to go at once to see their new home; but she could not
induce her mother to leave the house.

"O Mercy!" she exclaimed pathetically, "ef yer knew what a comfort 't was
to me jest to set still in a chair once more. It seems like heaven, arter
them pesky joltin' cars. I ain't in no hurry to see the house. It can't
run away, I reckon; and we're sure of it, ain't we? There ain't any thing
that's got to be done, is there?" she asked nervously.

"Oh, no, mother. It is all sure. We have leased the house for one year;
and we can't move in until our furniture comes, of course. But I do long
to see what the place is like, don't you?" replied Mercy, pleadingly.

"No, no, child. Time enough when we move in. 'T ain't going to make any
odds what it's like. We're goin' to live in it, anyhow. You jest go by
yourself, ef you want to so much, an' let me set right here. It don't seem
to me 's I'll ever want to git out o' this chair." At last, very
unwillingly, late in the afternoon, Mercy went, leaving her mother alone
in the hotel.

Without asking a question of anybody, she turned resolutely to the north.

"Even if our house is not on this street," she said to herself, "I am
going to see those lovely woods;" and she walked swiftly up the hill, with
her eyes fixed on the glowing dome of scarlet and yellow leaves which
crowned it. The trees were in their full autumnal splendor: maples,
crimson, scarlet, and yellow; chestnuts, pale green and yellow; beeches,
shining golden brown; and sumacs in fiery spikes, brighter than all the
rest. There were also tall pines here and there in the grove, and their
green furnished a fine dark background for the gay colors. Mercy had
often read of the glories of autumn in New England's thickly wooded
regions; but she had never dreamed that it could be so beautiful as this.
Rows of young maples lined the street which led up to this wooded hill.
Each tree seemed a full sheaf of glittering color; and yet the path below
was strewn thick with fallen leaves no less bright. Mercy walked
lingeringly, each moment stopping to pick up some new leaf which seemed
brighter than all the rest. In a very short time, her hands were too full;
and in despair, like an over-laden child, she began to scatter them along
the way. She was so absorbed in her delight in the leaves that she hardly
looked at the houses on either hand, except to note with an unconscious
satisfaction that they were growing fewer and farther apart, and that
every thing looked more like country and less like town than it had done
in the neighborhood of the hotel.

Presently she came to a stretch of stone wall, partly broken down, in
front of an old orchard whose trees were gnarled and moss-grown.
Blackberry-vines had flung themselves over this wall, in and out among the
stones. The leaves of these vines were almost as brilliant as the leaves
of the maple-trees. They were of all shades of red, up to the deepest
claret; they were of light green, shading into yellow, and curiously
mottled with tiny points of red; all these shades and colors sometimes
being seen upon one long runner. The effect of these wreaths and tangles
of color upon the old, gray stones was so fine that Mercy stood still and
involuntarily exclaimed aloud. Then she picked a few of the most
beautiful vines, and, climbing up on the wall, sat down to arrange them
with the maple-leaves she had already gathered. She made a most
picturesque picture as she sat there, in her severe black gown and quaint
little black bonnet, on the stone wall, surrounded by the bright vines and
leaves; her lap full of them, the ground at her feet strewed with them,
her little black-gloved hands deftly arranging and rearranging them. She
looked as if she might be a nun, who had run away from her cloister, and
coming for the first time in her life upon gay gauds of color, in strange
fabrics, had sat herself down instantly to weave and work with them,
unaware that she was on a highway.

This was the picture that Stephen White saw, as he came slowly up the road
on his way home after an unusually wearying day. He slackened his pace,
and, perceiving how entirely unconscious Mercy was of his approach,
deliberately studied her, feature, dress, attitude,--all, as
scrutinizingly as if she had been painted on canvas and hanging on a wall.

"Upon my word," he said to himself, "she isn't bad-looking, after all. I'm
not sure that she isn't pretty. If she hadn't that inconceivable bonnet on
her head,--yes, she is very pretty. Her mouth is bewitching. I declare, I
believe she is beautiful," were Stephen's successive verdicts, as he drew
nearer and nearer to Mercy. Mercy was thinking of him at that very
moment,--was thinking of him with a return of the annoyance and
mortification which had stung her at intervals all day, whenever she
recalled their interview of the previous evening. Mercy combined, in a
very singular manner, some of the traits of an impulsive nature with those
of an unimpulsive one. She did things, said things, and felt things with
the instantaneous intensity of the poetic temperament; but she was quite
capable of looking at them afterward, and weighing them with the cool and
unbiassed judgment of the most phlegmatic realist. Hence she often had
most uncomfortable seasons, in which one side of her nature took the other
side to task, scorned it and berated it severely; holding up its actions
to its remorseful view, as an elder sister might chide a younger one, who
was incorrigibly perverse and wayward.

"It was about as silly a thing as you ever did in your life. He must have
thought you a perfect fool to have supposed he had come down to meet you,"
she was saying to herself at the very moment when the sound of Stephen's
footsteps first reached her ear, and caused her to look up. The sight of
his face at that particular moment was so startling and so unpleasant to
her that it deprived her of all self-possession. She gave a low cry, her
face was flooded with crimson, and she sprang from the wall so hastily
that her leaves and vines flew in every direction.

"I am very sorry I frightened you so, Mrs. Philbrick," said Stephen, quite
unconscious of the true source of her confusion. "I was just on the point
of speaking, when you heard me. I ought to have spoken before, but you
made so charming a picture sitting there among the leaves and vines that I
could not resist looking at you a little longer."

Mercy Philbrick hated a compliment. This was partly the result of the
secluded life she had led; partly an instinctive antagonism in her
straightforward nature to any thing which could be even suspected of not
being true. The few direct compliments she had received had been from men
whom she neither respected nor trusted. These words, coming from Stephen
White, just at this moment, were most offensive to her.

Her face flushed still deeper red, and saying curtly,--"You frightened me
very much, Mr. White; but it is not of the least consequence," she turned
to walk back to the village. Stephen unconsciously stretched out his hand
to detain her.

"But, Mrs. Philbrick," he said eagerly, "pray tell me what you think of
the house. Do you think you can be contented in it?"

"I have not seen it," replied Mercy, in the same curt tone, still moving
on.

"Not seen it!" exclaimed Stephen, in a tone which was of such intense
astonishment that it effectually roused Mercy's attention. "Not seen it!
Why, did you not know you were on your own stone wall? There is the
house;" and Mercy, following the gesture of his hand, saw, not more than
twenty rods beyond the spot where she had been sitting, a shabby, faded,
yellow wooden house, standing in a yard which looked almost as neglected
as the orchard, from which it was only in part separated by a tumbling
stone wall.

Mercy did not speak. Stephen watched her face in silence for a moment;
then he laughed constrainedly, and said,--

"Don't be afraid, Mrs. Philbrick, to say outright that it is the
dismallest old barn you ever saw. That's just what I had said about it
hundreds of times, and wondered how anybody could possibly live in it. But
necessity drove us into it, and I suppose necessity has brought you to it,
too," added Stephen, sadly.

Mercy did not speak. Very deliberately her eyes scanned the building. An
expression of scorn slowly gathered on her face.

"It is not so forlorn inside as it is out," said Stephen. "Some of the
rooms are quite pleasant. The south rooms in your part of the house are
very cheerful."

Mercy did not speak. Stephen went on, beginning to be half-angry with this
little, unknown woman from Cape Cod, who looked with the contemptuous
glance of a princess upon the house in which he and his mother dwelt,--

"You are quite at liberty to throw up your lease, Mrs. Philbrick, if you
choose. It was, perhaps, hardly fair to have let you hire the house
without seeing it."

Mercy started. "I beg your pardon, Mr. White. I should not think of such a
thing as giving up the lease. I am very sorry you saw how ugly I think the
house. I do think it is the very ugliest house I ever saw," she continued,
speaking with emphatic deliberation; "but, then, I have not seen many
houses. In our village at home, all the houses are low and broad and
comfortable-looking. They look as if they had sat down and leaned back
to take their ease; and they are all neat and clean-looking, and have rows
of flower-beds from the gate to the front door. I never saw a house built
with such a steep angle to its roof as this has," said Mercy, looking up
with the instinctive dislike of a natural artist's eye at the ridgepole of
the old house.

"We have to have our roofs at a sharp pitch, to let the snow slide off in
winter," said Stephen, apologetically, "we have such heavy snows here; but
that doesn't make the angle any less ugly to look at."

"No," said Mercy; and her eyes still roved up and down and over the house,
with not a shadow of relenting in their expression. It was Stephen's turn
to be silent now. He watched her, but did not speak.

Mercy's face was not merely a record of her thoughts: it was a photograph
of them. As plainly as on a written page held in his hand, Stephen White
read the successive phases of thought and struggle which passed through
Mercy's mind for the next five minutes; and he was not in the least
surprised when, turning suddenly towards him with a very sweet smile, she
said in a resolute tone,--

"There! that's done with. I hope you will forgive my rudeness, Mr. White;
but the truth is I was awfully shocked at the first sight of the house. It
isn't your house, you know, so it isn't quite so bad for me to say so; and
I'm so glad you hate it as much as I do. Now I am never going to think
about it again,--never."

"Why, can you help it, Mrs. Philbrick?" asked Stephen, in a wondering
tone. "I can't. I hate it more and more, I verily believe, each time I
come home; and I think that, if my mother weren't in it, I should burn it
down some night."

Mercy looked at him with a certain shade of the same contempt with which
she had looked at the house; and Stephen winced, as she said coolly,--

"Why, of course I can help it. I should be very much ashamed of myself if
I couldn't. I never allow myself to be distressed by things which I can't
help,--at least, that sort of thing," added Mercy, her face clouding with
the sudden recollection of a grief that she had not been able to rise
above. "Of course, I don't mean real troubles, like grief about any one
you love. One can't wholly conquer such troubles as that; but one can do a
great deal more even with these than people usually suppose. I am not sure
that it is right to let ourselves be unhappy about any thing, even the
worst of troubles. But I must hurry home now. It is growing late."

"Mrs. Philbrick," exclaimed Stephen, earnestly: "please come into the
house, and speak to my mother a moment. You don't know how she has been
looking forward to your coming."

"Oh, no, I cannot possibly do that," replied Mercy. "There is no reason
why I should call on your mother, merely because we are going to live in
the same house."

"But I assure you," persisted Stephen, "that it will give her the greatest
pleasure. She is a helpless cripple, and never leaves her bed. She has
probably been watching us from the window. She always watches for me. She
will wonder if I do not bring you in to see her. Please come," he said
with a tone which it was impossible to resist; and Mercy went.

Mrs. White had indeed been watching them from the window; but Stephen had
reckoned without his host, or rather without his hostess, when he assured
Mercy that his mother would be so glad to see her. The wisest and the
tenderest of men are continually making blunders in their relations with
women; especially if they are so unfortunate as to occupy in any sense a
position involving a relation to two women at once. The relation may be
ever so rightful and honest to each woman; the women may be good women,
and in their right places; but the man will find himself perpetually
getting into most unexpected hot water, as many a man could testify
pathetically, if he were called upon.

Mrs. White had been watching her son through the whole of his conversation
with Mercy. She could see only dimly at such a distance; but she had
discerned that it was a woman with whom he stood talking so long. It was
nearly half an hour past supper-time, and supper was Mrs. White's one
festivity in the course of the day. Their breakfast and their mid-day
dinner were too hurried meals for enjoyment, because Stephen was obliged
to make haste to the office; but with supper there was nothing to
interfere. Stephen's work for the day was done: he took great pains to
tell her at this time every thing which he had seen or heard which could
give her the least amusement. She looked forward all through her long
lonely days to the evenings, as a child looks forward to Saturday
afternoons. Like all invalids whose life has been forced into grooves, she
was impatient and unreasonable when anybody or any thing interfered with
her routine. A five minutes' delay was to her a serious annoyance, and
demanded an accurate explanation. Stephen so thoroughly understood this
exactingness on her part that he adjusted his life to it, as a
conscientious school-boy adjusts his to bells and signals, and never
trespassed knowingly. If he had dreamed that it was past tea-time, on this
unlucky night, he would never have thought of asking Mercy to go in and
see his mother. But he did not; and it was with a bright and eager face
that he threw open the door, and said in the most cordial tone,--

"Mother, I have brought Mrs. Philbrick to see you."

"How do you do, Mrs. Philbrick?" was the rejoinder, in a tone and with a
look so chilling that poor Mercy's heart sank within her. She had all
along had an ideal in her own mind of the invalid old lady, Mr. White's
mother, to whom she was to be very good, and who was to be her mother's
companion. She pictured her as her own mother would be, a good deal older
and feebler, in a gentle, receptive, patient old age. Of so repellent,
aggressive, unlovely an old woman as this she had had no conception. It
would be hard to do justice in words to Mrs. White's capacity to be
disagreeable when she chose. She had gray eyes, which, though they had a
very deceptive trick of suffusing with tears as of great sensibility on
occasion, were capable of resting upon a person with a positively unhuman
coldness; her voice also had at these times a distinctly unhuman quality
in its tones. She had apparently no conception of any necessity of
controlling her feelings, or the expression of them. If she were pleased,
if all things went precisely as she liked, if all persons ministered to
her pleasure, well and good,--she would be graciously pleased to smile,
and be good-humored. If she were displeased, if her preferences were not
consulted, if her plans were interfered with, woe betide the first person
who entered her presence; and still more woe betide the person who was
responsible for her annoyance.

As soon as Stephen's eyes fell on her face, on this occasion, he felt with
a sense of almost terror that he had made a fatal mistake, and he knew
instantly that it must be much later than he had supposed; but he plunged
bravely in, like a man taking a header into a pool he fears he may drown
in, and began to give a voluble account of how he had found Mrs. Philbrick
sitting on their stone wall, so absorbed in looking at the bright leaves
that she had not even seen the house. He ran on in this strain for some
minutes, hoping that his mother's mood might soften, but in vain. She
listened with the same stony, unresponsive look on her face, never taking
the stony, unresponsive eyes from his face; and, as soon as he stopped
speaking, she said in an equally stony voice,--

"Mrs. Philbrick, will you be so good as to take off your bonnet and take
tea with us? It is already long past our tea-hour!"

Mercy sprang to her feet, and said impulsively, "Oh, no, I thank you. I
did not dream that it was so late. My mother will be anxious about me. I
must go. I am very sorry I came in. Good-evening."

"Good-evening, Mrs. Philbrick," in the same slow and stony syllables, came
from Mrs. White's lips, and she turned her head away immediately.

Stephen, with his face crimson with mortification, followed Mercy to the
door. In a low voice, he said, "I hope you will be able to make allowances
for my mother's manner. It is all my fault. I know that she can never bear
to have me late at meals, and I ought never to allow myself to forget the
hour. It is all my fault"

Mercy's indignation at her reception was too great for her sense of
courtesy.

"I don't think it was your fault at all, Mr. White," she exclaimed.
"Good-night," and she was out of sight before Stephen could think of a
word to say.

Very slowly he walked back into the sitting-room. He had seldom been so
angry with his mother; but his countenance betrayed no sign of it, and he
took his seat opposite her in silence. Silence, absolute, unconquerable
silence, was the armor which Stephen White wore. It was like those
invisible networks of fine chains worn next the skin, in which many men in
the olden time passed unscathed through years of battles, and won the
reputation of having charmed lives. No one suspected the secret. To the
ordinary beholder, the man seemed accoutred in the ordinary fashion of
soldiers; but, whenever a bullet struck him, it glanced off harmlessly as
if turned back by a spell. It was so with Stephen White's silence: in
ordinary intercourse, he was social genial; he talked more than average
men talk; he took or seemed to take, more interest than men usually take
in the common small talk of average people; but the instant there was a
manifestation of anger, of discord of any thing unpleasant, he entrenched
himself in silence. This was especially the case when he was reproached or
aroused by his mother. It was often more provoking to her than any amount
of retort or recrimination could have been. She had in her nature a
certain sort of slow ugliness which delighted in dwelling upon a small
offence, in asking irritating questions about it, in reiterating its
details; all the while making it out a matter of personal unkindness or
indifference to her that it should have happened. When she was in these
moods, Stephen's silence sometimes provoked her past endurance.

"Can't you speak, Stephen?" she would exclaim.

"What would be the use, mother?" he would say sadly. "If you do not know
that the great aim of my life is to make you happy, it is of no use for me
to keep on saying it. If it would make you any happier to keep on
discussing and discussing this question indefinitely, I would endure even
that; but it would not."

To do Mrs. White justice, she was generally ashamed of these ebullitions
of unreasonable ill-temper, and endeavored to atone for them afterward by
being more than ordinarily affectionate and loving in her manner towards
Stephen. But her shame was short-lived, and never made her any the less
unreasonable or exacting when the next occasion occurred; so that,
although Stephen received her affectionate epithets and caresses with
filial responsiveness, he was never in the slightest degree deluded by
them. He took them for what they were worth, and held himself no whit
freer from constraint, no whit less ready for the next storm. By the very
fact of the greater fineness of his organization, this tyrannical woman
held him chained. His submission to her would have seemed abject, if it
had not been based on a sentiment and grounded in a loyalty which
compelled respect. He had accepted this burden as the one great duty of
his life; and, whatever became of him, whatever became of his life, the
burden should be carried. This helpless woman, who stood to him in the
relation of mother, should be made happy. From the moment of his father's
death, he had assumed this obligation as a sacrament; and, if it lasted
his life out, he would never dream of evading or lessening it. In this
fine fibre of loyalty, Stephen White and Mercy Philbrick were alike:
though it was in him more an exalted sentiment; in her, simply an organic
necessity. In him, it would always have been in danger of taking morbid
shapes and phases; of being over-ridden and distorted at any time by
selfishness or wickedness in its object, as it had been by his selfish
mother. In Mercy, it was on a higher and healthier plane. Without being a
shade less loyal, she would be far clearer-sighted; would render, but not
surrender; would give a lifetime of service, but not a moment of
subjection. There was a shade of something feminine in Stephen's loyalty,
of something perhaps masculine in Mercy's; but Mercy's was the best, the
truest.

"I wouldn't allow my mother to treat a stranger like that," she thought
indignantly, as she walked away after Mrs. White's inhospitable invitation
to tea. "I wouldn't allow her. I would make her see the shamefulness of
it. What a weak man Mr. White must be!"

Yet if Mercy could have looked into the room she had just left, and have
seen Stephen listening with a face unmoved, save for a certain compression
of the mouth, and a look of patient endurance in the eyes, to a torrent of
ill-nature from his mother, she would have recognized that he had
strength, however much she might have undervalued its type.

"I should really think that you might have more consideration, Stephen,
than to be so late to tea, when you know it is all I have to look forward
to, all day long. You stood a good half hour talking with that woman, Did
you not know how late it was?"

"No, mother. If I had, I should have come in."

"I suppose you had your watch on, hadn't you?"

"Yes, mother."

"Well, I'd like to know what excuse there is for a man's not knowing what
time it is, when he has a watch in his pocket? And then you must needs
bring her in here, of all things,--when you know I hate to see people
near my meal-times, and you must have known it was near supper-time. At
any rate, watch or no watch, I suppose you didn't think you'd started to
come home in the middle of the afternoon, did you? And what did you want
her to come in for, anyhow? I'd like to know that. Answer me, will you?"

"Simply because I thought that it would give you pleasure to see some one,
mother. You often complain of being so lonely, of no one's coming in,"
replied Stephen, in a tone which was pathetic, almost shrill, from its
effort to be patient and calm.

"I wish, if you can't speak in your own voice, you wouldn't speak at all,"
said the angry woman. "What makes you change your voice so?"

Stephen made no reply. He knew very well this strange tone which sometimes
came into his voice, when his patience was tried almost beyond endurance.
He would have liked to avoid it; he was instinctively conscious that it
often betrayed to other people what he suffered. But it was beyond his
control: it seemed as if all the organs of speech involuntarily clenched
themselves, as the hand unconsciously clenches itself when a man is
enraged.

Mrs. White persisted. "Your voice, when you're angry, 's enough to drive
anybody wild. I never heard any thing like it. And I'm sure I don't see
what you have to be angry at now. I should think I was the one to be
angry. You're all I've got in the world, Stephen; and you know what a life
I lead. It isn't as if I could go about, like other women; then I
shouldn't care where you spent your time, if you didn't want to spend it
with me." And tears, partly of ill-temper, partly of real grief, rolled
down the hard, unlovely, old face.

This was only one evening. There are three hundred and sixty-five in a
year. Was not the burden too heavy for mortal man to carry?




Chapter IV.



Mercy said nothing to her mother of Mrs. White's rudeness. She merely
mentioned the fact of her having met Mr. White near the house, and having
gone with him, at his request, to speak to his mother.

"What's she like, Mercy?" asked Mrs. Carr, eagerly. "Is she goin' to be
company for me?"

"I could not tell, mother," replied Mercy, indifferently; "for it was just
their tea-hour, and I did not stay a minute,--only just to say, How d'ye
do, and Good-evening. But Mr. White says she is very lonely; people don't
go to see her much: so I should think she would be very glad of somebody
her own age in the house, to come and sit with her. She looks very ill,
poor soul. She hasn't been out of her bed, except when she was lifted, for
eight years."

"Dear me! dear me!" exclaimed Mrs. Carr. "Oh, I hope I'll never be that
way. What'u'd you ever do child, if I'd get to be like that?"

"No danger, mother dear, of your ever being like Mrs. White," said Mercy,
with an incautious emphasis, which, however, escaped Mrs. Carr's
recognition.

"Why, how can you be so sure I mightn't ever get into jest so bad a way,
child? There's none of us can say what diseases we're likely to hev or
not to hev. Now there's never been a case o' lung trouble in our family
afore mine, not 's fur back 's anybody kin trace it out; 'n' there's been
two cancers to my own knowledge; 'n' I allus hed a most awful dread o'
gettin' a cancer. There ain't no death like thet. There wuz my mother's
half-sister, Keziah,--she that married Elder Swift for her second husband.
She died o' cancer; an' her oldest boy by her first husband he hed it in
his face awful. But he held on ter life 's ef he couldn't say die, nohow;
and I tell yer, Mercy, it wuz a sight nobody'd ever forget, to see him
goin' round the street with one side o' his face all bound up, and his
well eye a rolling round, a-doin' the work o' two. He got so he couldn't
see at all out o' either eye afore he died, 'n' you could hear his
screeches way to our house. There wouldn't no laudalum stop the pain a
mite."

"Oh, mother! don't! don't!" exclaimed Mercy. "It is too dreadful to talk
about. I can't bear to think that any human being has ever suffered so.
Please don't ever speak of cancers again."

Mrs. Carr looked puzzled and a little vexed, as she answered, "Well, I
reckon they've got to be talked about a good deal, fust and last, 's long
's there's so many dies on 'em. But I don't know 's you 'n' I've got any
call to dwell on 'em much. You've got dreadful quick feelin's, Mercy,
ain't you? You allus was orful feelin' for everybody when you wuz little,
'n' I don't see 's you've outgrowed it a bit. But I expect it's thet makes
you sech friends with folks, an' makes you such a good gal to your poor
old mother. Kiss me, child," and Mrs. Carr lifted up her face to be
kissed, as a child lifts up its face to its mother. She did this many
times a day; and, whenever Mercy bent down to kiss her, she put her hands
on the old woman's shoulders, and said, "Dear little mother!" in a tone
which made her mother's heart warm with happiness.

It is a very beautiful thing to see just this sort of relation between an
aged parent and a child, the exact reversal of the bond, and the bond so
absolutely fulfilled. It seems to give a new and deeper sense to the word
"filial," and a new and deeper significance to the joy of motherhood or
fatherhood. Alas, that so few sons and daughters are capable of it! so few
helpless old people know the blessedness of it! No little child six years
old ever rested more entirely and confidingly in the love and kindness and
shelter and direction of its mother than did Mrs. Carr in the love and
kindness and shelter and direction of her daughter Mercy. It had begun to
be so, while Mercy was yet a little girl. Before she was fifteen years
old, she felt a responsibility for her mother's happiness, a watchfulness
over her mother's health, and even a care of her mother's clothes. With
each year, the sense of these responsibilities grew deeper; and after her
marriage, as she was denied the blessing of children, all the deep
maternal instincts of her strong nature flowed back and centred anew
around this comparatively helpless, aged child whom she called mother, and
treated with never-failing respect.

When Mrs. Carr first saw the house they were to live in, she exclaimed,--

"O Lor', Mercy! Is thet the house?" Then, stepping back a few steps,
shoving her spectacles high on her nose, and with her head well thrown
back, she took a survey of the building in silence. Then she turned slowly
around, and, facing Mercy, said in a droll, dry way, not uncommon with
her,--

"'Bijah Jenkins's barn!"

Mercy laughed outright.

"So it is, mother. I hadn't thought of it. It looks just like that old
barn of Deacon Jenkins's."

"Yes," said Mrs. Carr. "That's it, exzackly. Well, I never thought o'
offerin' to hire a barn to live in afore, but I s'pose 't'll do till we
can look about. Mebbe we can do better."

"But we've taken it for a year, mother," said Mercy, a little dismayed.

"Oh, hev we? Well, well, I daresay it's comfortable enough; so the sun
shines in mornin's, thet's the most I care for. You'll make any kind o'
house pooty to look at inside, an' I reckon we needn't roost on the fences
outside, a-lookin' at it, any more'n we choose to. It does look, for all
the world though, like 'Bijah Jenkins's old yaller barn; 'n' thet there
jog's jest the way he jined on his cow-shed. I declare it's too
redicklus." And the old lady laughed till she had to wipe her spectacles.

"It could be made very pretty, I think," said Mercy, "for all it is so
hideous now. I know just what I'd do to it, if it were mine. I'd throw
out a big bay window in that corner where the jog is, and another on the
middle of the north side, and then run a piazza across the west side, and
carry the platform round both the bay windows. I saw a picture of a house
in a book Mr. Allen had, which looked very much as this would look then.
Oh, but I'd like to do it!" Mercy's imagination was so fired with the
picture she had made to herself of the house thus altered and improved,
that she could not easily relinquish it.

"But, Mercy, you don't know the lay o' the rooms, child. You don' 'no'
where that ere jog comes. Your bay window mightn't come so's't would be of
any use. Yer wouldn't build one jest to look at, would you?" said her
mother.

"I'm not so sure I wouldn't, if I had plenty of money," replied Mercy,
laughing. "But I have no idea of building bay windows on other people's
houses. I was only amusing myself by planning it. I'd rather have that
house, old and horrid as it is, than any house in the town. I like the
situation so much, and the woods are so beautiful. Perhaps I'll earn a lot
of money some day, and buy the place, and make it just as we like it."

"You earn money, child!" said Mrs. Carr, in a tone of unqualified wonder.
"How could you earn money, I'd like to know?"

"Oh, make bonnets or gowns, dear little mother, or teach school," said
Mercy, coloring. "Mr. Allen said I was quite well enough fitted to teach
our school at home, if I liked."

"But, Mercy, child, you'd never go to do any such thing's thet, would yer
now?" said her mother, piteously. "Don't ye hev all ye want, Mercy? Ain't
there money enough for our clothes? I'm sure I don't need much; an' I
could do with a good deal less, if there was any thing you wanted, dear.
Your father he 'd never rest in his grave, ef he thought his little Mercy
was a havin' to arn money for her livin'. You didn't mean it, child, did
yer? Say yer didn't mean it, Mercy," and tears stood in the poor old
woman's eyes.

It is strange what a tenacious pride there was in the hearts of our old
sea-faring men of a half century ago. They had the same feeling that kings
and emperors might have in regard to their wives and daughters, that it
was a disgrace for them to be obliged to earn money. It would be an
interesting thing to analyze this sentiment, to trace it to its roots: it
was so universal among successful sea-faring men that it must have had its
origin in some trait distinctively peculiar to their profession. All the
other women in the town or the village might eke out the family incomes by
whatever devices they pleased; but the captains' wives were to be ladies.
They were to wear silk gowns brought from many a land; they were to have
ornaments of quaint fashion, picked up here and there; they were to have
money enough in the bank to live on in quiet comfort during the intervals
when the husbands sailed away to make more. So strong was this feeling
that it crystallized into a traditionary custom of life, which even
poverty finds it hard to overcome. You shall find to-day, in any one of
the seaport cities or towns of New England, widows and daughters of
sea-captains, living, or rather seeming to live, upon the most beggarly
incomes, but still keeping up a certain pathetic sham of appearance of
being at ease. If they are really face to face with probable starvation,
they may go to some charitable institution where fine needlework is given
out, and earn a few dollars in that way. But they will fetch and carry
their work by night, and no neighbor will ever by any chance surprise them
with it in their hands. Most beautifully is this surreptitious sewing
done; there is no work in this country like it. The tiny stitches bear the
very aroma of sad and lonely leisure in them; a certain fine pride, too,
as if the poverty-constrained lady would in no wise condescend to depart
from her own standard in the matter of a single loop or stitch, no matter
to what plebeian uses the garment might come after it should leave her
hands.

Mercy's deep blush when she replied to her mother's astonished inquiry,
how she could possibly earn any money, sprung from her consciousness of a
secret,--a secret so harmless in itself, that she was ashamed of having
any feeling of guilt in keeping it a secret; and yet, her fine and
fastidious honesty so hated even the semblance of concealment, that the
mere withholding of a fact, simply because she disliked to mention it,
seemed to her akin to a denial of it. If there is such a thing in a human
being as organic honesty,--an honesty which makes a lie not difficult, but
impossible, just as it is impossible for men to walk on ceilings like
flies, or to breathe in water like fishes,--Mercy Philbrick had it. The
least approach to an equivocation was abhorrent to her: not that she
reasoned about it, and submitting it to her conscience found it wicked,
and therefore hateful; but that she disliked it instinctively,--as
instinctively as she disliked pain. Her moral nerves shrank from it, just
as nerves of the body shrink from suffering; and she recoiled from the
suggestion of such a thing with the same involuntary quickness with which
we put up the hand to ward off a falling blow, or drop the eyelid to
protect an endangered eye. Physicians tell us that there are in men and
women such enormous differences in this matter of sensitiveness to
physical pain that one person may die of a pain which would be
comparatively slight to another; and this is a fact which has to be taken
very carefully into account, in all dealing with disease in people of the
greatest capacity for suffering. May there not be equally great
differences in souls, in the matter of sensitiveness to moral
hurt?--differences for which the soul is not responsible, any more than
the body is responsible for its skin's having been made thin or thick.
Will-power has nothing whatever to do with determining the latter
conditions. Let us be careful how far we take it to task for failing to
control the others. Perhaps we shall learn, in some other stage of
existence, that there is in this world a great deal of moral color
blindness, congenital, incurable; and that God has much more pity than we
suppose for poor things who have stumbled a good many times while they
were groping in darkness.

People who see clearly themselves are almost always intolerant of those
who do not. We often see this ludicrously exemplified, even in the trivial
matter of near-sightedness. We are almost always a little vexed, when we
point out a distant object to a friend, and hear him reply,--

"No, I do not see it at all. I am near-sighted."

"What! can't you see that far?" is the frequent retort, and in the pity is
a dash of impatience.

There is a great deal of intolerance in the world, which is closely akin
to this; and not a whit more reasonable or righteous, though it makes
great pretensions to being both. Mercy Philbrick was full of such
intolerance, on this one point of honesty. She was intolerant not only to
others, she was intolerant to herself. She had seasons of fierce and
hopeless debating with herself, on the most trivial matters, or what would
seem so to nine hundred and ninety-nine persons out of a thousand. During
such seasons as these, her treatment of her friends and acquaintances had
odd alternations of frank friendliness and reticent coolness. A sudden
misgiving whether she might not be appearing to like her friend more than
she really did would seize her at most inopportune moments, and make her
absent-minded and irresponsive. She would leave sentences abruptly
unfinished,--invitations, perhaps, or the acceptances of invitations, the
mere words of which spring readily to one's lips, and are thoughtlessly
spoken. But, in Mercy's times of conflict with herself, even these were
exaggerated in her view to monstrous deceits. She had again and again
held long conversations with Mr. Allen on this subject, but he failed to
help her. He was a good man, of average conscientiousness and average
perception: he literally could not see many of the points which Mercy's
keener analysis ferreted out, and sharpened into weapons for her own pain.
He thought her simply morbid.

"Now, child," he would say,--for, although he was only a few years Mercy's
senior, he had taught her like a child for three years,--"now, child,
leave off worrying yourself by these fancies. There is not the least
danger of your ever being any thing but truthful. Nature and grace are
both too strong in you. There is no lie in saying to a person who has come
to see you in your own house, 'I am glad to see you,' for you are glad;
and, if not, you can make yourself glad, when you think how much pleasure
you can give the person by talking with him. You are glad, always, to give
pleasure to any human being, are you not?"

"Yes," Mercy would reply unhesitatingly.

"Very well. To the person who comes to see you, you give pleasure:
therefore, you are glad to see him."

"But, Mr. Allen," would persist poor Mercy, "that is not what the person
thinks I mean. Very often some one comes to see me, who bores me so that I
can hardly keep awake. He would not be pleased if he knew that all my
cordial welcome really meant was,--'I'm glad to see you, because I'm a
benevolent person, and am willing to make my fellow-creatures happy at any
sacrifice, even at the frightful one of entertaining such a bore as you
are!' He would never come near me again, if he knew I thought that; and
yet, if I do think so, and make him think I do not, is not that the
biggest sort of a lie? Why, Mr. Allen, many a time when I have seen
tiresome or disagreeable people coming to our house, I have run away and
hid myself, so as not to be found; not in the least because I could not
bear the being bored by them, but because I could not bear the thought of
the lies I should speak, or at least act, if I saw them."

"The interpretation a visitor chooses to put upon our kind cordiality of
manner to him is his own affair, not ours, Mercy. It is a Christian duty
to be cordial and kindly of manner to every human being: any thing less
gives pain, repels people from us, and hinders our being able to do them
good. There is no more doubt of this than of any other first principle of
Christian conduct; and I am very sorry that these morbid notions have
taken such hold of you. If you yield to them, you will make yourself soon
disliked and feared, and give a great deal of needless pain to your
neighbors."

It was hard for Mr. Allen to be severe with Mercy, for he loved her as if
she were his younger sister; but he honestly thought her to be in great
danger of falling into a chronic morbidness on this subject, and he
believed that stern words were most likely to convince her of her mistake.
It was a sort of battle, however,--this battle which Mercy was forced to
fight,--in which no human being can help another, unless he has first been
through the same battle himself. All that Mr. Allen said seemed to Mercy
specious and, to a certain extent, trivial: it failed to influence her,
simply because it did not so much as recognize the point where her
difficulty lay.

"If Mr. Allen tries till he dies, he will never convinc me that it is not
deceiving people to make them think you're glad to see them when you're
not," Mercy said to herself often, as, with flushed cheeks and tears in
her eyes, she walked home after these conversations. "He may make me think
that it is right to deceive them rather than to make them unhappy. It
almost seems as if it must be; yet, if we once admitted that, where
should we ever stop? It seems to me that would be a very dangerous
doctrine. A lie's a lie, let whoever will call it fine names, and pass it
off as a Christian duty The Bible does not say, 'Thou shalt not lie,
except when it is necessary to lie, to avoid hurting thy neighbor's
feelings,' It says, 'Thou shalt not lie.' Oh, what a horrible word 'lie'
is! It stings like a short, sharp stroke with a lash." And Mercy would
turn away from the thought with a shudder, and resolutely force hersef to
think of something else. Sometimes she would escape from the perplexity
for weeks: chance would so favor her, that no opportunity for what she
felt to be deceit would occur; but, in these intervals of relief, her
tortured conscience seemed only to renew its voices, and spring upon her
all the more fiercely on the next occasion. The effect, of all these
indecisive conflicts upon Mercy's character had not been good. They had
left her morally bruised, and therefore abnormally sensitive to the least
touch. She was in danger of becoming either a fanatic for truth, or
indifferent to it. Paradoxcal as it may seem, she was in almost as much
danger of the one as of the other. But always, when our hurts are fast
healing without help, the help comes. It is probable that there is to-day
on the earth a cure, either in herb or stone or spring, for every ill
which men's bodies can know. Ignorance and accident may hinder us long
from them, but sooner or later the race shall come to possess them all. So
with souls. There is the ready truth, the living voice, the warm hand, or
the final experience, waiting for each soul's need. We do not die till we
have found them. There were yet to enter into Mercy Philbrick's life a new
light and a new force, by the help of which she would see clearly and
stand firm.

The secret which she had now for nearly a year kept from her mother was a
very harmless one. To people of the world, it would appear so trivial a
thing, that the conscience which could feel itself wounded by reticence on
such a point would seem hardly worth a sneer. Mr. Allen, who had been
Mercy's teacher for three years, had early seen in her a strong poetic
impulse, and had fostered and stimulated it by every means in his power.
He believed that in the exercise of this talent she would find the best
possible help for her loneliness and comfort for her sorrow. He recognized
clearly that, to so exceptional a nature as Mercy's, a certain amount of
isolation was inevitable, all through her life, however fortunate she
might be in entering into new and wider relations. The loneliness of
intense individuality is the loneliest loneliness in the world,--a
loneliness which crowds only aggravate, and which even the closest and
happiest companionship can only in part cure. The creative faculty is the
most inalienable and uncontrollable of individualities. It is at once its
own reward and its own penalty: until it has conquered the freedom of its
own city, in which it must for ever dwell, more or less apart, it is only
a prisoner in the cities of others. All this Mr. Allen felt for Mercy,
recognized in Mercy. He felt and recognized it by the instinct of love,
rather than by any intellectual perception. Intellectually, he was, in
spite of his superior culture, far Mercy's inferior. He had been brave
enough and manly enough to recognize this, and also to recognize what it
took still more manliness to recognize,--that she could never love a man
of his temperament. It would have been very easy for him to love Mercy. He
was not a man of a passionate nature; but he felt himself strangely
stirred whenever he looked into her sensitive, orchid-like face. He felt
in every fibre of him that to have the whole love of such a woman would be
bewildering joy; yet never for one moment did he allow himself to think of
seeking it. "I might make her think she loved me, perhaps," he said to
himself. "She is so lonely and sad, and has seen so few men; but it would
be base. She needs a nature totally different from mine, a life unlike the
life I shall lead. I will never try to make her love me. And he never did.
He taught her and trained her, and developed her, patiently, exactingly,
and yet tenderly as if she had been his sister; but he never betrayed to
her, even by a look or tone, that he could have loved her as his wife. No
doubt his influence was greater over her for this subtle, unacknowledged
bond. It gave to their intercourse a certain strange mixture of reticence
and familiarity, which grew more and more perilous and significant month
by month. Probably a change must have come, had they lived thus closely
together a year or two longer. The change could have been in but one
direction. They loved each other too much to ever love less: they might
have loved more; and Mercy's life had been more peaceful, her heart had
known a truer content, if she had never felt any stronger emotion than
that which Harley Allen's love would have roused in her bosom. But his
resolution was inexorable. His instinct was too keen, his will too strong:
he compelled all his home-seeking, wife-loving thoughts to turn away from
Mercy; and, six months after her departure, he had loyally and lovingly
promised to be the husband of another. In Mercy's future he felt an
intense interest; he would never cease to watch over her, if she would let
him; he would guide, mould, and direct her, until the time came--he knew
it would come--when she had outgrown his help, and ascended to a plane
where he could no longer guide her. His greatest fear was lest, from her
overflowing vitality and keen sensuous delight in all the surface
activities and pleasures of life, the intellectual side of her nature
should be kept in the background and not properly nourished. He had
compelled her to study, to think, to write. Who would do this for her in
the new home? He knew enough of Stephen White's nature to fear that he,
while he might be an appreciative friend, would not be a stimulating one.
He was too dreamy and pleasure-loving himself to be a spur to others. A
vague wonder, almost like a presentiment, haunted his thoughts continually
as to the nature of the relation which would exist between Stephen and
Mercy. One day he wrote a long letter to Stephen, telling him all about
Mercy,--her history; her peculiarities, mental and moral; her great need
of mental training; her wonderful natural gifts. He closed his letter in
these words:--

"There is the making of a glorious woman and, I think, a true poet in this
girl; but whether she ever makes either will depend entirely upon the
hands she falls into. She has a capacity for involuntary adaptation of
herself to any surroundings, and for an unconscious and indomitable
loyalty to the every-day needs of every-day life, which rarely go with the
poetic temperament. She would contentedly make bread and do nothing else,
till the day of her death, if that seemed to be the nearest and most
demanded duty. She would be heartily faithful and joyous every day, in
intercourse with only common and uncultivated people, if fate sets her
among them. She seems to me sometimes to be more literally a child of God,
in the true and complete sense of the word 'child,' than any one I ever
knew. She takes every thing which comes to her just as a happy and good
little child takes every thing that is given to him, and is pleased with
all; yet she is not at all a religious person. I am often distressed by
her lack of impulse to worship. I think she has no strong sense of a
personal God; yet her conscience is in many ways morbidly sensitive. She
is a most interesting and absorbing person,--one entirely unique in my
experience. Living with her, as you will, it will be impossible for you
not to influence her strongly, one way or the other; and I want to enlist
your help to carry on the work I have begun. She owes it to herself and to
the world not to let her mind be inactive. I am very much mistaken if she
has not within her the power to write poems, which shall take place among
the work that lasts."

Mr. Allen read this letter over several times, and then, with a gesture of
impatience, tore the sheets down the middle, and threw them into the fire,
exclaiming,--

"Pshaw! as if there were any use in sending a man a portrait of a woman he
is to see every day. If Stephen is the person to amount to any thing in
her life, he will recognize her. If he is not, all my descriptions of her
will be thrown away. It is best to let things take their own course."

After some deliberation, he decided to take a step, which he would never
have taken, had Mercy not been going away from his influence,--a step
which he had again and again said to himself he would hot risk, lest the
effect might be to hinder her intellectual growth. He sent two of her
poems to a friend of his, who was the editor of one of the leading
magazines in the country. The welcome they met exceeded even his
anticipations. By the very next mail, he received a note from his friend,
enclosing a check, which to Harley Allen's inexperience of such matters
seemed disproportionately large. "Your little Cape Cod girl is a wonder,
indeed," wrote the editor. "If she can keep on writing such verse as this,
she will make a name for herself. Send us some more: we'll pay her well
for it."

Mr. Allen was perplexed. He had not once thought of the verses being paid
for. He had thought that to see her poems in print might give Mercy a new
incentive to work, might rouse in her an ambition, which would in part
take the place of the stimulus which his teachings had given her. He very
much disliked to tell her what he had done, and to give to her the money
she had unwittingly earned. He feared that she would resent it; he feared
that she would be too elated by it; he feared a dozen different things in
as many minutes, as he sat turning the check over and over in his hands.
But his fears were all unfounded. Mercy had too genuine an artistic nature
to be elated, too much simplicity to be offended. Her first emotion was
one of incredulity; her second, of unaffected and humble wonder that any
verses of hers should have been so well spoken of; and her next, of
childlike glee at the possibility of her earning any money. She had not a
trace of the false pride which had crystallized in her mother's nature
into such a barrier against the idea of a paid industry.

"O Mr. Allen!" she exclaimed, "is it really possible? Do you think the
verses were really worth it? Are you quite sure the editor did not send
the money because the verses were written by a friend of yours?"

Harley Allen laughed.

"Editors are not at all likely, Mercy," he said, "to pay any more for
things than the things are worth. I think you will some day laugh
heartily, as you look back upon the misgivings with which you received the
first money earned by your pen. If you will only work faithfully and
painstakingly, you can do work which will be much better paid than this."

Mercy's eyes flashed.

"Oh! oh! Then I can have books and pictures, and take journeys," she said
in a tone of such ecstasy that Mr. Allen was surprised.

"Why, Mercy," he replied, "I did not know you were such a discontented
girl. Have you always longed for all these things?"

"I'm not discontented, Mr. Allen," answered Mercy, a little proudly. "I
never had a discontented moment in my life. I'm not so silly. I have never
yet seen the day which did not seem to me brimful and running over with
joys and delights; that is, except when I was for a little while bowed
down by a grief nobody could bear up under," she added, with a sudden
drooping of every feature in her expressive face, as she recalled the one
sharp grief of her life. "I don't see why a distinct longing for all sorts
of beautiful things need be in the least inconsistent with absolute
content. In fact, I know it isn't; for I have both."

Mr. Allen was not enough of an idealist to understand this. He looked
puzzled, and Mercy went on,--

"Why, Mr. Allen, I should like to have our home perfectly beautiful, just
like the most beautiful houses I have read about in books. I should like
to have the walls hung full of pictures, and the rooms filled full of
books; and I should like to have great greenhouses full of all the rare
and exquisite flowers of the whole world. I'd like one house like the
house you told me of, full of all the orchids, and another full of only
palms and ferns. I should like to wear always the costliest of silks, very
plain and never of bright colors, but heavy and soft and shining; and
laces that were like fleecy clouds when they are just scattering. I should
like to be perfectly beautiful, and to have perfectly beautiful people
around me. But all this doesn't make me one bit less contented. I care
just as much for my few little, old books, and my two or three pictures,
and our beds of sweet-williams and pinks. They all give me such pleasure
that I'm just glad I'm alive every minute.--What are you thinking of, Mr.
Allen!" exclaimed Mercy, breaking off and coloring scarlet, as she became
suddenly aware that her pastor was gazing at her with a scrutinizing look
she had never seen on his face before.

"Of your future life, Mercy,--of your future life. I am wondering what it
will be, and if the dear Lord will carry you safe through all the
temptations which the world must offer to one so sensitive as you are to
all its beauties," replied Mr. Allen, sadly. Mercy was displeased. She was
always intolerant of this class of references to the Lord. Her sense of
honesty took alarm at them. In a curt and half-petulant tone, she
answered,--

"I suppose ministers have to say such things, Mr. Allen; but I wish you
wouldn't say them to me. I do not think that the Lord made the beautiful
things in this world for temptations; and I believe he expects us to keep
ourselves out of mischief, and not throw the responsibility on to him!"

"Oh, Mercy, Mercy! don't say such things! They sound irreverent: they
shock me!" exclaimed Mr. Allen, deeply pained by Mercy's tone and words.

"I am very sorry to shock you, Mr. Allen," replied Mercy, in a gentler
tone. "Pray forgive me. I do not think, however, there is half as much
real irreverence in saying that the Lord expects us to look out for
ourselves and keep out of mischief as there is in teaching that he made a
whole world full of people so weak and miserable that they couldn't look
after themselves, and had to be lifted along all the time."

Mr. Allen shook his head, and sighed. When Mercy was in this frame of
mind, it was of no use to argue with her. He returned to the subject of
her poetry.

"If you will keep on reading and studying, Mercy, and will compel yourself
to write and rewrite carefully, there is no reason why you should not have
a genuine success as a writer, and put yourself in a position to earn
money enough to buy a great many comforts and pleasures for yourself, and
your mother also," he said.

At the mention of her mother, Mercy started, and exclaimed irrelevantly,--

"Dear me! I never once thought of mother."

Mr. Allen looked, as well he might, mystified. "Never once thought of her!
What do you mean, Mercy?"

"Why, I mean I never once thought about telling her about the money. She
wouldn't like it."

"Why not? I should think she would not only like the money, but be very
proud of your being able to earn it in such a way."

"Perhaps that might make a difference," said Mercy, reflectively: "it
would seem quite different to her from taking in sewing, I suppose."

"Well, I should think so," laughed Mr. Allen. "Very different, indeed."

"But it's earning money, working for money, all the same," continued
Mercy; "and you haven't the least idea how mother feels about that. Father
must have been full of queer notions. She got it all from him. But I can't
see that there is any difference between a woman's taking money for what
she can do, and a man's taking money for what he can do. I can do sewing,
and you can preach; and of the two, if people must go without one or the
other, they could do without sermons better than without clothes,--eh, Mr.
Allen?" and Mercy laughed mischievously. "But once when I told mother I
believed I would turn dressmaker for the town, I knew I could earn ever so
much money, besides doing a philanthropy in getting some decent gowns into
the community, she was so horrified and unhappy at the bare idea that I
never have forgotten it. It is just so with ever so many women here. They
would rather half-starve than do any thing to earn money. For my part, I
think it is nonsense."

"Certainly, Mercy,--certainly it is," replied Mr. Allen, anxious lest this
new barrier should come between Mercy and her work. "It is only a
prejudice. And you need never let your mother know any thing about it.
She is so old and feeble it would not be worth while to worry her."

Mercy's eyes grew dark and stern as she fixed them on Mr. Allen. "I wonder
I believe any thing you say, Mr. Allen. How many things do you keep back
from me, or state differently from what they are, to save my feelings? or
to adapt the truth to my feebleness, which is not like the feebleness of
old age, to be sure, but is feebleness in comparison with your knowledge
and strength? I hate, hate, hate, your theories about deceiving people. I
shall certainly tell my mother, if I keep on writing, and am paid for it,"
she said impetuously.

"Very well. Of course, if you think it wrong to leave her in ignorance
about it, you must tell her. I myself see no reason for your mentioning
the fact, unless you choose to. You are a mature and independent woman:
she is old and childish. The relation between you is really reversed. You
are the mother, and she the child. Suppose she had become a writer when
you were a little girl: would it have been her duty to tell you of it?"
replied Mr. Allen.

"I don't care! I shall tell her! I never have kept the least thing from
her yet, and I don't believe I ever will," said Mercy. "You'll never make
me think it's right, Mr. Allen. What a good Jesuit you'd have made,
wouldn't you?"

Mr. Allen colored. "Oh, child, how unjust you are!" he exclaimed. "But it
must be all my stupid way of putting things. One of these days, you'll see
it all differently."

And she did. Firm as were her resolutions to tell her mother every thing,
she could not find courage to tell her about the verses and the price paid
for them. Again and again she had approached the subject, and had been
frightened back,--sometimes by her own unconquerable dislike to speaking
of her poetry; sometimes, as in the instance above, by an outbreak on her
mother's part of indignation at the bare suggestion of her earning money.
After that conversation, Mercy resolved within herself to postpone the day
of the revelation, until there should be more to tell and more to show.

"If ever I have a hundred dollars, I'll tell her then," she thought. "So
much money as that would make it seem better to her. And I will have a
good many verses by that time to read to her." And so the secret grew
bigger and heavier, and yet Mercy grew more used to carrying it, until she
herself began to doubt whether Mr. Allen were not right, after all; and if
it would not be a pity to trouble the feeble old heart with a needless
perplexity and pain.




Chapter V.



When Stephen White saw his new tenants' first preparations for moving into
his house, he was conscious of a strangely mingled feeling, half
irritation, and half delight. Four weeks had passed since the unlucky
evening on which he had taken Mercy to his mother's room, and he had not
seen her face again. He had called at the hotel twice, but had found only
Mrs. Carr at home. Mercy had sent a messenger with only a verbal message,
when she wished the key of the house.

She had an undefined feeling that she would not come into any relation
with Stephen White, if it could be avoided. She was heartily glad that she
had not been in the house when he called. And yet, had she been in the
habit of watching her own mental states, she would have discovered that
Stephen White was very much in her thoughts; that she had come to
wondering why she never met him in her walks; and, what was still more
significant, to mistaking other men for him, at a distance. This is one of
the oddest tricks of a brain preoccupied with the image of one human
being. One would think that it would make the eye clearer-sighted,
well-nigh infallible, in the recognition of the loved form. Not at all.
Waiting for her lover to appear, a woman will stand wearily watching at a
window, and think fifty times in sixty minutes that she sees him coming.
Tall men, short men, dark men, light men; men with Spanish cloaks, and men
in surtouts,--all wear, at a little distance, a tantalizing likeness to
the one whom they in no wise resemble.

After such a watching as this, the very eye becomes disordered, as after
looking at a bright color it sees a spectrum of a totally different tint;
and, when the long looked-for person appears, he himself looks unnatural
at first, and strange. How well many women know this curious fact in
love's optics! I doubt if men ever watch long enough, and longingly
enough, for a woman's coming, to be so familiar with the phenomenon.
Stephen White, however, had more than once during these four weeks
quickened his pace to overtake some slender figure clad in black, never
doubting that it was Mercy Philbrick, until he came so near that his eyes
were forced to tell him the truth. It was truly a strange thing that he
and Mercy did not once meet during all these weeks. It was no doubt an
important element in the growth of their relation, this interval of
unacknowledged and combated curiosity about each other. Nature has a
myriad of ways of bringing about her results. Seed-time and harvest are
constant, and the seasons all keep their routine; but no two fields have
the same method or measure in the summer's or the winter's dealings.
Hearts lie fallow sometimes; and seeds of love swell very big in the
ground, all undisturbed and unsuspected.

When Mercy and her mother drove up to the house, Stephen was standing at
his mother's window. It was just at dusk.

"Here they are, mother," he said. "I think I will go out and meet them."

Mrs. White lifted her eyes very slowly towards her son, and spoke in the
measured syllables and unvibrating tone which always marked her utterance
when she was displeased.

"Do you think you are under any obligation to do that? Suppose they had
hired a house of you in some other part of the town: would you have felt
called upon to pay them that attention? I do not know what the usual
duties of a landlord are. You know best."

Stephen colored. This was the worst of his mother's many bad traits,--an
instinctive, unreasoning, and unreasonable jealousy of any mark of
attention or consideration shown to any other person than herself, even if
it did not in the smallest way interfere with her comfort; and this cold,
sarcastic manner of speaking was, of all the forms of her ill-nature, the
one he found most unbearable. He made no reply, but stood still at the
window, watching Mercy's light and literally joyful movements, as she
helped her mother out of, and down from, the antiquated old carriage, and
carried parcel after parcel and laid them on the doorstep.

Mrs. White continued in the same sarcastic tone,--

"Pray go and help move all their baggage in, Stephen, if it would give you
any pleasure. It is nothing to me, I am sure, if you choose to be all the
time doing all sorts of things for everybody. I don't see the least
occasion for it, that's all."

"It seems to me only common neighborliness and friendly courtesy, mother,"
replied Stephen, gently. "But you know you and I never agree upon such
points. Our views are radically different, and it is best not to discuss
them."

"Views!" ejaculated Mrs. White, in a voice more like the low growl of some
animal than like any sound possible to human organs. "I don't want to hear
any thing about 'views' about such a trifle. Why don't you go, if you want
to, and be done with it?"

"It is too late now," answered Stephen, in the same unruffled tone. "They
have gone in, and the carriage is driving off."

"Well, perhaps they would like to have you put down their carpets for
them, or open their boxes," sneered Mrs. White, still with the same
intolerable sarcastic manner. "I don't doubt they could find some use for
your services."

"O mother, don't!" pleaded Stephen, "please don't. I do not wish to go
near them or ever see them, if it will make you any less happy. Do let us
talk of something else."

"Who ever said a word about your not going near them, I'd like to know?
Have I ever tried to shut you up, or keep you from going anywhere you
wanted to? Answer me that, will you?"

"No, mother," answered Stephen, "you never have. But I wish I could make
you happier."

"You do make me very happy, Steve," said Mrs. White, mollified by the
gentle answer. "You're a good boy, and always was; but it does vex me to
see you always so ready to be at everybody's beck and call; and, where
it's a woman, it naturally vexes me more. You wouldn't want to run any
risk of being misunderstood, or making a woman care about you more than
she ought."

Stephen stared. This was a new field. Had his mother gone already thus far
in her thoughts about Mercy Philbrick? And was her only thought of the
possibility of the young woman's caring for him, and not in the least of
his caring for her?

And what would ever become of the peace of their daily life, if this kind
of jealousy--the most exacting, most insatiable jealousy in the
world--were to grow up in her heart? Stephen was dumb with despair. The
apparent confidential friendliness and assumption of a tacit understanding
and agreement between him and her on the matter, with which his mother had
said, "You wouldn't want to be misunderstood, or make a woman care more
for you than she ought," struck terror to his very soul. The apparent
amicableness of her remark at the present moment did not in the least
blind him to the enormous possibilities of future misery involved in such
a train of feeling and thought on her part. He foresaw himself involved in
a perfect network of espionage and cross-questioning and suspicion, in
comparison with which all he had hitherto borne at his mother's hands
would seem trivial. All this flashed through his mind in the brief
instant that he hesitated before he replied in an off-hand tone, which for
once really blinded his mother,--

"Goodness, mother! whatever put such ideas into your head? Of course I
should never run any such risk as that."

"A man can't possibly be too careful," remarked Mrs. White, sententiously.
"The world's full of gossiping people, and women are very impressionable,
especially such high-strung women as that young widow. A man can't
possibly be too careful. Read me the paper now, Stephen."

Stephen was only too thankful to take refuge in and behind the newspaper.
A newspaper had so often been to him a shelter from his mother's eyes, a
protection from his mother's tongue, that, whenever he saw a storm or a
siege of embarrassing questioning about to begin, he looked around for a
newspaper as involuntarily as a soldier feels in his belt for his pistol.
He had more than once smiled bitterly to himself at the consciousness of
the flimsy bulwark; but he found it invaluable. Sometimes, it is true, her
impatient instinct made a keen thrust at the truth, and she would say
angrily,--

"Put down that paper! I want to see your face when I speak to you;" but
his reply, "Why, mother, I am reading. I was just going to read something
aloud to you," would usually disarm and divert her. It was one of her
great pleasures to have him read aloud to her. It mattered little what he
read: she was equally interested in the paragraphs of small local news,
and in the telegraphic summaries of foreign affairs. A revolt in a
distant European province, of which she had never heard even the name, was
neither more nor less exciting to her than the running away of a heifer
from the premises of an unknown townsman.

All through the evening, the sounds of moving of furniture, and brisk
going up and down stairs, came through the partition, and interrupted
Stephen's thoughts as much as they did his mother's. They had lived so
long alone in the house in absolute quiet, save for the semi-occasional
stir of Marty's desultory house-cleaning, that these sounds were
disturbing, and not pleasant to hear. Stephen did not like them much
better than his mother did; and he gave her great pleasure by remarking,
as he bade her good-night,--

"I suppose those people next door will get settled in a day or two, and
then we can have a quiet evening again."

"I should hope so," replied his mother. "I should think that a caravan of
camels needn't have made so much noise. It's astonishing to me that folks
can't do things without making a racket; but I think some people feel
themselves of more consequence when they're making a great noise."

The next morning, as Stephen was bidding his mother good-morning, he
accidentally glanced out of the window, and saw Mercy walking slowly away
from the house with a little basket on her arm.

"She'll go to market every morning," he thought to himself. "I shall see
her then."

Not the slightest glance of Stephen's eye ever escaped his mother's
notice.

"Ah! there goes the lady," she said. "I wonder if she is always going down
town at this hour? You will have to manage to go either earlier or later,
or else people will begin to talk about you."

Stephen White had one rule of conduct: when he was uncertain what to do,
not to do any thing. He broke it in this instance, and had reason to
regret it long. He spoke impulsively on the instant, and revealed to
mother his dawning interest in Mercy, and planted then and there an
ineffaceable germ of distrust in her mind.

"Now, mother," he said, "what's the use of you beginning to set up this
new worry? Mrs. Philbrick is a widow, and very sad and lonely. She is the
friend of my friend, Harley Allen; and I am in duty bound to show her some
attention, and help her if I can. She is also a bright, interesting
person; and I do not know so many such that I should turn my back on one
under my own roof. I have not so many social pleasures that I should give
up this one, just on account of a possible gossip about it."

Silence would have been wiser. Mrs. White did not speak for a moment or
two; then she said, in a slow and deliberate manner, as if reflecting on a
problem,--"You enjoy Mrs. Philbrick's society, then, do you, Stephen? How
much have you seen of her?"

Still injudicious and unlike himself, Stephen answered, "Yes, I think I
shall enjoy it very much, and I think you will enjoy it more than I shall;
for you may see great deal of her. I have only seen her once, you know."

"I don't suppose she will care any thing about me," replied Mrs. White,
with an emphasis on the last personal pronoun which spoke volumes. "Very
few people do."

Stephen made no reply. It had just dawned on his consciousness that he had
been blundering frightfully, and his mind stood still for a moment, as a
man halts suddenly, when he finds himself in a totally wrong road. To turn
short about is not always the best way of getting off a wrong road, though
it may be the quickest way. Stephen turned short about, and exclaimed with
a forced laugh, "Well, mother, I don't suppose it will make any great
difference to you, if she doesn't. It is not a matter of any moment,
anyhow, whether we see any thing of either of them or not. I thought she
seemed a bright, cheery sort of body, that's all. Good-by," and he ran out
of the house.

Mrs. White lay for a long time with her eyes fixed on the wall. The
expression of her face was of mingled perplexity and displeasure. After a
time, these gave place to a more composed and defiant look. She had taken
her resolve, had marked out her line of conduct.

"I won't say another word to Stephen about her," she thought. "I'll just
watch and see how things go. Nothing can happen in this house without my
knowing it."

The mischief was done; but Mrs. White was very much mistaken in the last
clause of her soliloquy.

Meantime, Mercy was slowly walking towards the village, revolving her own
little perplexities, and with a mind much freer from the thought of
Stephen White than it had been for four weeks. Mercy was in a dilemma.
Their clock was broken, hopelessly broken. It had been packed in too frail
a box; and heavier boxes placed above it had crashed through, making a
complete wreck of the whole thing,--frame, works, all. It was a high,
old-fashioned Dutch clock, and had stood in the corner of their
sitting-room ever since Mercy could recollect. It had belonged to her
father's father, and had been her mother's wedding gift from him.

"It's easy enough to get a clock that will keep good time," thought Mercy,
as she walked along; "but, oh, how I shall miss the dear old thing! It
looked like a sort of belfry in the corner. I wonder if there are any such
clocks to be bought anywhere nowadays?" She stopped presently before a
jeweller's and watchmaker's shop in the Brick Row, and eagerly scrutinized
the long line of clocks standing in the window. Very ugly they all
were,--cheap, painted wood, of a shining red, and tawdry pictures on the
doors, which ran up to a sharp point in a travesty of the Gothic arch
outline.

"Oh, dear!" sighed Mercy, involuntarily aloud.

"Bless my soul! Bless my soul!" fell suddenly upon her ear, in sharp,
jerking syllables, accompanied by clicking taps of a cane on the sidewalk.
She turned and looked into the face of her friend, "Old Man Wheeler," who
was standing so near her that with each of his rapid shiftings from foot
to foot he threatened to tread on the hem of her gown.

"Bless my soul! Bless my soul! Glad to see ye. Missed your face. How're
ye gettin' on? Gone into your house? How's your mother? I'll come see you,
if you're settled. Don't go to see anybody,--never go! never go! People
are all wolves, wolves, wolves; but I'll come an' see you. Like your
face,--good face, good face. What're you lookin' at? What're you lookin'
at? Ain't goin' to buy any thin' out o' that winder, be ye? Trash, trash,
trash! People are all cheats, cheats," said the old man, breathlessly.

"I'm afraid I'll have to, sir," replied Mercy, vainly trying to keep the
muscles of her face quiet. "I must buy a clock. Our clock got broken on
the way."

"Broken? Clock broken? Mend it, mend it, child. I'll show you a good man,
not this feller in here,--he's only good for outsides. Holler sham, holler
sham! What kind o' clock was it?"

"Oh, that's the worst of it. It was an old clock my grandfather brought
from Holland. It reached up to the ceiling, and had beautiful carved work
on it. But it's in five hundred pieces, I do believe. A heavy box crushed
it. Even the brass work inside is all jammed and twisted. Our things came
by sea," replied Mercy.

"Bless my soul! Bless my soul! Come on, come on! I'll show you," exclaimed
the eccentric old man, starting off at a quick pace. Mercy did not stir.
Presently, he looked back, wheeled, and came again so near that he nearly
trod on her gown.

"Bless my soul! Didn't tell her,--bad habit, bad habit. Never do make
people understand. Come on, child,--come on! I've got a clock like yours.
Don't want it. Never use it. Run down twenty years ago. Guess we can find
it. Come on, come on!" he exclaimed.

"But, Mr. Wheeler," said Mercy, half-frightened at his manner, yet
trusting him in spite of herself, "do you really want to sell the clock?
If you have no use for it, I'd be very glad to buy it of you, if it looks
even a little like our old one. I will bring my mother to look at it."

"Fine young woman! fine young woman! Good face. Never mistaken in a face
yet. Don't sell clocks: never sold a clock yet. I'll give yer the clock,
if yer like it. Come on, child,--come on!" and he laid his hand on Mercy's
arm and drew her along.

Mercy held back. "Thank you, Mr. Wheeler," she said. "You're very kind.
But I think my mother would not like to have you give us a clock. I will
buy it of you; but I really cannot go with you now. Tell me where the
clock is, and I will come with my mother to see it."

The old man stamped his foot and his cane both with impatience. "Pshaw!
pshaw!" he said: "women all alike, all alike." Then with an evident effort
to control his vexation, and speak more slowly, he said, "Can't you see
I'm an old man, child? Don't pester me now. Come, on, come on! I tell you
I want to show yer that clock. Give it to you 's well 's not. Stood in the
lumber-room twenty years. Come on, come on! It's right up here, ten
steps." And again he took Mercy by the arm. Reluctantly she followed him,
thinking to herself, "Oh, what a rash thing this is to do! How do I know
but he really is crazy?"

He led the way up an outside staircase at the end of the Brick Row, and,
after fumbling a long time in several deep pockets, produced a huge rusty
iron key, and unlocked the door at the head of the stairs. A very strange
life that key had led in pockets. For many years it had slept under Miss
Orra White's maidenly black alpacas, and had been the token of confinement
and of release to scores of Miss Orra's unruly pupils; then it had had an
interval of dignified leisure, lifted to the level of the Odd Fellows
regalia, and only used by them on rare occasions. For the last ten years,
however, it had done miscellaneous duty as warder of Old Man Wheeler's
lumber-room. If a key could be supposed to peep through a keyhole, and
speculate on the nature of the service it was rendering to humanity, in
keeping safe the contents of the room into which it gazed, this key might
have indulged in fine conjectures, and have passed its lifetime in a state
of chronic bewilderment. Each time that the door of this old storehouse
opened, it opened to admit some new, strange, nondescript article, bearing
no relation to any thing that had preceded it. "Old Man Wheeler" added to
all his other eccentricities a most eccentric way of collecting his debts.
He had dealings of one sort or another with everybody. He drove hard
bargains, and was inexorable as to dates. When a debtor came, pleading for
a short delay on a payment, the old man had but one reply,--

"No, no, no! What yer got? what yer got? Gie me somethin', gie me
somethin'. Settle, settle, settle! Gie me any thin' yer got. Settle,
settle, settle!" The consequences of twenty years' such traffic as this
can more easily be imagined than described. The room was piled from floor
to roof with its miscellaneous collections: junk-shops, pawnbrokers'
cellars, and old women's garrets seemed all to have disgorged themselves
here. A huge stack of calico comforters, their tufts gray with dust and
cobwebs, lay on top of two old ploughs, in one corner: kegs of nails,
boxes of soap, rolls of leather, harnesses stiff and cracking with age,
piles of books, chairs, bedsteads, andirons, tubs, stone ware, crockery
ware, carpets, files of old newspapers, casks, feather-beds, jars of
druggists' medicines, old signboards, rakes, spades, school-desks,--in
short, all things that mortal man ever bought or sold,--were here, packed
in piles and layers, and covered with dust as with a gray coverlid. At
each foot-fall on the loose boards of the floor, clouds of stifling dust
arose, and strange sounds were heard in and behind the piles of rubbish,
as if all sorts of small animals might be skurrying about, and giving
alarms to each other.

Mercy stood still on the threshold, her face full of astonishment. The
dust made her cough; and at first she could hardly see which way to step.
The old man threw down his cane, and ran swiftly from corner to corner,
and pile to pile, peering around, pulling out first one thing and then
another. He darted from spot to spot, bending lower and lower, as he grew
more impatient in his search, till he looked like a sort of human weasel
gliding about in quest of prey.

"Trash, trash, nothin' but trash!" he muttered to himself as he ran. "Burn
it up some day. Trash, trash!"

"How did you get all these queer things together, Mr. Wheeler?" Mercy
ventured to say at last "Did you keep a store?"

The old man did not reply. He was tugging away at a high stack of rolls of
undressed leather, which reached to the ceiling in one corner. He pulled
them too hastily, and the whole stack tumbled forward, and rolled heavily
in all directions, raising a suffocating dust, through which the old man's
figure seemed to loom up as through a fog, as he skipped to the right and
left to escape the rolling bales.

"O Mr. Wheeler!" cried Mercy, "are you hurt?"

He laughed a choked laugh, more like a chuckle than like a laugh.

"He! he! child. Dust don't hurt me. Goin' to return to 't presently. Made
on 't! made on 't! Don't see why folks need be so 'fraid on 't! He! he! 'T
is pretty choky, though." And he sat down on one of the leather rolls, and
held his sides through a hard coughing fit. As the dust slowly subsided,
Mercy saw standing far back in the corner, where the bales of leather had
hidden it, an old-fashioned clock, so like her own that she gave a low cry
of surprise.

"Oh, is that the clock you meant, Mr. Wheeler?" she exclaimed.

"Yes, yes, that's it. Nice old clock. Took it for debt. Cost me more'n
't's wuth. As fur that matter, 'tain't wuth nothin' to me. Wouldn't hev it
in the house 'n' more than I'd git the town 'us tower in for a clock. D'ye
like it, child? Ye can hev it's well's not. I'd like to give it to ye."

"I should like it very much, very much indeed," replied Mercy. "But I
really cannot think of taking it, unless you let us pay for it."

The old man sprung to his feet with such impatience that the leather bale
rolled away from him, and he nearly lost his balance. Mercy sprang forward
and caught him.

"Bless my soul! Bless my soul! Don't pester me, child! Don't you see I'm
an old man? I tell ye I'll give ye the clock, an' I won't sell it ter
ye,--won't, won't, won't," and he picked up his cane, and stood leaning
upon it with both his hands clasped on it, and his head bent forward,
eagerly scanning Mercy's face. She hesitated still, and began to speak
again.

"But, Mr. Wheeler,"--

"Don't 'but' me. There ain't any buts about it. There's the clock. Take
it, child,--take it, take it, take it, or else leave it, just's you like.
I ain't a-goin' to saddle ye with it; but I think ye'd be very silly not
to take it,--silly, silly."

Mercy began to think so too. The clock was its own advocate, almost as
strong as the old man's pleading.

"Very well, Mr. Wheeler," she said. "I will take the clock, though I don't
know what my mother will say. It is a most valuable present. I hope we
can do something for you some day."

"Tut, tut, tut!" growled the old man. "Just like all the rest o' the
world. Got no faith,--can't believe in gettin' somethin' for nothin'.
You're right, child,--right, right. 'S a general thing, people are cheats,
cheats, cheats. Get all your money away,--wolves, wolves, wolves! Stay
here, child, a minute. I'll get two men to carry it." And, before Mercy
realized his intention, he had shut the door, locked it, and left her
alone in the warehouse. Her first sensation was of sharp terror; but she
ran to the one window which was accessible, and, seeing that it looked out
on the busiest thoroughfare of the town, she sat down by it to await the
old man's return. In a very few moments, she heard the sounds of steps on
the stairs, the door was thrown open, and the old man, still talking to
himself in muttered tones, pushed into the room two ragged vagabonds whom
he had picked up on the street.

They looked as astonished at the nature of the place as Mercy had. With
gaping mouths and roving eyes, they halted on the threshold.

"Come in, come in! What 're ye 'bout? Earn yer money, earn yer money!"
exclaimed the old man, pointing to the clock, and bidding them take it up
and carry it out.

"Now mind! Quarter a piece, quarter a piece,--not a cent more. Do ye
understand? Hark 'e! do ye understand? Not a cent more," he said,
following them out of the door. Then turning to Mercy, he exclaimed,--

"Bless my soul! Bless my soul! Forgot you, child. Come on, come on! I'll
go with you, else those rascals will cheat you. Men are wolves, wolves,
wolves. They're to carry the clock up to your house for a quarter apiece.
But I'll come on with you. Got half a dollar?"

"Oh, yes," laughed Mercy, much pleased that the old man was willing she
should pay the porters. "Oh, yes, I have my portemonnaie here," holding it
up. "This is the cheapest clock ever sold, I think; and you are very good
to let me pay the men."

The old man looked at her with a keen, suspicious glance.

"Good? eh! good? Why, ye didn't think I was goin' to give ye money, did
ye? Oh, no, no, no! Not money. Never give money."

This was very true. It would probably have cost him a severer pang to give
away fifty cents than to have parted with the entire contents of the
storehouse. Mercy laughed aloud.

"Why, Mr. Wheeler," she said, "you have given me just the same as money.
Such a clock as this must have cost a good deal, I am sure."

"No, no, child! It's very different, different. Clock wasn't any use to
me, wasn't wuth any thin'. Money's of use, use, use. Can't have enough
on't. People get it all away from you. They're wolves, wolves, wolves,"
replied the old man, running along in advance of Mercy, and rapping one of
the men who were carrying the clock, sharply on his shoulder.

"Keep your end up there! keep it up! I won't pay you, if you don't carry
your half," he exclaimed.

It was a droll procession, and everybody turned to look at it: the two
ragged men carrying the quaint-fashioned old clock, from which the dust
shook off at every jolt, revealing the carved scrolls and figures upon it:
following them, Mercy, with her expressive face full of mirth and
excitement; and the old man, now ahead, now lagging behind, now talking in
an eager and animated manner with Mercy, now breaking off to admonish or
chastise the bearers of the clock. The eccentric old fellow used his cane
as freely as if it had been a hand. There were few boys in town who had
not felt its weight; and his more familiar acquaintances knew the touch of
it far better than they knew the grip of his fingers. It "saved steps," he
used to say; though of steps the old man seemed any thing but chary, as he
was in the habit of taking them perpetually, without advancing or
retreating, changing from one foot to the other, as uneasily as a goose
does.

Stephen White happened to be looking out of the window, when this unique
procession of the clock passed his office. He could not believe what he
saw. He threw up the window and leaned out, to assure himself that he was
not mistaken. Mercy heard the sound, looked up, and met Stephen's eye. She
colored violently, bowed, and involuntarily quickened her pace. Her
companion halted, and looked up to see what had arrested her attention.
When he saw Stephen's face, he said,--

"Pshaw!" and turned again to look at Mercy. The bright color had not yet
left her cheek. The old man gazed at her angrily for a moment, then
stopped short, planted his cane on the ground, and said in a loud tone,
all the while peering into her face as if he would read her very
thoughts,--

"Don't you know that Steve White isn't good for any thin'? Poor stock,
poor stock! Father before him poor stock, too. Don't you go to lettin' him
handle your money, child. Mind now! I'll be a good friend to you, if
you'll do 's I say; but, if Steve White gets hold on you, I'll have
nothin' to do with you. Mind that, eh? eh?"

Mercy had a swift sense of angry resentment at these words; but she
repelled it, as she would have resisted the impulse to be angry with a
little child.

"Mr. Wheeler," she said with a gentle dignity of tone, which was not
thrown away on the old man, "I do not know why you should speak so to me
about Mr. White. He is almost an entire stranger to me as yet. We live in
his house; but we do not know him or his mother yet, except in the most
formal way. He seems to be a very agreeable man," she added with a little
tinge of perversity.

"Hm! hm!" was all the old man's reply; and he did not speak again till
they reached Mercy's gate. Here the clock-carriers were about to set their
burden down. Mr. Wheeler ran towards them with his cane outstretched.

"Here! here! you lazy rascals! Into the house! into the house, else you
don't get any quarter!

"Well I came along, child,--well I came along. They'd ha' left it right
out doors here. Cheats! People are all cheats, cheats, cheats," he
exclaimed.

Into the house, without a pause, without a knock, into poor bewildered
Mrs. Carr's presence he strode, the men following fast on his steps, and
Mercy unable to pass them.

"Where'll you have it? Where'll you have it, child? Bless my soul! where's
that girl!" he exclaimed, looking back at Mercy, who stood on the front
doorstep, vainly trying to hurry in to explain the strange scene to her
mother. Mrs. Carr was, as usual, knitting. She rose up suddenly, confused
at the strange apparitions before her, and let her knitting fall on the
floor. The ball rolled swiftly towards Mr. Wheeler, and tangled the yarn
around his feet. He jumped up and down, all the while brandishing his
cane, and muttering, "Pshaw! pshaw! Damn knitting! Always did hate the
sight on't." But, kicking out to the right and the left vigorously, he
soon snapped the yarn, and stood free.

"Mother! mother!" called Mercy from behind, "this is the gentleman I told
you of,--Mr. Wheeler. He has very kindly given us this beautiful clock,
almost exactly like ours."

The sound of Mercy's voice reassured the poor bewildered old woman, and,
dropping her old-fashioned courtesy, she said timidly,--

"Pleased to see you, sir. Pray take a chair."

"Chair? chair? No, no! Never do sit down in houses,--never, never.
Where'll you have it, mum? Where'll you have it?

"Don't you dare put that down! Wait till you are told to, you lazy
rascals!" he exclaimed, lifting his cane, and threatening the men who were
on the point of setting the clock down, very naturally thinking they might
be permitted at last to rest a moment.

"Oh, Mr. Wheeler!" said Mercy, "let them put it down anywhere, please, for
the present. I never can tell at first where I want a thing to stand. I
shall have to try it in different corners before I am sure," and Mercy
took out her portemonnaie, and came forward to pay the bearers. As she
opened it, the old man stepped nearer to her, and peered curiously into
her hand. The money in the portemonnaie was neatly folded and assorted,
each kind by itself, in a separate compartment. The old man nodded, and
muttered to himself, "Fine young woman! fine young woman! Business,
business!--Who taught you, child, to sort your money that way?" he
suddenly asked.

"Why, no one taught me," replied Mercy. "I found that it saved time not to
have to fumble all through a portemonnaie for a ten-cent piece. It looks
neater, too, than to have it all in a crumpled mass," she added, smiling
and looking up in the old man's face. "I don't like disorder. Such a place
as your store-room would drive me crazy."

The old man was not listening. He was looking about the room with a
dissatisfied expression of countenance. In a few moments, he said
abruptly,--

"'S this all the furniture you've got?"

Mrs. Carr colored, and looked appealingly at Mercy; but Mercy laughed,
and replied as she would have answered her own grandfather,--

"Oh, no, not all we have! We have five more rooms furnished. It is all we
have for this room, however. These rooms are all larger than our rooms
were at home, and so the things look scanty. But I shall get more by
degrees."

"Hm! hm! Want any thing out o' my lumber-room? Have it's well's not.
Things no good to anybody."

"Oh, no, thank you, Mr. Wheeler. We have all we need. I could not think of
taking any thing more from you. We are under great obligation to you now
for the clock," said Mercy; and Mrs. Carr bewilderedly ejaculated, "Oh,
no, sir,--no, sir! There isn't any call for you to give us any thin'."

While they were speaking, the old man was rapidly going out of the house;
with quick, short steps like a child, and tapping his cane on the floor at
every step. In the doorway he halted a moment, and, without looking back,
said, "Well, well, let me know, if you do want any thing. Have it's well's
not," and he was gone.

"Oh, Mercy! he's crazy, sure's you're alive. You'll get took up for hevin'
this clock. Whatever made you take it, child?" exclaimed Mrs. Carr,
walking round and round the clock, and dusting it here and there with a
corner of her apron.

"Well, mother, I am sure I don't know. I couldn't seem to help it: he was
so determined, and the clock was such a beauty. I don't think he is crazy.
I think he is simply very queer; and he is ever, ever so rich. The clock
isn't really of any value to him; that is, he'd never do any thing with
it. He has a huge room half as big as this house, just crammed with
things, all sorts of things, that he took for debts; and this clock was
among them. I think it gave the old man a real pleasure to have me take
it; so that is one more reason for doing it."

"Well, you know best, Mercy," said Mrs. Carr, a little sadly; "but I can't
quite see it's you do. It seems to me amazin' like a charity. I wish he
hadn't never found you out."

"I don't, mother. I believe he is going to be my best crony here," said
Mercy, laughing; "and I'm sure nobody can say any thing ill-natured about
such a crony as he would be. He must be seventy years old, at least."

When Stephen came home that night, he received from his mother a most
graphic account of the arrival of the clock. She had watched the
procession from her window, and had heard the confused sounds of talking
and moving of furniture in the house afterward. Marty also had supplied
some details, she having been surreptitiously overlooking the whole
affair.

"I must say," remarked Mrs. White, "that it looks very queer. Where did
she pick up Old Man Wheeler? Who ever heard of his being seen walking with
a woman before? Even as a young man, he never would have any thing to do
with them; and it was always a marvel how he got married. I used to know
him very well."

"But, mother," urged Stephen, "for all we know, they may be relations or
old friends of his. You forget that we know literally nothing about these
people. So far from being queer, it may be the most natural thing in the
world that he should be helping her fit up her house."

But in his heart Stephen thought, as his mother did, that it was very
queer.




Chapter VI.



The beautiful white New England winter had set in. As far as the eye could
reach, nothing but white could be seen. The boundary, lines of stone walls
and fences were gone, or were indicated only by raised and rounded lines
of the same soft white. On one side of these were faintly pencilled dark
shadows in the morning and in the afternoon; but at high noon the fields
were as unbroken a white as ever Arctic explorer saw, and the roads shone
in the sun like white satin ribbons flung out in all directions. The
groves of maple and hickory and beech were bare. Their delicate gray tints
spread in masses over the hillsides like a transparent, gray veil, through
which every outline of the hills was clear, but softened. The massive
pines and spruces looked almost black against the white of the snow, and
the whole landscape was at once shining and sombre; an effect which is
peculiar to the New England winter in the hill country, and is always
either very depressing or very stimulating to the soul. Dreamy and inert
and phlegmatic people shiver and huddle, see only the sombreness, and find
the winter one long imprisonment in the dark. But to a joyous, brisk,
sanguine soul, the clear, crisp, cold air is like wine; and the whiteness
and sparkle and shine of the snow are like martial music, a constant
excitement and spell.

Mercy's soul thrilled within her with new delight and impulse each day.
The winter had always oppressed her before. On the seashore, winter means
raw cold, a pale, gray, angry ocean, fierce winds, and scanty wet snows.
This brilliant, frosty air, so still and dry that it never seemed cold,
this luxuriance of snow piled soft and high as if it meant shelter and
warmth,--as indeed it does,--were very wonderful to Mercy. She would have
liked to be out of doors all day long: it seemed to her a fairer than
summer-time. She followed the partially broken trails of the wood-cutters
far into the depths of the forests, and found there on sunny days, in
sheltered spots, where the feet of the men and horses and the runners of
the heavy sledges had worn away the snow, green mosses and glossy ferns
and shining clumps of the hepatica. It was a startling sight on a December
day, when the snow was lying many inches deep, to come suddenly on Mercy
walking in the middle of the road, her hands filled with green ferns and
mosses and vines. There were three different species of ground-pine in
these woods, and hepatica and pyrola and wintergreen, and thickets of
laurel. What wealth for a lover of wild, out-door things! Each day Mercy
bore home new treasures, until the house was almost as green and fragrant
as a summer wood. Day after day, Mrs. White, from her point of observation
at her window, watched the lithe young figure coming down the road,
bearing her sheaves of boughs and vines, sometimes on her shoulder, as
lightly and gracefully as a peasant girl of Italy might bear her poised
basket of grapes. Gradually a deep wonder took possession of the lonely
old woman's soul.

"Whatever can she do with all that green stuff?" she thought. "She's
carried in enough to trim the 'Piscopal church twice over."

At last she shared her perplexity with Marty.

"Marty," said she one day, "have you ever seen Mrs. Philbrick come into
the house without somethin' green in her hands? What do you suppose she's
goin' to do with it all?"

"Lord knows," answered Marty. "I've been a speckkerlatin' about that very
thing myself. They can't be a brewin' beer this time o' year; but I see
her yesterday with her hands full o' pyroly."

"I wish you would make an errand in there, Marty," said Mrs. White, "and
see if you can any way find out what it's all for. She's carried in pretty
near a grove of pine-trees, I should say."

The willing Marty went, and returned with a most surprising tale. Every
room was wreathed with green vines. There were evergreen trees in boxes;
the window-seats were filled with pots of green things growing; waving
masses of ferns hung down from brackets on the walls.

"I jest stood like a dumb critter the minnit I got in," said Marty. "I
didn't know whether I wuz in the house or out in the woods, the whole
place smelled o' hemlock so, an' looked so kind o' sunny and shady all ter
oncet.--I jest wished Steve could see it. He'd go wild," added the
unconsciously injudicious Marty.

Mrs. White's face darkened instantly.

"It must be very unwholesome to have rooms made so dark and damp," she
said. "I should think people might have more sense."

"Oh, it wa'n't dark a mite!" interrupted Marty, eagerly. "There wuz a
blazin' fire on the hearth in the settin'-room, an' the sun a-streamin'
into both the south winders. It made shadders on the floor, jest as it
does in the woods. I'd jest ha' liked to set down there a spell, and not
do nothin' but watch 'em."

At this moment, a low knock at the door interrupted the conversation.
Marty opened the door, and there stood Mercy herself, holding in her hands
some wreaths of laurel and pine, and a large earthen dish with ferns
growing in it. It was the day before Christmas; and Mercy had been busy
all day, putting up the Christmas decorations in her rooms. As she hung
cross after cross, and wreath after wreath, she thought of the poor,
lonely, and peevish old woman she had seen there weeks before, and
wondered if she would have any Christmas evergreens to brighten her room.

"I don't suppose a man would ever think of such things," thought Mercy.
"I've a great mind to carry her in some. I'll never muster courage to go
in there, unless I go to carry her something; and I may as well do it
first as last. Perhaps she doesn't care any thing about things from the
woods; but I think they may do her good without her knowing it. Besides, I
promised to go." It was now ten days since Stephen, meeting Mercy in the
town one day, had stopped, and said to her, in a half-sad tone which had
touched her,--

"Do you really never mean to come again to see my mother? I do assure you
it would be a great kindness."

His tone conveyed a great deal,--his tone and his eyes. They said as
plainly as words could have said,--

"I know that my mother treated you abominably, I know she is very
disagreeable; but, after all, she is helpless and alone, and if you could
only once get her to like you, and would come and see her now and then, it
would be a kindness to her, and a great help to me; and I do yearn to know
you better; and I never can, unless you will begin the acquaintance by
being on good terms with my mother."

All this Stephen's voice and eyes had said to Mercy's eyes and heart,
while his lips, pronounced the few commonplace words which were addressed
to her ear. All this Mercy was revolving in her thoughts, as she deftly
and with almost a magic touch laid the soft mosses in the earthen dish,
and planted them thick with ferns and hepatica and partridge-berry vines
and wintergreen. But all she was conscious of saying to herself was, "Mr.
White asked me to go; and it really is not civil not to do it, and I may
as well have it over with."

When Mrs. White's eyes first fell on Mercy in the doorway, they rested on
her with the same cold gaze which had so repelled her on their first
interview. But no sooner did she see the dish of mosses than her face
lighted up, and exclaiming, "Oh, where did you get those partridge-berry
vines?" she involuntarily stretched out her hands. The ice was broken.
Mercy felt at home at once, and at once conceived a true sentiment of
pity for Mrs. White, which never wholly died out of her heart. Kneeling on
the floor by her bed, she said eagerly,--

"I am so glad you like them, Mrs. White. Let me hold them down low, where
you can look at them."

Some subtle spell must have linked itself in Mrs. White's brain with the
dainty red partridge berries. Her eyes filled with tears, as she lifted
the vines gently in her fingers, and looked at them. Mercy watched her
with great surprise; but with the quick instinct of a poet's temperament
she thought, "She hasn't seen them very likely since she was a little
girl."

"Did you use to like them when you were a child, Mrs. White?" she asked.

"I used to pick them when I was young," replied Mrs. White,
dreamily,--"when I was young: not when I was a child, though. May I have
one of them to keep?" she asked presently, still holding an end of one of
the vines in her fingers.

"Oh, I brought them in for you, for Christmas," exclaimed Mercy. "They are
all for you."

Mrs. White was genuinely astonished. No one had ever done this kind of
thing for her before. Stephen always gave her on her birthday and on
Christmas a dutiful and somewhat appropriate gift, though very sorely he
was often puzzled to select a thing which should not jar either on his own
taste or his mother's sense of utility. But a gift of this kind, a simple
little tribute to her supposed womanly love of the beautiful, a thoughtful
arrangement to give her something pleasant to look upon for a time, no
one had ever before made. It gave her an emotion of real gratitude, such
as she had seldom felt.

"You are very kind, indeed,--very," she said with emphasis, and in a
gentler tone than Mercy had before heard from her lips. "I shall have a
great deal of comfort out of it."

Then Mercy set the dish on a small table, and hung up the wreaths in the
windows. As she moved about the room lightly, now and then speaking in her
gay, light-hearted voice, Mrs. White thought to herself,--

"Steve was right. She is a wonderful cheery body." And, long after Mercy
had gone, she continued to think happily of the pleasant incident of the
fresh bright face and the sweet voice. For the time being, her jealous
distrust of the possible effect of these upon her son slumbered.

When Stephen entered his mother's room that night, his heart gave a sudden
bound at the sight of the green wreaths and the dish of ferns. He saw them
on fhe first instant after opening the door; he knew in the same instant
that the hands of Mercy Philbrick must have placed them there; but, also,
in that same brief instant came to him an involuntary impulse to pretend
that he did not observe them; to wait till his mother should have spoken
of them first, that he might know whether she were pleased or not by the
gift. So infinitely small are the first beginnings of the course of deceit
into which tyranny always drives its victim. It could not be called a
deceit, the simple forbearing to speak of a new object which one observed
in a room. No; but the motive made it a sure seed of a deceit: for when
Mrs. White said, "Why, Stephen, you haven't noticed the greens! Look in
the windows!" his exclamation of apparent surprise, "Why, how lovely!
Where did they come from?" was a lie. It did not seem so, however, to
Stephen. It seemed to him simply a politic suppression of a truth, to save
his mother's feelings, to avoid a possibility of a war of words. Mercy
Philbrick, under the same circumstances, would have replied,--

"Oh, yes, I saw them as soon as I came in. I was waiting for you to tell
me about them," and even then would have been tortured by her conscience,
because she did not say why she was waiting.

While his mother was telling him of Mercy's call, and of the report Marty
had brought back of the decorations of the rooms, Stephen stood with his
face bent over the ferns, apparently absorbed in studying each leaf
minutely; then he walked to the windows and examined the wreaths. He felt
himself so suddenly gladdened by these tokens of Mercy's presence, and by
his mother's evident change of feeling towards her, that he feared his
face would betray too much pleasure; he feared to speak, lest his voice
should do the same thing. He was forced to make a great effort to speak in
a judiciously indifferent tone, as he said,--

"Indeed, they are very pretty. I never saw mosses so beautifully arranged;
and it was so thoughtful of her to bring them in for you for Christmas
Eve. I wish we had something to send in to them, don't you?"

"Well, I've been thinking," said his mother, "that we might ask them to
come in and take dinner with us to-morrow. Marty's made some capital
mince-pies, and is going to roast a turkey. I don't believe they'll be
goin' to have any thing better, do you, Stephen?"

Stephen walked very suddenly to the fire, and made a feint of rearranging
it, that he might turn his face entirely away from his mother's sight. He
was almost dumb with astonishment. A certain fear mingled with it. What
meant this sudden change? Did it portend good or evil? It seemed too
sudden, too inexplicable, to be genuine. Stephen had yet to learn the
magic power which Mercy Philbrick had to compel the liking even of people
who did not choose to like her.

"Why, yes, mother," he said, "that would be very nice. It is a long time
since we had anybody to Christmas dinner."

"Well, suppose you run in after tea and ask them," replied Mrs. White, in
the friendliest of tones.

"Yes, I'll go," answered Stephen, feeling as if he were a man talking in a
dream. "I have been meaning to go in ever since they came."

After tea, Stephen sat counting the minutes till he should go. To all
appearances, he was buried in his newspaper, occasionally reading a
paragraph aloud to his mother. He thought it better that she should remind
him of his intention to go; that the call should be purely at her
suggestion. The patience and silence with which he sat waiting for her to
remember and speak of it were the very essence of deceit again,--twice in
this one hour an acted lie, of which his dulled conscience took no note
or heed. Fine and impalpable as the meshes of the spider's-web are the
bands and bonds of a habit of concealment; swift-growing, too, and in
ever-widening circles, like the same glittering net woven for death.

At last Mrs. White said, "Steve, I think it's getting near nine o'clock.
You'd better go in next door before it's any later."

Stephen pulled out his watch. By his own sensations, he would have said
that it must be midnight.

"Yes, it is half-past eight. I suppose I had better go now," he said, and
bade his mother good-night.

He went out into the night with a sense of ecstasy of relief and joy. He
was bewildered at himself. How this strong sentiment towards Mercy
Philbrick had taken possession of him he could not tell. He walked up and
down in the snowy path in front of the house for some minutes, questioning
himself, sounding with a delicious dread the depths of this strange sea in
which he suddenly found himself drifting. He went back to the day when
Harley Allen's letter first told him of the two women who might become his
tenants. He felt then a presentiment that a new element was to be
introduced into his life; a vague, prophetic sense of some change at hand.
Then came the first interview, and his sudden disappointment, which he now
blushed to recollect. It seemed to him as if some magician must have laid
a spell upon his eyes, that he did not see even in that darkness how
lovely a face Mercy had, did not feel even through all the embarrassment
and strangeness the fascination of her personal presence. Then he dwelt
lingeringly on the picture, which had never faded from his brain, of his
next sight of her, as she sat on the old stone wall, with the gay
maple-leaves and blackberry-vines in her lap. From that day to the
present, he had seen her only a half dozen times, and only for a chance
greeting as they had passed each other in the street; but it seemed to him
that she had never been really absent from him, so conscious was he of her
all the time. So absorbed was he in these thoughts that a half-hour was
gone before he realized it, and the village bells were ringing for nine o'
clock when he knocked on the door of the wing.

Mrs. Carr had rolled up her knitting, and was just on the point of going
upstairs. Their little maid of all work had already gone to bed, when
Stephen's loud knock startled them all.

"Gracious alive! Mercy, what's that?" exclaimed Mrs. Carr, all sorts of
formless terrors springing upon her at once. Mercy herself was astonished,
and ran hastily to open the door. When she saw Stephen standing there, her
astonishment was increased, and she looked it so undisguisedly that he
said,--

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Philbrick. I know it is late, but my mother sent
me in with a message." ...

"Pray come in, Mr. White," interrupted Mercy. "It is not really late, only
we keep such absurdly early hours, and are so quiet, as we know nobody
here, that a knock at the door in the evening makes us all jump. Pray
come in," and she threw open the door into the sitting-room, where the
lamps had already been put out, and the light of a blazing hickory log
made long flickering shadows on the crimson carpet. In this dancing light,
the room looked still more like a grove than it had to Marty at high noon.
Stephen's eyes fastened hungrily on the sight.

"Your room is almost too much to resist," he said; "but I will not come in
now. I did not know it was so late. My mother wishes to know if you and
your mother will not come in and eat a Christmas dinner with us to-morrow.
We live in the plainest way, and cannot entertain in the ordinary
acceptation of the term. We only ask you to our ordinary home-dinner," he
added, with a sudden sense of the incongruity between the atmosphere of
refined elegance which pervaded Mercy's simple, little room, and the
expression which all his efforts had never been able to banish from his
mother's parlor.

"Oh thank you, Mr. White. You are very good. I think we should like to
come very much. Mother and I were just saying that it would be the first
Christmas dinner we ever ate alone. But you must come in, Mr. White,--I
insist upon it," replied Mercy, stretching out one hand towards him, as if
to draw him in.

Stephen went. On the threshold of the sitting-room he paused and stood
silent for some minutes. Mercy was relighting the lamps.

"Oh, Mrs. Philbrick!" he exclaimed, "won't you please not light the lamps.
This firelight on these evergreens is the loveliest thing I ever saw."

Too unconventional to think of any reasons why she should not sit with
Stephen White alone by firelight in her own house, Mercy blew out the lamp
she had lighted, and drawing a chair close up to the hearth sat down, and
clasping her hands in her lap looked eagerly into Stephen's face, and said
as simply as a child,--

"I like firelight, too, a great deal better than any other light. Some
evenings we do not light the lamps at all. Mother can knit just as well
without much light, and I can think better."

Mercy was sitting in a chair so low that, to look at Stephen, she had to
lift her face. It was the position in which her face was sweetest. Some
lines, which were a shade too strong and positive when her face fully
confronted you, disappeared entirely when it was thrown back and her eyes
were lifted. It was then as ingenuous and tender and trustful a face as if
she had been but eight instead of eighteen.

Stephen forgot himself, forgot the fact that Mercy was comparatively a
stranger, forgot every thing, except the one intense consciousness of this
sweet woman-face looking up into his. Bending towards her, he said
suddenly,--

"Mrs. Philbrick, your face is the very loveliest face I have ever seen in
my life. Do not be angry with me. Oh, do not!" he continued, seeing the
color deepen in Mercy's cheeks, and a stern expression gathering in her
eyes, as she looked steadily at him with unutterable surprise. "Do not be
angry with me. I could not help saying it; but I do not say it as men
generally say such things. I am not like other men: I have lived alone
all my life with my mother. You need not mind my saying your face is
lovely, any more than my saying that the ferns on the walls are lovely."

If Stephen had known Mercy from her childhood, he could not have framed
his words more wisely. Every fibre of her artistic nature recognized the
possibility of a subtle truth in what he said, and his calm, dreamy tone
and look heightened this impression. Moreover, as Stephen's soul had been
during all the past four weeks slowly growing into the feeling which made
it inevitable that he should say these words on first looking closely and
intimately into Mercy's face, so had her soul been slowly growing into the
feeling which made it seem not really foreign or unnatural to her that he
should say them.

She answered him with hesitating syllables, quite unlike her usual fluent
speech.

"I think you must mean what you say, Mr. White; and you do not say it as
other men have said it. But will you please to remember not to say it
again? We cannot be friends, if you do."

"Never again, Mrs. Philbrick?" he said,--he could almost have said
"Mercy,"--and looked at her with a gaze of whose intentness he was hardly
aware.

Mercy felt a strange terror of this man; a few minutes ago a stranger, now
already asking at her hands she hardly knew what, and compelling her in
spite of herself. But she replied very quietly, with a slight smile,--

"Never, Mr. White. Now talk of something else, please. Your mother seemed
very much pleased with the ferns I carried her to-day. Did she love the
woods, when she was well?"

"I do not know. I never heard her say," answered Stephen, absently, still
gazing into Mercy's face.

"But you would have known, surely, if she had cared for them," said Mercy,
laughing; for she perceived that Stephen had spoken at random.

"Oh, yes, certainly,--certainly. I should have known," said Stephen, still
with a preoccupied air, and rising to go. "I thank you for letting me come
into this beautiful room with you. I shall always think of your face
framed in evergreens, and with flickering firelight on it."

"You are not going away, are you, Mr. White?" asked Mercy, mischievously.

"Oh, no, certainly not. I never go away. How could I go away? Why did you
ask?"

"Oh," laughed Mercy, "because you spoke as if you never expected to see my
face after to-night. That's all."

Stephen smiled. "I am afraid I seem a very absent-minded person," he said.
"I did not mean that at all. I hope to see you very often, if I may.
Good-night."

"Good-night, Mr. White. We shall be very glad to see you as often as you
like to come. You may be sure of that; but you must come earlier, or you
will find us all asleep. Good-night."

Stephen spent another half-hour pacing up and down in the snowy path in
front of the house. He did not wish to go in until his mother was asleep.
Very well he knew that it would be better that she did not see his face
that night. When he went in, the house was dark and still. As he passed
his mother's door, she called, "Steve!"

"All right, mother. They'll come," he replied, and ran swiftly up to his
own room.

During this half-hour, Mercy had been sitting in her low chair by the
fire, looking steadily into the leaping blaze, and communing very sternly
with her own heart on the subject of Stephen White. Her pitiless honesty
of nature was just as inexorable in its dealing with her own soul as with
others; she never paltered with, nor evaded an accusation of, her
consciousness. At this moment, she was indignantly admitting to herself
that her conduct and her feeling towards Stephen were both deserving of
condemnation. But, when she asked herself for their reason, no answer came
framed in words, no explanation suggested itself, only Stephen's face rose
up before her, vivid, pleading, as he had looked when he said, "Never
again, Mrs. Philbrick?" and as she looked again into the dark blue eyes,
and heard the low tones over again, she sank into a deeper and deeper
reverie, from which gradually all self-accusation, all perplexity, faded
away, leaving behind them only a vague happiness, a dreamy sense of joy.
If lovers could look back on the first quickening of love in their souls,
how precious would be the memories; but the unawakened heart never knows
the precise instant of the quickening. It is wrapped in a half-conscious
wonder and anticipation; and, by the time the full revelation comes, the
impress of the first moments has been wiped out by intenser experiences.
How many lovers have longed to trace the sweet stream back to its very
source, to the hidden spring which no man saw, but have lost themselves
presently in the broad greenness, undisturbed and fertile, through which,
like a hidden stream through an emerald meadow, the love had been flowing
undiscovered.

Months after, when Mercy's thoughts reverted to this evening, all she
could recollect was that on the night of Stephen's first call she had been
much puzzled by his manner and his words, had thought it very strange that
he should seem to care-so much for her, and perhaps still more strange
that she herself found it not unpleasing that he did so. Stephen's
reminiscences were at once more distinct and more indistinct,--more
distinct of his emotions, more indistinct of the incidents. He could not
recollect one word which had been said: only his own vivid consciousness
of Mercy's beauty; her face "framed in evergreens, with the firelight
flickering on it," as he had told her he should always think of it.

Christmas morning came, clear, cold, shining bright. A slight thaw the day
before had left every bough and twig and pine-needle covered with a
moisture that had frozen in the night into glittering crystal sheaths,
which flashed like millions of prisms in the sun. The beauty of the scene
was almost solemn. The air was so frosty cold that even the noon sun did
not melt these ice-sheaths; and, under the flood of the full mid-day
light, the whole landscape seemed one blaze of jewels. When Mercy and her
mother entered Mrs. White's room, half an hour before the dinner-hour,
they found her sitting with the curtains drawn, because the light had hurt
her eyes.

"Oh, Mrs. White!" exclaimed Mercy. "It is cruel you should not see this
glorious spectacle! If you had the window open, the light would not hurt
your eyes. It is the glare of it coming through the glass. Let us wrap you
up, and draw you close to the window, and open it wide, so that you can
see the colors for a few minutes. It is just like fairy-land."

Mrs. White looked bewildered. Such a plan as this of getting out-door air
she had never thought of.

"Won't it make the room too cold?" she said.

"Oh, no, no!" cried Mercy; "and no matter if it does. We can soon warm it
up again. Please let me ask Marty to come?" And, hardly waiting for
permission, she ran to call Marty. Wrapped up in blankets, Mrs. White was
then drawn in her bed close to the open window, and lay there with a look
of almost perplexed delight on her face. When Stephen came in, Mercy stood
behind her, a fleecy white cloud thrown over her head, pointing out
eagerly every point of beauty in the view. A high bush of sweet-brier,
with long, slender, curving branches, grew just in front of the window.
Many of the cup-like seed-vessels still hung on the boughs: they were all
finely encrusted with frost. As the wind faintly stirred the branches,
every frost-globule flashed its full rainbow of color; the long sprays
looked like wands strung with tiny fairy beakers, inlaid with pearls and
diamonds. Mercy sprang to the window, took one of these sprays in her
fingers, and slowly waved it up and down in the sunlight.

"Oh, look at it against the blue sky!" she cried. "Isn't it enough to make
one cry just to see it?"

"Oh, how can mother help loving her?" thought Stephen. "She is the
sweetest woman that ever drew breath."

Mrs. White seemed indeed to have lost all her former distrust and
antagonism. She followed Mercy's movements with eyes not much less eager
and pleased than Stephen's. It was like a great burst of sunlight into a
dark place, the coming of this earnest, joyous, outspoken nature into the
old woman's narrow and monotonous and comparatively uncheered life. She
had never seen a person of Mercy's temperament. The clear, decided,
incisive manner commanded her respect, while the sunny gayety won her
liking. Stephen had gentle, placid sweetness and much love of the
beautiful; but his love of the beautiful was an indolent, and one might
almost say a-haughty, demand in his nature. Mercy's was a bounding and
delighted acceptance. She was cheery: he was only placid. She was full of
delight; he, only of satisfaction. In her, joy was of the spirit,
spiritual. Keen as were her senses, it was her soul which marshalled them
all. In him, though the soul's forces were not feeble, the senses foreran
them,--compelled them, sometimes conquered them. It would have been
impossible to put Mercy in any circumstances, in any situation, out of
which, or in spite of which, she would not find joy. But in Stephen
circumstance and place might as easily destroy as create happiness. His
enjoyment was as far inferior to Mercy's in genuineness and enduringness
as is the shallow lake to the quenchless spring. The waters of each may
leap and sparkle alike, to the eye, in the sunshine; but when drought has
fallen on the lake, and the place that knew it knows it no more, the
spring is full, free, and glad as ever.

Mrs. White's pleasure in Mercy's presence was short-lived. Long before
the simple dinner was over, she had relapsed into her old forbidding
manner, and into a silence which was more chilly than any words could have
been. The reason was manifest. She read in every glance of Stephen's eyes,
in every tone of his voice, the depth and the warmth of his feeling
towards Mercy. The jealous distrust which she had felt at first, and which
had slept for a brief time under the spell of Mercy's kindliness towards
herself, sprang into fiercer life than ever. Stephen and Mercy, in utter
unconsciousness of the change which was gradually taking place, talked and
laughed together in an evident gay delight, which made matters worse every
moment. A short and surly reply from Mrs. White to an innocent question of
Mrs. Carr's fell suddenly on Mercy's ear. Keenly alive to the smallest
slight to her mother, she turned quickly towards Mrs. White, and, to her
consternation, met the same steady, pitiless, aggressive look which she
had seen on her face in their first interview. Mercy's first emotion was
one of great indignation: her second was a quick flash of comprehension of
the whole thing. A great wave of rosy color swept over her face; and,
without knowing what she was doing, she looked appealingly at Stephen.
Already there was between them so subtle a bond that each understood the
other without words. Stephen knew all that Mercy thought in that instant,
and an answering flush mounted to his forehead. Mrs. White saw both these
flushes, and compressed her lips still more closely in a grimmer silence
than before. Poor, unsuspecting Mrs. Carr kept on and on with her
meaningless and childish remarks and inquiries; and Mercy and Stephen were
both very grateful for them. The dinner came to an untimely end; and
almost immediately Mercy, with a nervous and embarrassed air, totally
foreign to her, said to her mother,--

"We must go home now. I have letters to write."

Mrs. Carr was disappointed. She had anticipated a long afternoon of chatty
gossip with her neighbor; but she saw that Mercy had some strong reason
for hurrying home, and she acquiesced unhesitatingly.

Mrs. White did not urge them to remain. To all Mrs. White's faults it must
be confessed that she added the virtue of absolute sincerity.

"Good-afternoon, Mrs. Carr," and "Good-afternoon, Mrs. Philbrick," fell
from her lips in the same measured syllables and the same cold, unhuman
voice which had so startled Mercy once before.

"What a perfectly horrid old woman!" exclaimed Mercy, as soon as they had
crossed the threshold of their own door. "I'll never go near her again as
long as I live!"

"Why, Mercy Carr!" exclaimed her mother, "what do you mean? I don't think
so. She got very tired before dinner was over. I could see that, poor
thing! She's drefful weak, an' it stan's to reason she'd be kind o'
snappish sometimes."

Mercy opened her lips to reply, but changed her mind and said nothing.

"It's just as well for mother to keep on good terms with her, if she can,"
she thought. "Maybe it'll help divert a little of Mrs. White's temper from
him, poor fellow!"

Stephen had followed them to the door, saying little; but at the last
moment, when Mercy said "good-by," he had suddenly held out his hand, and,
clasping hers tightly, had looked at her sadly, with a world of regret and
appeal and affection and almost despair in the look.

"What a life he must lead of it!" thought Mercy. "Dear me! I should go
wild or else get very wicked. I believe I'd get very wicked. I wonder he
shuts himself up so with her. It is all nonsense: it only makes her more
and more selfish. How mean, how base of her, to be so jealous of his
talking with me! If she were his wife, it would be another thing. But he
doesn't belong to her body and soul, if she _is_ his mother. If ever I
know him well enough, I'll tell him so. It isn't manly in him to let her
tyrannize over him and everybody else that comes into the house. I never
saw any human being that made one so afraid, somehow. Her tone and look
are enough to freeze your blood."

While Mercy was buried in these indignant thoughts, Stephen and his
mother, only a few feet away, separated from her only by a wall, were
having a fierce and angry talk. No sooner had the door closed upon Mercy
than Mrs. White had said to Stephen,--

"Have you the slightest idea how much excitement you showed in conversing
with Mrs. Philbrick? I have never seen you look or speak in this way."

The flush had not yet died away on Stephen's face. At this attack, it grew
deeper still. He made no reply. Mrs. White continued,--

"I wish you could see your face. It is almost purple now."

"It is enough to make the blood mount to any man's face, mother, to be
accused so," replied Stephen, with a spirit unusual for him.

"I don't accuse you of any thing," she retorted. "I am only speaking of
what I observe. You needn't think you can deceive me about the least
thing, ever. Your face is a perfect tell-tale of your thoughts, always."

Poor Stephen groaned inwardly. Too well he knew his inability to control
his unfortunate face.

"Mother!" he exclaimed with almost vehemence of tone, "mother! do not
carry this thing too far. I do not in the least understand what you are
driving at about Mrs. Philbrick, nor why you show these capricious changes
of feeling towards her. I think you have treated her so to-day that she
will never darken your doors again. I never should, if I were in her
place."

"Very well, I hope she never will, if her presence is to produce such an
effect on you. It is enough to turn her head to see that she has such
power over a man like you. She is a very vain woman, anyway,--vain of her
power over people, I think."

Stephen could bear no more. With a half-smothered ejaculation of "O
mother!" he left the room.

And thus the old year went out and the new year came in for Mercy
Philbrick and Stephen White,--the old year in which they had been nothing,
and the new year in which they were to be every thing to each other.




Chapter VII.



The next morning, while Stephen was dressing, he slowly reviewed the
events of the previous day, and took several resolutions. If Mrs. White
could have had the faintest conception of what was passing in her son's
mind, while he sat opposite to her at breakfast, so unusually cheerful and
talkative, she would have been very unhappy. But she, too, had had a
season of reflection this morning, and was much absorbed in her own plans.
She heartily regretted having shown so much ill-feeling in regard to
Mercy; and she had resolved to atone for it in some way, if she could.
Above all, she had resolved, if possible, to banish from Stephen's mind
the idea that she was jealous of Mercy or hostile towards her. She had
common sense enough to see that to allow him to recognize this feeling on
her part was to drive him at once into a course of manoeuvring and
concealment. She flattered herself that it was with a wholly natural and
easy air that she began her plan of operations by remarking,--

"Mrs. Philbrick seems to be very fond of her mother, does she not,
Stephen?"

"Yes, very," answered Stephen, indifferently.

"Mrs. Carr is quite an old woman. She must have been old when Mrs.
Philbrick was born. I don't think Mrs. Philbrick can be more than twenty,
do you?"

"I am sure I don't know. I never thought anything about her age," replied
Stephen, still more indifferently. "I'm no judge of women's ages."

"Well, I'm sure she isn't more than twenty, if she is that," said Mrs.
White; "and she really is a very pretty woman, Steve. I'll grant you
that."

"Grant me that, mother?" laughed Stephen, lightly. "I never said she was
pretty, did I? The first time I saw her, I thought she was uncommonly
plain; but afterwards I saw that I had done her injustice. I don't think,
however, she would usually be thought pretty."

Mrs. White was much gratified by his careless tone and manner; so much so
that she went farther than she had intended, and said in an off-hand way,
"I'm real sorry, Steve, you thought I didn't treat her well yesterday. I
didn't mean to be rude, but you know it always does vex me to see a
woman's head turned by a man's taking a little notice of her; and I know
very well, Stephy, that women like you. It wouldn't take much to make Mrs.
Philbrick fancy you were in love with her."

Stephen also was gratified by his mother's apparent softening of mood, and
instinctively met her more than half way, replying,--

"I didn't mean to say that you were rude to her, mother; only you showed
so plainly that you didn't want them to stay. Perhaps she didn't notice
it, only thought you were tired. It isn't any great matter, any way. We'd
better keep on good terms with them, if they're to live under the same
roof with us, that's all."

"Oh, yes," replied Mrs. White. "Much better to be on neighborly terms. The
old mother is a childish old thing, though. She'd bore me to death, if she
came in often."

"Yes, indeed, she is a bore, sure enough," said Stephen; "but she's so
simple, and so much like a child you can't help pitying her."

They fenced very well, these two, with their respective secrets to keep;
but the man fenced best, his secret being the most momentous to shield
from discovery. When he shut the door, having bade his mother good by, he
fairly breathed hard with the sense of having come out of a conflict. One
of the resolutions he had taken was that he would wait for Mercy this
morning on a street he knew she must pass on her way to market. He did not
define to himself any motive for this act, except the simple longing to
see her face. He had not said to himself what he would do, or what words
he would speak, or even that he would speak at all; but one look at her
face he must have, and he had though to himself distinctly in making this
plan, "Here is one way in which I can see her every day, and my mother
never know any thing about it."

When Mrs. White saw Mercy set off for her usual morning walk, a half hour
or more after Stephen had left the house, she thought, as she had often
though before on similar occasions, "Well, she won't overtake Stephen
this time. I dare say she planned to." Light-hearted Mercy, meantime, was
walking on with her own swift, elastic tread, and thinking warmly and
shyly of the look with which Stephen had bade her good-by the day before.
She was walking, as was her habit, with her eyes cast down, and did not
observe that any one approached her, until she suddenly heard Stephen's
voice saying, "Good-morning, Mrs. Philbrick." It was the second time that
he had surprised her in a reverie of which he himself was the subject.
This time the surprise was a joyful one; and the quick flush of rosy color
which spread over her cheeks was a flush of gladness,--undisguised and
honest gladness.

"Why, Mr. White," she exclaimed, "I never thought of seeing you. I thought
you were always in your office at this time."

"I waited to see you this morning," replied Stephen, in a tone as simply
honest as her own. "I wanted to speak to you."

Mercy looked up inquiringly, but did not speak. Stephen smiled.

"Oh, not for any particular thing," he said: "only for the pleasure of
it."

Then Mercy smiled, and the two looked into each other's faces with a joy
which neither attempted to disguise. Stephen took Mercy's basket from her
arm; and they walked along in silence, not knowing that it was silence, so
full was it of sweet meanings to them in the simple fact that they were
walking by each other's side. The few words they did speak were of the
purposeless and irrelevant sort in which unacknowledged lovers do so
universally express themselves in their earlier moments alone together,--a
sort of speech more like birds chirping than like ordinary language. When
they parted at the door of Stephen's office, he said,--

"I think you always come to the village about this time in the morning, do
you not?"

"Yes, always," replied Mercy.

"Then, if you are willing, I would like sometimes to walk with you," said
Stephen.

"I like it very much, Mr. White," answered Mercy, eagerly. "I used to walk
a great deal with Mr. Allen, and I miss it sadly."

A jealous pang shot through Stephen's heart. He had been blind. This was
the reason Harley Allen had taken such interest in finding a home for Mrs.
Philbrick and her mother. He remembered now that he had thought at the
time some of the expressions in his friend's letter argued an unusual
interest in the young widow. Of course no man could know Mercy without
loving her. Stephen was wretched; but no trace of it showed on the serene
and smiling face with which he bade Mercy "Good-by," and ran up his
office-stairs three steps at a time.

All day Mercy went about her affairs with a new sense of impulse and
cheer. It was not a conscious anticipation of the morrow: she did not say
to herself "To-morrow morning I shall see him for half an hour." Love
knows the secret of true joy better than that. Love throws open wider
doors,--lifts a great veil from a measureless vista: all the rest of life
is transformed into one shining distance; every present moment is but a
round in a ladder whose top disappears in the skies, from which angels are
perpetually descending to the dreamer below.

The next morning Mercy saw Stephen leave the house even earlier than
usual. Her first thought was one of blank disappointment. "Why, I thought
he meant to walk down with me," she said to herself. Her second thought
was a perplexed instinct of the truth: "I wonder if he can be afraid to
have his mother see him with me?" At this thought, Mercy's face burned,
and she tried to banish it; but it would not be banished, and by the time
her morning duties were done, and she had set out on her walk, the matter
had become quite clear in her mind.

"I shall see him at the corner where he was yesterday," she said.

But no Stephen was there. Spite of herself, Mercy lingered and looked
back. She was grieved and she was vexed.

"Why did he say he wanted to walk with me, and then the very first morning
not come?" she said, as she walked slowly into the village.

It was a cloudy day, and the clouds seemed to harmonize with Mercy's mood.
She did her errands in a half-listless way; and more than one of the
tradespeople, who had come to know her voice and smile, wondered what had
gone wrong with the cheery young lady. All the way home she looked vainly
for Stephen at every cross-street. She fancied she heard his step behind
her; she fancied she saw his tall figure in the distance. After she
reached home and the expectation was over for that day, she took herself
angrily to task for her folly. She reminded herself that Stephen had said
"sometimes," not "always;" and that nothing could have been more unlikely
than that he should have joined her the very next day. Nevertheless, she
was full of uneasy wonder how soon he would come again; and, when the next
morning dawned clear and bright, her first thought as she sprang up was,--

"This is such a lovely day for a walk! He will surely come to-day."

Again she was disappointed. Stephen left the house at a very early hour,
and walked briskly away without looking back. Mercy forced herself to go
through her usual routine of morning work. She was systematic almost to a
fault in the arrangement of her time, and any interference with her hours
was usually a severe trial of her patience. But to-day it was only by a
great effort of her will that she refrained from setting out earlier than
usual for the village. She walked rapidly until she approached the street
where Stephen had joined her before. Then she slackened her pace, and
fixed her eyes on the street. No person was to be seen in it. She walked
slower and slower: she could not believe that he was not there. Then she
began to fear that she had come a little too early. She turned to retrace
her steps; but a sudden sense of shame withheld her, and she turned back
again almost immediately, and continued her course towards the village,
walking very slowly, and now and then halting and looking back. Still no
Stephen. Street after street she passed: no Stephen. A sort of indignant
grief swelled up in Mercy's bosom; she was indignant with herself, with
him, with circumstances, with everybody; she was unreasoning and
unreasonable; she longed so to see Stephen's face that she could not think
clearly of any thing else. And yet she was ashamed of this longing. All
these struggling emotions together were too much for her; tears came into
her eyes; then vexation at the tears made them come all the faster; and,
for the first time in her life, Mercy Philbrick pulled her veil over her
face to hide that she was crying. Almost in the very moment that she had
done this, she heard a quick step behind her, and Stephen's voice
calling,--

"Oh, Mrs. Philbrick! Mrs. Philbrick! do not walk so fast. I am trying to
overtake you."

Feeling as guilty as a child detected in some forbidden spot, Mercy stood
still, vainly hoping her black veil was thick enough to hide her red eyes;
vainly trying to regain her composure enough to speak in her natural
voice, and smile her usual smile. Vainly, indeed! What crape could blind a
lover's eyes, or what forced tone deceive a lover's ears?

At his first sight of her face, Stephen started; at the first sound of her
voice, he stood still, and exclaimed,--

"Mrs. Philbrick, you have been crying!" There was no gainsaying it, even
if Mercy had not been too honest to make the attempt. She looked up
mischievously at him, and tried to say lightly,--

"What then, Mr. White? Didn't you know all women cried?"

The voice was too tremulous. Stephen could not bear it. Forgetting that
they were on a public street, forgetting every thing but that Mercy was
crying, he exclaimed,--

"Mercy, what is it? Do let me help you! Can't I?"

She did not even observe that he called her "Mercy." It seemed only
natural. Without realizing the full meaning of her words, she said,--

"Oh, you have helped me now," and threw up her veil, showing a face where
smiles were already triumphant. Instinct told Stephen in the same second
what she had meant, and yet had not meant to say. He dropped her hand, and
said in a low voice,--

"Mercy, did you really have tears in your eyes because I did not come?
Bless you, darling! I don't dare to speak to you here. Oh, pray come down
this little by-street with me."

It was a narrow little lane behind the Brick Row into which Stephen and
Mercy turned. Although it was so near the centre of the town, it had never
been properly graded, but had been left like a wild bit of uneven field.
One side of it was walled by the Brick Row; on the other side were only a
few poverty-stricken houses, in which colored people lived. The snow lay
piled in drifts here all winter, and in spring it was an almost impassable
slough of mud. There was now no trodden path, only the track made by
sleighs in the middle of the lane. Into this strode Stephen, in his
excitement walking so fast that Mercy could hardly keep up with him. They
were too much absorbed in their own sensations and in each other to
realize the oddity of their appearance, floundering in the deep snow,
looking eagerly in each other's faces, and talking in a breathless and
disjointed way.

"Mercy," said Stephen, "I have been walking up and down waiting for you
ever since I came out; but a man whom I could not get away from stopped
me, and I had to stand still helpless and see you walk by the street, and
I was afraid I could not overtake you."

"Oh, was that it?" said Mercy, looking up timidly in his face. "I felt
sure you would be there this morning, because"--

"Because what?" said Stephen, gently.

"Because you said you would come sometimes, and I knew very well that that
need not have meant this particular morning nor any particular morning;
and that was what vexed me so, that I should have been silly and set my
heart on it. That was what made me cry, Mr. White, I was so vexed with
myself," stoutly asserted Mercy, beginning to feel braver and more like
herself.

Stephen looked her full in the face without speaking for a moment. Then,--

"May I call you Mercy?" he said.

"Yes," she replied.

"May I say to you exactly what I am thinking?"

"Yes," she replied again, a little more hesitatingly.

"Then, Mercy, this is what I want to say to you," said Stephen, earnestly.
"There is no reason why you and I should try to deceive each other or
ourselves. I care very, very much for you, and you care very much for me.
We have come very close to each other, and neither of our lives can ever
be the same again. What is in store for us in all this we cannot now see;
but it is certain we are very much to each other."

He spoke more and more slowly and earnestly; his eyes fixed on the distant
horizon instead of on Mercy's face. A deep sadness gradually gathered on
his countenance, and his last words were spoken more in the tone of one
who felt a new exaltation of suffering than of one who felt the new
ecstasy of a lover. Looking down into Mercy's face, with a tenderness
which made her very heart thrill, he said,--

"Tell me, Mercy, is it not so? Are we not very much to each other?"

The strange reticence of his tone, even more reticent than his words, had
affected Mercy inexplicably: it was as if a chill wind had suddenly blown
at noonday, and made her shiver in spite of full sunlight. Her tone was
almost as reticent and sad as his, as she said, without raising her
eyes,--

"I think it is true."

"Please look up at me, Mercy," said Stephen. "I want to feel sure that you
are not sorry I care so much for you."

"How could I be sorry?" exclaimed Mercy, lifting her eyes suddenly, and
looking into Stephen's face with all the fulness of affection of her
glowing nature. "I shall never be sorry."

"Bless you for saying that, dear!" said Stephen, solemnly,--"bless you.
You should never be sorry a moment in your life, if I could help it; and
now, dear, I must leave you," he said, looking uneasily about. "I ought
not to have brought you into this lane. If people were to see us walking
here, they would think it strange." And, as they reached the entrance of
the lane, his manner suddenly became most ceremonious; and, extending his
hand to assist her over a drift of snow, he said in tones unnecessarily
loud and formal, "Good-morning, Mrs. Philbrick. I am glad to have helped
you through these drifts. Good-morning," and was gone.

Mercy stood still, and looked after him for a moment with a blank sense of
bewilderment. His sudden change of tone and manner smote her like a blow.
She comprehended in a flash the subterfuge in it, and her soul recoiled
from it with incredulous pain. "Why should he be afraid to have people see
us together? What does it mean? What reason can he possibly have?" Scores
of questions like these crowded on her mind, and hurt her sorely. Her
conjecture even ran so wide as to suggest the possibility of his being
engaged to another woman,--some old and mistaken promise by which he was
hampered. Her direct and honest nature could conceive of nothing less than
this which could explain his conduct. Restlessly her imagination fastened
on this solution of the problem, and tortured her in vain efforts to
decide what would be right under such circumstances.

The day was a long, hard one for Mercy. The more she thought, conjectured,
remembered, and anticipated, the deeper grew her perplexity. All the joy
which she had at first felt in the consciousness that Stephen loved her
died away in the strain of these conflicting uncertainties: and it was a
grave and almost stern look with which she met him that night, when, with
an eager bearing, almost radiant, he entered her door.

He felt the change at once, and, stretching both his hands towards her,
exclaimed,--

"Mercy, my dear, new, sweet friend! are you not well to-night?"

"Oh, yes, thank you. I am very well," replied Mercy, in a tone very
gentle, but with a shade of reserve in it.

Stephen's face fell. The expression of patient endurance which was
habitual to it, and which Mercy knew so well, and found always so
irresistibly appealing, settled again on all his features. Without
speaking, he drew his chair close to the hearth, and looked steadfastly
into the fire. Some minutes passed in silence. Mercy felt the tears coming
again into her eyes. What was this intangible but inexorable thing which
stood between this man's soul and hers? She could not doubt that he loved
her; she knew that her whole soul went out towards him with a love of
which she had never before had even a conception. It seemed to her that
the words he had spoken and she had received had already wrought a bond
between them which nothing could hinder or harm. Why should they sit thus
silent by each other's side to-night, when so few hours ago they were full
of joy and gladness? Was it the future or the past which laid this seal on
Stephen's lips? Mercy was not wont to be helpless or inert. She saw
clearly, acted quickly always; but here she was powerless, because she was
in the dark. She could not even grope her way in this mystery. At last
Stephen spoke.

"Mercy," he said, "perhaps you are already sorry that I care so much for
you. You said yesterday you never would be."

"Oh, no, indeed! I am not," said Mercy. "I am very glad you care so much
for me."

"Perhaps you have discovered that you do not care so much for me as you
yesterday thought you did."

"Oh, no, no!" replied poor Mercy, in a low tone.

Again Stephen was silent for a long time. Then he said,--

"Ever since I can remember, I have longed for a perfect and absorbing
friendship. The peculiar relations of my life have prevented my even
hoping for it. My father's and my mother's friends never could be my
friends. I have lived the loneliest life a mortal man ever lived. Until I
saw you, Mercy, I had never even looked on the face of a woman whom it
seemed possible to me that any man could love. Perhaps, when I tell you
that, you can imagine what it was to me to look on the face of a woman
whom it seems to me no man could help loving. I suppose many men have
loved you, Mercy, and many more men will. I do not think any man has ever
felt for you, or ever will feel for you, as I feel. My love for you
includes every love the heart can know,--the love of father, brother,
friend, lover. Young as I am, you seem to me like my child, to be taken
care of; and you seem like my sister, to be trusted and loved; and like my
friend, to be leaned upon. You see what my life is. You see the burden
which I must carry, and which none can share. Do you think that the
friendship I can give you can be worth what it would ask? I feel withheld
and ashamed as I speak to you. I know how little I can do, how little I
can offer. To fetter you by a word would be base and selfish; but, oh,
Mercy, till life brings you something better than my love, let me love
you, if it is only till to-morrow!"

Mercy listened to each syllable Stephen spoke, as one in a wilderness,
flying for his life from pursuers, would listen to every sound which could
give the faintest indications which way safety might lie. If she had
listened dispassionately to such words, spoken to any other woman, her
native honesty of soul would have repelled them as unfair. But every
instinct of her nature except the one tender instinct of loving was
disarmed and blinded,--disarmed by her affection for Stephen, and blinded
by her profound sympathy for his suffering.

She fixed her eyes on him as intently as if she would read the very
thoughts of his heart.

"Do you understand me, Mercy?" he said.

"I think I do," she replied in a whisper.

"If you do not now, you will as time goes on," he continued. "I have not
a thought I am unwilling for you to know; but there are thoughts which it
would be wrong for me to put into words. I stand where I stand; and no
mortal can help me, except you. You can help me infinitely. Already the
joy of seeing you, hearing you, knowing that you are near, makes all my
life seem changed. It is not very much for you to give me, Mercy, after
all, out of the illimitable riches of your beauty, your brightness, your
spirit, your strength,--just a few words, just a few smiles, just a little
love,--for the few days, or it may be years, that fate sets us by each
other's side? And you, too, need a friend, Mercy. Your duty to another has
brought you where you are singularly alone, for the time being, just as my
duty to another has placed me where I must be singularly alone. Is it not
a strange chance which has thus brought us together?"

"I do not believe any thing is chance," murmured Mercy. "I must have been
sent here for something."

"I believe you were, dear," said Stephen, "sent here for my salvation. I
was thinking last night that, no matter if my life should end without my
ever knowing what other men call happiness, if I must live lonely and
alone to the end, I should still have the memory of you,--of your face,
of your hand, and the voice in which you said you cared for me. O Mercy,
Mercy! you have not the least conception of what you are to me!" And
Stephen stretched out both his arms to her, with unspeakable love in the
gesture.

So swiftly that he had not the least warning of her intention, Mercy
threw herself into them, and laid her head on his shoulder, sobbing. Shame
filled her soul, and burned in her cheeks, when Stephen, lifting her as he
would a child, and kissing her forehead gently, placed her again in her
chair, and said,--

"My darling, I cannot let you do that. I will never ask from you any thing
that you can by any possibility come to regret at some future time. I
ought perhaps to be unselfish enough not to ask from you any thing at all.
I did not mean to; but I could not help it, and it is too late now."

"Yes, it is too late now," said Mercy,--"too late now." And she buried her
face in her hands.

"Mercy," exclaimed Stephen, in a voice of anguish, "you will break my
heart: you will make me wish myself dead, if you show such suffering as
this. I thought that you, too, could find joy, and perhaps help, in my
love, as I could in yours. If it is to give you pain and not happiness, it
were better for you never to see me again. I will never voluntarily look
on your face after to-night, if you wish it,--if you would be happier so."

"Oh, no, no!" cried Mercy. Then, overwhelmed with the sudden realization
of the pain she was giving to a man whom she so loved that at that moment
she would have died to shield him from pain, she lifted her face, shook
back the hair from her forehead, and, looking bravely into his eyes,
repeated,--

"No, no! I am very selfish to feel like this. I do understand you. I
understand it all; and I will help you, and comfort you all I can. And I
do love you very dearly," she added in a lower voice, with a tone of such
incomparable sweetness that it took almost superhuman control on Stephen's
part to refrain from clasping her to his heart. But he did not betray the
impulse, even by a gesture. Looking at her with an expression of great
thankfulness, he said,--

"I believe that peace will come to us, Mercy. I believe I can do something
to make you happy. To know that I love you as I do will be a great deal to
you, I think." He paused.

"Yes," answered Mercy, "a great deal." He went on,--

"And to know that you are perpetually helping and cheering me will be
still more to you, I think. We shall know some joys, Mercy, which joyous
lovers never know. Happy people do not need each other as sad people do. O
Mercy, do try and remember all the time that you are the one bright thing
in my life,--in my whole life."

"I will, Stephen, I will," said Mercy, resolutely, her whole face glowing
with the new purposes forming in her heart. It was marvellous how clear
the relation between herself and Stephen began to seem to her. It was
rather by her magnetic consciousness of all that he was thinking and
feeling than by the literal acceptance of any thing or all things which he
said. She seemed to herself to be already one with him in all his trials,
burdens, perplexities; in his renunciation; in his self-sacrifice; in his
loyalty of reticence; in his humility of uncomplainingness.

When she bade him "good-night," her face was not only serene: it was
serene with a certain exaltation added, as the face of one who had entered
into a great steadfastness of joy. Stephen wondered greatly at this
transition from the excitement and grief she had at first shown. He had
yet to learn what wellsprings of strength lie in the poetic temperament.

As he stood lingering on the threshold, finding it almost impossible to
turn away while the sweet face held him by the honest gaze of the loving
eyes, he said,

"There will be many times, dear, when things will have to be very hard,
when I shall not be able to do as you would like to have me, when you may
even be pained by my conduct. Shall you trust me through it all?"

"I shall trust you till the day of my death," said Mercy, impetuously.
"One can't take trust back. It isn't a gift: it is a necessity."

Stephen smiled,--a smile of sorrow rather than gladness.

"But if you thought me other than you had believed?" he said.

"I could never think you other than you are," replied Mercy, proudly. "It
is not that I 'believe' you. I know you. I shall trust you to the day of
my death."

Perhaps nothing could illustrate better the difference between Mercy
Philbrick's nature and Stephen White's, between her love for him and his
for her, than the fact that, after this conversation, she lay awake far
into the early hours of the morning, living over every word that he had
spoken, looking resolutely and even joyously into the strange future which
was opening before her, and scanning with loving intentness every chance
that it could possibly hold for her ministrations to him. He, on the other
hand, laid his head on his pillow with a sense of dreamy happiness, and
sank at once into sleep, murmuring,--

"The darling! how she does love me! She shall never regret it,--never. We
can have a great deal of happiness together as it is; and if the time ever
should come," ...

Here his thoughts halted, and refused to be clothed in explicit phrase.
Never once had Stephen White permitted himself to think in words, even in
his most secret meditations, "When my mother dies, I shall be free." His
fine fastidiousness would shrink from it, as from the particular kind of
brutality and bad taste involved in a murder. If the whole truth could
have been known of Stephen's feeling about all crimes and sins, it would
have been found to be far more a matter of taste than of principle, of
instinct than of conviction.

Surely never in this world did love link together two souls more
diametrically opposite than Mercy Philbrick's and Stephen White's. It
needed no long study or especial insight into character to know which of
the two would receive the more and suffer the less, in the abnormal and
unfortunate relation on which they had entered. But no presentiment warned
Mercy of what lay before her. She was like a traveller going into a
country whose language he has never heard, and whose currency he does not
understand. However eloquent he may be in his own land, he is dumb and
helpless here; and of the fortune with which he was rich at home he is
robbed at every turn by false exchanges which impose on his ignorance.
Poor Mercy! Vaguely she felt that life was cruel to Stephen and to her;
but she accepted its cruelty to her as an inevitable part of her oneness
with him. Whatever he had to bear she must bear too, especially if he were
helped by her sharing the burden. And her heart glowed with happiness,
recalling the expression with which he had said,--

"Remember, Mercy, you are the one bright thing in my life."

She understood, or thought she understood, precisely the position in which
he was placed.

"Very possibly he has even promised his mother," she said to herself,
"even promised her he would never be married. It would be just like her to
exact such a promise from him, and never think any thing of it. And, even
if he has not, it is all the same. He knows very well no human being could
live in the house with her, to say nothing of his being so terribly poor.
Poor, dear Stephen! to think of our little rent being more than half his
income! Oh, if there were only some way in which I could contrive to give
him money without his knowing it."

If any one had said to Mercy at this time: "It was not honorable in this
man, knowing or feeling that he could not marry you, to tell you of his
love, and to allow you to show him yours for him. He is putting you in a
false position, and may be blighting your whole life," Mercy would have
repelled the accusation most indignantly. She would have said: "He has
never asked me for any such love as that. He told me most honestly in the
very beginning just how it was. He always said he would never fetter me by
a word; and, once when I forgot myself for a moment, and threw myself into
his very arms, he only kissed my forehead as if I were his sister, and put
me away from him almost with a reproof. No, indeed! he is the very soul of
honor. It is I who choose to love him with all my soul and all my
strength. Why should not a woman devote her life to a man without being
his wife, if she chooses, and if he so needs her? It is just as sacred and
just as holy a bond as the other, and holier, too; for it is more
unselfish. If he can give up the happiness of being a husband and father,
for the sake of his duty to his mother, cannot I give up the happiness of
being a wife and mother, for the sake of my affection and duty towards
him?"

It looked very plain to Mercy in these first days. It looked right, and it
seemed very full of joy. Her life seemed now rounded and complete. It had
a ruling motive, without which no life is satisfying; and that motive was
the highest motive known to the heart,--the desire to make another human
being perfectly happy. All hindrances and difficulties, all drawbacks and
sacrifices, seemed less than nothing to her. When she saw Stephen, she was
happy because she saw him; and when she did not see him, she was happy
because she had seen him, and would soon see him again. Past, present,
and future all melt into one great harmonious whole under the spell of
love in a nature like Mercy's. They are like so many rooms in one great
house; and in one or the other the loved being is always to be found,
always at home, can never depart! Could one be lonely for a moment in such
a house?

Mercy's perpetual and abiding joy at times terrified Stephen. It was a
thing so foreign to his own nature that it seemed to him hardly natural.
Calm acquiescence he could understand,--serene endurance: he himself never
chafed at the barriers, little or great, which kept him from Mercy. But
there were many days when his sense of deprivation made him sad, subdued,
and quiet. When, in these moods, he came into Mercy's presence, and found
her radiant, buoyant, mirthful even, he wondered; and sometimes he
questioned. He strove to find out the secret of her joy. There seemed to
him no legitimate reason for it.

"Why, to see that I make you glad, Stephen," she would say. "Is not that
enough? Or even, when I cannot make you glad, just to love you is enough."

"Mercy, how did you ever come to love me?" he said once, stung by a sense
of his own unworthiness. "How do you know you love me, after all?"

"How do I know I love you!" she exclaimed. "Can any one ever tell that, I
wonder? I know it by this: that every thing in the whole world, even down
to the smallest grass-blade, seems to me different because you are alive."
She said these words with a passionate vehemence, and tears in her eyes.
Then, changing in a second to a mischievous, laughing mood, she said,--

"Yes: you make all that odds to me. But let us not talk about loving each
other, Stephen. That's the way children do with their flower-seeds,--keep
pulling them up, to see how they grow."

That night, Mercy gave Stephen this sonnet,--the first words she had
written out of the great wellspring of her love:--

  "HOW WAS IT?"

  Why ask, dear one? I think I cannot tell,
  More than I know how clouds so sudden lift
  From mountains, or how snowflakes float and drift,
  Or springs leave hills. One secret and one spell
  All true things have. No sunlight ever fell
  With sound to bid flowers open. Still and swift
  Come sweetest things on earth.
                                     So comes true gift
  Of Love, and so we know that it is well.
  Sure tokens also, like the cloud, the snow,
  And silent flowing of the mountain-springs,
  The new gift of true loving always brings.
  In clearer light, in purer paths, we go:
  New currents of deep joy in common things
  We find. These are the tokens, dear, we know!




Chapter VIII.



As the months went on, Mercy began to make friends. One person after
another observed her bright face, asked who she was, and came to seek her
out. "Who is that girl with fair hair and blue eyes, who, whenever you
meet her in the street, always looks as if she had just heard some good
news?" was asked one day. It was a noteworthy thing that this description
was so instantly recognized by the person inquired of, that he had no
hesitancy in replying,--

"Oh, that is a young widow from Cape Cod, a Mrs. Philbrick. She came last
winter with h