rrwill not, I
trust, blame me quite so severely."

"We are not blaming you, my dear boy, we are waiting to hear first what
you have to say for yourself," Elsie answered, laying her hand fondly upon
his head. "Sit here by my side while you tell it," she added, making room
for him on the sofa.

He made his story brief, yet kept nothing back.

His hearers were deeply moved as he repeated what Mr. Love had told him of
the lonely and forlorn condition in which he must leave his petted only
child, and went on to describe the hasty marriage and the death scene, so
immediately following. Their kind hearts yearned over the little orphaned
bride, and they exonerated Edward from all blame for the part he acted in
the short, sad drama.

"Cherish her tenderly, my dear boy," his mother said, with tears in her
soft eyes, "you are all, everything to her, and must never let her want
for love or tenderest care."

"Mother," he answered in moved tones, "I shall try to be to my little wife
just the husband my father was to you."

"That is all any one could ask, my son," she returned, the tears coursing
down her cheeks.

"Do not expect too much of her, Edward," Mr. Dinsmore said. "She is a
mere child, a petted and spoiled one, I presume, from what you have told
us, and if she should prove wayward and at times unreasonable, be very
patient and forbearing with her."

"I trust I shall, grandpa," he answered. "I cannot expect her to be quite
the woman she would have made under my mother's training; but she is young
enough to profit by mamma's sweet teachings and example even yet. I find
her very docile and teachable, very affectionate, and desirous to be and
do all I would have her."

Zoe came down for the evening simply but tastefully attired in white,
looking very sweet and fair. She was evidently disposed to be on friendly
terms with her new relatives, yet clung with a pretty sort of shyness to
her young husband, who perceived it with delight, regarding her ever and
anon with fond, admiring eyes.

It excited no jealousy in mother or sisters. Such an emotion was quite
foreign to Elsie's nature and found small place in the heart of any one of
her children.

Violet, spite of the near approach of her own nuptials, was sufficiently
at leisure from herself to give time and thought to this new sister,
making her feel that she was so esteemed, and winning for herself a large
place in Zoe's heart.

Indeed all exerted themselves to make Zoe fully aware that they considered
her quite one of the family. That very evening she was taken with Edward
to Vi's room to look at the trousseau, told of all the arrangements for
the wedding and the summer sojourn at the North, and made the recipient of
many handsome presents from Mr. and Mrs. Dinsmore, Elsie, and Violet.

But for her recent sad bereavement she would have been a very happy little
woman indeed. As it was she was bright and cheerful when with the family,
but had occasional paroxysms of grief when alone with Edward, in which she
wept bitterly upon his breast, he soothing her with tenderest caresses and
words of endearment.

Violet's wedding was strictly private, only near relatives being present;
but in accordance with the wishes of the whole family, she was richly
attired in white silk, orange blossoms, and costly bridal veil.

Zoe, leaning on Edward's arm, watched her through the ceremony with
admiring eyes, more than half regretting that the haste of her own
marriage had precluded the possibility of so rich and becoming a bridal
dress for herself--a thought which she afterward expressed to Edward in
the privacy of their own apartments. "Never mind, my sweet," he said,
holding her close to his heart "I couldn't love you any better if you had
given yourself to me in the grandest of wedding-dresses."

"How nice in you to say that!" she exclaimed, laying her head on his
breast and gazing fondly up into his face. "Didn't Captain Raymond look
handsome in his uniform?"

"Yes, indeed; don't you think I have as much reason to envy his appearance
as a groom as you Vi's as a bride?"

"No, indeed!" she cried indignantly, "he's not half so nice as you are! I
wouldn't exchange with her for all the world!"

"Thank you; that's a very high compliment, I think; for I greatly admire
my new brother-in-law," Edward said, with a gleeful laugh, and repeating
his caresses.




CHAPTER XVIII.

    "My cake is dough."
        --_Shakespeare_.


It was a warm afternoon late in June.

"There! I'm done with lessons for a while anyway, and glad of it too!"
exclaimed Lulu Raymond, coming into Mrs. Scrimp's sitting-room and
depositing her satchel of school-books upon the table.

"So am I, Lu, for now you'll have time to make that new dress for my
dollie, won't you?" Gracie said languidly, from the sofa where she lay.

"Yes, little pet, and ever so many other things. But oh dear! holidays
aren't much after all when you can't go anywhere or have any fun. I do
wonder when we'll see papa again."

"Pretty soon, Lu," cried a boyish voice in tones of delight, and turning
quickly she found Max at the window, wearing a brighter face than he had
shown her for many a day, and holding up a bulky letter.

"O Max!" she cried, "is it from papa?"

"Yes; and I'm coming in to read it to you if you and Gracie are alone."

"Yes, we are; Aunt Beulah's gone out calling and Ann's busy in the
kitchen."

"Then here I am!" he said, vaulting lightly in through the window.

Lulu laughed admiringly. "I'd like to try that myself," she said.

"Oh, don't, Lu!" said Gracie, "Aunt Beulah would scold you like anything."

"Let her scold! who cares!" returned Lulu with a scornful toss of the
head, while Max, who had gone to the side of Gracie's sofa, stooped over
her, and softly patting the thin pale cheek, asked how she felt to-day.

"'Bout the same as usual, Maxie," she said, with a languid smile.

"O Max, hurry and tell us what papa says in the letter!" cried Lulu
impatiently. "Is it good news?"

"First-rate, girls! couldn't be better! He's coming here next week and
going to take us all away with him!"

"Oh! oh! oh! how delightful!" cried Lulu, clapping her hands and dancing
about the room, while Grace clasped her hands in ecstasy, saying, "Oh, I
am so glad!"

"Come, Lu, sit down here beside us and be quiet," said Max, seating
himself beside Grace on the sofa, and motioning toward a low rocking-chair
near at hand. "I'm going to read the letter aloud, and then I have
something to show you."

Lulu took possession of the rocking-chair, folded her hands in her lap,
and Max began.

The letter was written from Saratoga, where the captain and his bride had
paused for a few days on their wedding tour, and was addressed to all
three of his children.

He told them of his marriage, described Violet, her mother, and the life
at Ion in glowing terms, spoke very highly of Mr. and Mrs. Dinsmore and
the younger members of the family, then told of their kind offer to share
their happy home with his children if they should prove themselves good
and obedient.

But here Lulu interrupted the reading with a passionate outburst. "A
step-mother! I won't have her! Papa had no business to go and give her to
us!"

"Why, Lu!" exclaimed Max, "of course he had a right to get married if he
wanted to! And I'm very glad he did, for I'm sure they must be much nicer
folks to live with than Mr. Fox and Mrs. Scrimp."

"Just like a silly boy to talk so!" returned Lulu, with a mixture of anger
and scorn in her tones. "Step-mothers are always hateful and cross and
abuse the children and won't let their father love them any more,
and----"

"Now who's been telling you such lies, sis?" interrupted Max. "There are
bad ones and good ones among them, the same as among other classes of
people. And papa says his new wife is sweet and kind and good to
everybody. And if she loves him won't she want to be good to his children?
I should think so, I'm sure. Now let me read the rest of his letter."

In that the captain went on to tell of the cottages by the sea engaged for
the summer, and that thither he and Violet purposed to go the next week,
taking his children with them. He wound up with some words of fatherly
affection and hope that brighter days than they had known for a long time
were now in store for them.

There was a postscript from Violet: "I am longing to see the dear children
of my husband, especially poor, little sick Gracie. I am sure we shall
love each other very much for his dear sake."

"There now, Lu, you see she means to be kind to us," was Max's satisfied
comment, as he refolded the missive and put it back into the envelope.

Lulu was one who never liked to retreat from a position she had once
taken. "Oh, it's easy to talk," she said, "acting's another thing. I'm not
going to be caught with chaff."

"See here!" said Max, showing a photograph.

"Oh, what a pretty lady!" cried Gracie, holding out an eager hand for it.

Max gave it to her, and Lulu sprang up and bent over her to get a good
view of it also.

"Who is it?" she asked.

"Isn't she pretty? isn't she perfectly beautiful, and sweet-looking as she
can be?" said Max, ignoring the question.

"Yes, she's just lovely; but why don't you say who she is, if you know?"

"She's papa's new wife, the new mamma you are determined to believe is
going to be so hateful."

"I'm sure she won't. She does look so sweet, I just love her already!"
Gracie said.

Lulu, too proud to retract, yet strongly drawn toward the possessor of so
sweet and lovely a countenance as was pictured there, kept silence, gazing
intently upon the photograph which Gracie still held.

"Whose is it, Max?" asked the latter.

"Mine I suppose, though papa doesn't say; but we'll find out when he
comes."

"Oh, I'm so glad, so glad he's coming soon! Aren't you, Maxie?"

"I never was gladder in my life!" cried Max. "And just think how nice to
go and live by the sea all summer! There'll be lots of fun boating and
bathing and fishing!"

"Oh, yes!" chimed in Lulu, "and papa is always so kind about taking us to
places and giving us a good time."

"But I can't have any!" sighed Gracie from her couch.

"Yes, papa will manage it somehow," said Max; "and the sea air and plenty
to eat will soon make you ever so much stronger."

They chatted on for some time, growing more and more delighted with the
prospect before them; then Max said he must go.

He wanted to take the photograph with him, but generously yielded to
Gracie's entreaties that it might be left with her till he came again.

She and Lulu were still gazing upon it and talking together of the
original--Max having gone--when Mrs. Scrimp came in, looking greatly vexed
and perturbed.

She too had received a letter from Capt. Raymond that day, telling of his
marriage and his intentions in regard to his children; directing also that
they and their luggage should be in waiting at a hotel near the depot of
the town at the hour of a certain day of the coming week when he and his
bride expected to arrive by a train from the West.

There would be a two hours' detention there while they waited for the
train that was to carry them to their final destination, which would allow
time for an interview between the captain and herself.

The news was entirely unexpected and very unwelcome to Mrs. Scrimp. She
would have much preferred to keep the little girls, for the sake of the
gain they were to her and a real affection for Gracie; also because of
having neglected to follow out the captain's directions in regard to
them--Gracie in particular--she felt no small perturbation at the prospect
of meeting and being questioned by him.

As was not unusual she vented her displeasure upon Lulu, scolding because
her school-books and hat had not been put in their proper places, her hair
and dress made neat.

"I'll put them away presently, Aunt Beulah. You'll not be bothered with me
much longer," remarked the delinquent nonchalantly, her eyes still upon
the photograph Gracie was holding.

"What's that?" asked Mrs. Scrimp, catching sight of it for the first time.

"Our new mamma," the children answered in a breath, Gracie's tones full of
gentle joyousness, Lulu's of a sort of defiant exultation, especially as
she added, "Papa's coming next week to take us away to live at home with
him."

"On shipboard?"

"No, in a cottage by the sea."

"Humph! he'll soon sail away again and leave you with your step-mother,
just as I told you."

"Well, I don't care, she looks enough kinder and sweeter than you do."

"Indeed! I pity her, poor young thing!" sighed Mrs. Scrimp, scanning the
photograph with keen curiosity. "She's very young--a mere child I should
say--and to think of the trouble she'll have with you and Max!"

"We're not going to be a trouble to her," said Lulu, "we're never a
trouble to people that treat us decently."

"I think your father might have given me an earlier warning of these
changes," grumbled Mrs. Scrimp. "I'll have to work myself sick to get you
two ready in time."

"Oh, no, Aunt Beulah, you needn't," said little Gracie, "the new mamma can
get somebody to make our clothes for us. Papa will pay for it."

"Of course he will," said Lulu. "You needn't do anything but have those we
have now all washed and ironed and packed up ready to go."

"That's all you know about it!" returned Mrs. Scrimp sharply. "You haven't
either of you a suitable dress for travelling in, especially in company
with your father's rich wife. I'll have to go right out now to the stores
and buy material, get a dress-maker to come in to-morrow bright and early,
and help her myself all I can. There'll be no rest for me now till you're
off."

There was no rest for anybody else in the interim except Gracie. As Ann
remarked rather indignantly to Lulu, adding, "She's as cross as two
sticks."

"What makes her so cross?" asked Lulu. "I should think she'd be so glad
she's going to be rid of me that she'd feel uncommonly good-natured."

"Not she!" laughed Ann, "she counted on the money your father pays for
years to come; but he's gone and got married and her cake is dough sure
enough."

"I'm glad he did," returned Lulu emphatically. "I've made up my mind that
such a sweet-looking lady as our new mamma must be a great deal nicer and
kinder than Aunt Beulah, if she is a step-mother."

"She _is_ sweet-lookin', that's a fact," said Ann. "I only wish I was
goin' to make the change as well as you."

The eventful day came at last to the children; all too soon to Mr. Fox and
Mrs. Scrimp, neither of whom relished the task of giving account of past
stewardship; for conscience accused both of unfaithfulness to the
captain's trust.

The three children were gathered in the hotel parlor, impatiently awaiting
the arrival of the train. Mrs. Scrimp sat a little apart, fidgety and ill
at ease, though ensconced in a most comfortable, cushioned arm-chair; and
Mr. Fox paced the veranda outside, wondering if Max had dared or would
dare to inform his father of the cruel treatment received at his hands,
and if so, whether the captain would credit the story.

Violet and the captain had thus far had a delightful honeymoon, finding
their mutual love deepening every hour, yet were not so engrossed with
each other as to quite forget his children; they had talked of them
frequently, and were now looking forward to the coming interview with
scarcely less eagerness than the young people themselves.

"We are almost there; it's the next station," said the captain with
satisfaction, beginning to collect satchels and parcels.

"Oh, I am glad!" exclaimed Violet. "I long to see the dear children and to
witness their delight in being taken into--their father's arms." The
concluding words were spoken tremulously and with starting tears as a gush
of tender memories came over her.

Her husband understood it, and clasping her hand fondly in his bent over
her with a whispered, "My darling! my own sweet precious little wife!"

She answered him with a look of love and joy. Then after a moment's
silence, "Do you think, Levis, that they will be pleased that--that you
have given them a step-mother?" she asked timidly and with a sigh.

"If they don't fall in love with your sweet face at first sight I shall be
exceedingly surprised," he said, gazing upon her with the fondest
admiration.

"Ah, I cannot hope so much as that!" she sighed; "children are so apt to
hear and treasure up unkind remarks about stepmothers; but I shall hope to
win their hearts in time. It seems to me we cannot fail to love each other
with such a bond of union as our common love to you."

"No, I trust not," he said, with a bright, happy smile. "I think they are
warm-hearted children; I'm sure they love their father; and it does seem
to me utterly impossible that they should fail to love the dearest,
loveliest, sweetest little lady in the world merely because she has become
that father's wife."

The whistle blew loudly, the train rushed on with redoubled speed,
slackened, came to a stand-still, and in another minute the captain had
alighted and was handing out Violet.

"Papa! oh, I'm so glad you're come at last!" cried a boyish voice at his
side.

"Max, my dear boy!"

There was a hasty, hearty embrace, Violet standing smiling by, then the
captain said, "Violet, my love, this is my son," and Max, moved by a
sudden impulse, threw his arms about her neck and kissed her in a rapture
of delight, so sweet and beautiful did she appear in his eyes.

"Oh, I beg your pardon!" he stammered, releasing her and stepping back a
little, afraid he had taken too great a liberty. But venturing a second
glance into her face, he saw that she was smiling sweetly through her
blushes.

"No apology is needed, Max," she said cheerily. "My brothers are always
ready with a kiss for mamma and sisters. And, since I am not old enough to
be your mother, you will let me be your older sister; won't you?"

"Oh, thank you, yes!" said Max. "Papa, let me carry the parcels. My
sisters are waiting for us there in the hotel on the other side of the
street. Gracie couldn't run across as I did, and Lu stayed with her."

"That was quite right," said his father. "I am in great haste to see my
darlings, but would rather not do so in a crowd."

There was a very strong affection between the captain and his children.
The hearts of the little girls beat fast, and their eyes filled with
tears of joy as they saw him cross the street and come into the room where
they were. With a cry of joy they threw themselves into his arms, and he
clasped both together to his heart, caressing them over and over again,
Violet looking on with eyes brimful of sympathetic tears.

The next moment the captain remembered her, and releasing the children,
introduced her. "This, my darlings, is the sweet lady whose picture I sent
you the other day, I am sure you will love her for papa's sake and her own
too."

"Will you not, dears?" Vi said, kissing them in turn. "I love you already
because you are his."

"I think I shall," Lulu said emphatically, after one long, searching look
into the sweet azure eyes; then turned to her father again.

But Gracie, putting both arms round Violet's neck, held up her face for
another kiss, saying in joyous tones, "Oh, I do love you now! my sweet,
pretty new mamma!"

"You darling!" responded Violet, holding her close. "I've wanted to have
you and nurse you well again ever since I heard how weak and sick you
were."

The words, reaching the ear of Mrs. Scrimp, as she hovered in the
background, brought a scowl to her brow. "As if she--an ignorant young
thing--could do better for the child than I!" she said to herself.

"Ah, Mrs. Scrimp!" the captain said, suddenly becoming aware of her
presence, and turning toward her with outstretched hand, "how d'ye do?
Allow me to introduce you to Mrs. Raymond." Violet offered her hand and
was given two fingers, while a pair of sharp black eyes looked coldly and
fixedly into hers.

Violet dropped the fingers, seated herself, and drew Gracie into her lap.

"Am I not too heavy for you to hold?" the child asked, nestling
contentedly in the arms that held her.

"Heavy!" exclaimed Violet, tears starting to her eyes as they rested upon
the little thin, pale face. "You are extremely light, you poor darling!
but I hope soon to see you grow fat and rosy in the sea air your papa will
take you to."

The captain had just left the room in search of Mr. Fox, taking Max with
him.

"You will have to be very careful not to overfeed that child, or you will
have her down sick," remarked Mrs. Scrimp with asperity, addressing
Violet. "She ought never to eat anything at all after three o'clock in the
afternoon."

Vi's heart swelled with indignation. "No wonder she is little more than
skin and bone, if that is the way she has been served!" she said, giving
Mrs. Scrimp as severe a look as her sweet, gentle countenance was capable
of expressing.

"She'd have been in her grave long ago if she hadn't been served so!"
snapped Mrs. Scrimp. "I'm old enough to be your mother, Mrs. Raymond, and
having had that child in charge for over two years--ever since her own
mother died--I ought to know what's good for her and what isn't. She is
naturally delicate, and to be allowed to overload her stomach would be the
death of her. I can't eat after three o'clock, and neither can she."

"A grown person is no rule for a child," observed Violet, gently smoothing
Gracie's hair; "children need to eat enough to supply material for growth
in addition to the waste of the system. Was it by the advice of a
competent physician you subjected her to such a regimen?"

"I've always had medical advice for her when it was needed," snapped Mrs.
Scrimp.

The captain re-entered the room at that moment. He had made short work
with Mr. Fox, paying his bill, and sending him away with his ears tingling
from a well-merited rebuke for his savage treatment of a defenceless
child.

It was Mrs. Scrimp's turn now; there was no evading the direct, pointed
questions of the captain, and she was compelled to acknowledge that she
had followed out her own theories in the treatment of Gracie, instead of
consulting a physician, even after he had directed her to seek medical
advice and treat the child in careful accordance with it.

"Well, madam," he remarked with much sternness and indignation, "if my
little girl is an invalid for life, I shall always feel that you are
responsible for it."

"I've been a mother to your children, Capt. Raymond," she exclaimed,
growing white with anger, "and this is your gratitude!"

"A mother!" he said, glancing from her to Vi, "I hope there are few such
mothers in the world. My poor starved baby! papa's heart aches to think of
what you have had to endure," he added in moved tones, the big tears
shining in his eyes, as he lifted Gracie on his knees and fondled her
tenderly.

Mrs. Scrimp rose and took an abrupt and indignant leave, her bill having
been already settled.




CHAPTER XIX.

NEW RELATIONSHIPS AND NEW TITLES.


"Are you hungry, Gracie darling?" her father asked with tender solicitude.

"No, papa," she said, "we had our breakfast just a little while before
Aunt Beulah brought us here."

"Well, if ever you suffer from hunger again it shall not be your father's
fault," he returned with emotion.

Taking out his watch, "We have a full half hour yet," he said. "Max, my
son, do you know of any place near at hand where oranges, bananas, cakes,
and candies are to be had?"

"Oh, yes, papa! just at the next corner."

"Then go and lay in a store for our journey," handing him some money.

"May I go too, papa?" asked Lulu, as Max set off with alacrity.

"No, stay here; I want you by my side," he said, smiling affectionately
upon her.

"I'm glad you do! O papa, I have wanted you so badly!" she exclaimed,
leaning her cheek against his arm and looking up lovingly into his face,
"and so have Max and Gracie. Haven't we, Gracie?"

"Yes, indeed!" sighed the little one. "O papa, I wish you didn't ever have
to go away and leave us!"

"I hope to stay with you longer than usual this time, and when I must go
away again to leave you in a very happy home, where no one will wish to
ill-use you," he said, with a glad look and smile directed toward his
bride.

"No one at Ion or in any house of my dear mother's will ever show them
anything but kindness and love if they are good and obedient," said Vi.
"We all obey grandpa, but we love to do it, because he is so dear and
never at all unreasonable."

"No, I am sure he is not," assented the captain, "and I shall esteem it a
great favor if he will count my darlings among his grandchildren. How
would my little Gracie like to have a dear kind grandpa and grandma?" he
asked, smoothing back the curls from the little pale face.

"Oh, ever so much, papa!" she responded with a bright and joyous smile. "I
never had any, papa, had I?"

"Not since you were old enough to remember."

Max did his errand promptly and well, returning just in time to go with
the others on board the train.

They took a parlor car and travelled with great comfort, a happy family
party, father and children rejoicing in being together again after a long
separation, Violet sympathizing in their joy and finding herself neither
forgotten nor neglected by any one of the little group of which she formed
a part.

Ever and anon her husband's eyes were turned upon her with a look of such
proud delight, such ardent affection as thrilled her heart with love, joy,
and gratitude to the Giver of all good.

Max's eyes too were full of enthusiastic admiration whenever his glance
met hers, and with boyish gallantry he watched for opportunities to wait
upon her.

Gracie regarded her with loving looks and called her mamma, as if the word
were very sweet to say.

Lulu alone was shy and reserved, never addressing Violet directly and
answering in monosyllables when spoken to by her, yet showed nothing like
aversion in look or manner.

All went well for some hours, Max and Lulu partaking freely of the fruit
and confectionery their father had provided, Gracie much more sparingly,
eating less than he would have allowed her, being a sensible little girl
and fearful of such unwonted indulgence.

But so unaccustomed were her digestive powers to anything but the most
restricted diet that they gave way under the unusual strain, and she
became so ill that Violet and the captain were filled with alarm.

Fortunately they were rapidly nearing their destination, and were soon
able to lay her upon the pretty, comfortable bed prepared for her and Lulu
in the new home by the sea, and summon a physician.

The Dinsmores and Travillas had arrived some days before and made all
arrangements for a delightful welcome to the bride and groom. Both
cottages were in perfect order, and a bountiful feast, comprising all the
delicacies of the season, was set out in the dining-room of that over
which Mr. and Mrs. Dinsmore presided.

But Gracie's illness interfered somewhat with the carrying out of their
plans, dividing their emotions between pity and concern for the little
sufferer, and joy over the return of the newly married pair.

The feast waited while the ladies, the captain, Mr. Dinsmore, and the
physician were occupied with the sick child.

Max and Lulu, quite forgotten for the moment by their father and Violet,
and much troubled about their little sister, would have felt very forlorn,
had not Harold, Herbert, and Rosie set themselves, with the true
politeness to which they had been trained, to making the little strangers
comfortable and at home.

They seated them in the veranda, where they could enjoy the breeze and a
view of the sea, and talked to them entertainingly of the various
pleasures--bathing, boating, fishing, etc.--in store for them.

Presently Mr. Dinsmore came out with a prescription which he asked Harold
to take to the nearest drug-store.

"May I go too, sir?" asked Max. "Wouldn't it be well for me to learn the
way there, so that I can do the errand next time?"

"That is well thought of, my boy," Mr. Dinsmore said, with a pleased look.
"But are you not too tired to-night for such a walk? it is fully a quarter
of a mile."

"No, sir, thank you; a run will do me good after being so long cramped up
in the cars."

"Ah," Mr. Dinsmore said, taking Max's hand and shaking it cordially, "I
think I shall find you a boy after my own heart--active, independent, and
ready to make yourself useful. Shall I number you among my grandchildren?"

"I shall be very happy to have you do so, sir," returned Max, coloring
with pleasure.

"Then henceforth you may address me as grandpa, as these other young
folks do," glancing at Rosie and her brothers. "You also, my dear, if you
like," he added, catching Lulu's dark eyes fixed upon him with a half
eager, half wistful look, and bending down to stroke her hair caressingly.

"Thank you, sir," she said, "I think I shall like to. But oh, tell me,
please, is Gracie very sick?"

"I hope not, my dear; the doctor thinks she will be in her usual health in
a day or two."

The boys were already speeding away.

The doctor had sent every one out of the sick-room except Mrs. Dinsmore
and Captain Raymond. The child clung to her long-absent father, and he
would not leave her until she slept.

Elsie led the way to Violet's room, and there they held each other in a
long, tender, silent embrace.

"My darling!" the mother said at length, "how I have missed you! how glad
I am to have you in my arms again!"

"Ah, mamma! my own dearest mamma, it seems to me you can hardly be so glad
as I am!" cried Vi, lifting her face to gaze with almost rapturous
affection into that of her mother. "I do not know how I could ever bear a
long separation from you!"

"You are happy?"

"Yes, mamma, very, very happy. I could never live without my husband now.
Ah, I did not dream of half the goodness and lovableness I have already
found in him. But ah, I am forgetting his children, Max and Lulu!" she
added, hastily releasing herself from her mother's arms. "I must see where
they are and that they are made comfortable."

"Leave that to me, Vi dear," her mother said; "you should be attending to
your toilet. I think the little sick one will fall asleep presently, when
she can be left in Mammy's care, while we all gather about the
supper-table; and we must have you and Zoe there in bridal attire."

"Zoe! I hardly saw her in my anxiety about Gracie!" exclaimed Violet.
"Does she seem happy, mamma, and like one of us?"

"Yes, she is quite one of us; we all love her, and I think she is happy
among us, though of course grieving sadly at times for the loss of her
father. The trunks have been brought up, I see. That small one must belong
to the two little girls."

"Yes, mamma, and suppose we let it stand here for the present so that I
can readily help Lulu find what she wishes to wear this evening."

"Yes, dear. I will go down and invite her up. Ah, here is mamma!" as Mrs.
Dinsmore tapped at the half-open door, then stepped in. She embraced
Violet with motherly affection. "A lost treasure recovered!" she said
joyously. "Vi, dear, you have no idea how we have missed you."

After a moment's chat, Rose and Elsie went down together to the veranda,
where they found Lulu, making acquaintance with the other members of the
family.

"This is a new granddaughter for us, my dear," Mr. Dinsmore said to his
wife.

"Yes, shall I be your grandma, my child?" asked Rose, giving Lulu an
affectionate kiss.

"And I too?" Elsie asked, caressing her in her turn.

"Two grandmas!" Lulu said, with a slightly bewildered look, "and neither
of you looking old enough. How will anybody know which I mean, if I call
you both so?"

"I think," said Mrs. Dinsmore, smiling, "it will have to be Grandma Rose
and Grandma Elsie."

"Yes," said Mrs. Travilla, "that will do nicely. Now, my dear little girl,
shall I take you upstairs that you may change your dress before tea?"

Lulu accepted the invitation with alacrity. They found Violet beginning
her toilet while her maid unpacked her trunk.

"Lulu, dear," she said, as the child came in, "you want to change your
dress I suppose? Have you the key of your trunk?"

"Yes, ma'am," taking it from her pocket.

"Agnes," said Vi, "leave mine for the present (you have taken out all I
want for the evening) and unpack that other."

The child drew near her young step-mother with a slightly embarrassed air.
"I--I don't know what to call you," she said in a half whisper.

Violet paused in what she was doing, and looking lovingly into the
blushing face, said, "You may call me cousin or auntie, whichever you
please, dear, till you can give me a little place in your heart; then, as
I am not old enough to be your mother, you may call me Mamma Vi. What is
it you wish to say to me?"

"Mayn't I go into some other room to wash and dress?"

"Certainly, dear," Violet answered. Turning inquiringly to her mother,
"What room can she have, mamma?"

"There is a very pleasant little one across the hall," Elsie said. "If
Lulu would like to have it for her own, it might be as well to have her
trunk sent in before unpacking."

"Oh, I should like to have a room all to myself!" exclaimed Lulu. "I had
at Aunt Beulah's. Gracie slept with her, in the room next to mine."

"I supposed you and Gracie would prefer to be together in a room close to
your papa's," Elsie said; "but there are rooms enough for you to have one
entirely to yourself."

"Then she shall," Violet said, smiling indulgently upon the little girl.
"Would you like my mother or me to help you choose what to wear to-night?
I want you to put on your best and look as pretty as ever you can."

Lulu's face flushed with pleasure. "Yes, ma'am," she said, going to her
trunk, which Agnes had now opened; "but I haven't anything half so
beautiful as the dress your sister has on."

"Haven't you? Well, never mind, you shall soon have dresses and other
things quite as pretty as Rosie's," Violet said, stooping over the trunk
to see what was there.

The child's eyes danced with delight. "Oh, shall I? Aunt Beulah never
would get me the pretty things I wanted, to look like other girls, you
know, or let my dresses be trimmed with ruffles and lace like theirs. I
used to think it would be dreadful to have a step-mother, but now I'm sure
it isn't always."

Violet smiled. "I hope we shall love each other very much, and be very
happy together, Lulu," she said. "Now tell me which dress you want to wear
this evening."

"This white muslin," said the little girl, lifting it and shaking out the
folds. "I believe it's the best I have, but you see it has only two
ruffles and not a bit of lace. And this sash she bought for me to wear
with it is narrow and not at all thick and handsome."

"No, it is not fit for Capt. Raymond's daughter to wear!" Vi exclaimed a
little indignantly, taking the ribbon between her thumb and finger. "But I
can provide you with a better, and you may cut this up for your doll."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Lulu, her eyes sparkling. "Step-mothers are nice
after all."

"But Lulu, dear," Elsie said, standing beside the little girl, and
caressing her hair with her soft white hand, "that is not a pretty or
pleasant name to my ear; especially when applied to so young and dear a
lady as this daughter of mine," looking tenderly into Vi's fair face. "Try
to think of her as one who dearly loves and is dearly loved by your
father, and ready to love his children for his sake."

"Yes, and for their own too," Violet added, "just as I love my darling
little sister Rosie. Now, Lulu, I think you have no more than time to make
your toilet. She will find everything needful in that room, will she,
mamma?"

"Yes; water, soap and towels. Can you do everything for yourself, my
child?"

"Yes, ma'am, except fastening my dress and sash."

"Then run in here or call to me when you are ready to have that done,"
said Violet.

Lulu was greatly pleased with her room. It had a set of cottage furniture,
many pretty ornaments, an inviting-looking bed draped in white, and lace
curtains to the windows; one of which gave her a fine view of the sea.

She made haste to wash and dress, thinking the while that their father's
marriage had brought a most delightful change to herself, brother and
sister.

"What soft, sweet voices they all have in talking," she mused. "Grandma
Rose, Grandma Elsie, and Mamma Vi. I'll call her that, if she'll let me,
it's a pretty name. I like it, and I believe I have given her a little
place in my heart already."

Just then Agnes knocked at the door to ask if she wanted anything.

"Yes," Lulu said, admitting her, "I'm ready to put on my dress and would
like you to button it for me."

"An' put dese on fo' you too, Miss?" and Agnes held up to the child's
astonished and delighted eyes a set of pink coral, necklace, bracelets and
pin, and a sash of broad, rich ribbon just matching in color.

"Oh," cried Lulu half breathlessly, "where did they come from?"

"Miss Wilet sent 'em," returned Agnes, beginning her work; "an' she tole
me to ax you to come in dar when I'se done fixin' ob you, an' let her see
if eberyting's right. Humph! 'twon't be, kase you oughter hab ribbon for
yo' hair to match wid de sash."




CHAPTER XX.

GRANDMA ELSIE AND MAMMA VI.


Violet's toilet was finished. She wore a white silk trimmed with a great
deal of very rich lace, white flowers in her hair and at her throat, and
looked very bridelike and beautiful.

So Lulu thought as she came dancing in, full of joyous excitement over her
own unusual adornment. Catching sight of Violet standing in front of her
toilet-table turning over a box of ribbons, "Oh, how beautiful you are!"
she cried, "and how very kind to let me wear these," glancing down at the
ornaments on her own person.

"Let you wear them, dear child! I have given them to you for your own, and
am looking now for ribbon for your hair to match the sash. I had forgotten
it. Ah, here is just the thing!"

"Given me these lovely, lovely bracelets and necklace! and this handsome
sash too!" cried Lulu in wide-eyed astonishment. "Oh, you are just too,
too good to me! May I kiss you? and may I call you Mamma Vi now?"

"Yes, indeed, if you can give me a little place in your heart," Violet
answered, taking the little girl in her arms.

"Oh, a great big place!" cried Lulu, returning Vi's caresses with ardor.
"Mamma Vi! it's a very pretty name, and you are my own sweet, pretty new
mamma! A great deal nicer than if you were old enough to be my real
mother."

"Ah, Lulu, it makes me very happy to hear all that!" said her father's
voice behind her, and she felt his hand laid affectionately upon her head.

She turned round quickly. "Ah, papa! how nice you look too! How is
Gracie?"

"I left her sleeping comfortably a half hour ago, and have been making my
toilet in another room. Ah, my love!" gazing at Violet with proud,
fondly-admiring eyes, "how very lovely you are!"

"In my husband's partial eyes," she returned, looking up at him with a
bright, sweet smile.

"In Lulu's, too, judging from what I heard her say just now," he said,
turning his eyes upon his daughter again. "Ah, how you have improved her
appearance!"

"Yes, papa, only see these lovely things she--Mamma Vi has given me!"
cried Lulu, displaying her ornaments.

"A most generous gift," he said, examining the jewelry. "These coral
ornaments are costly, Lulu, and you must be careful of them. Mamma Vi! Is
that the name you have chosen for yourself, my love?" he asked, again
turning to his bride.

"Yes, if you approve, Levis?"

"I like it!" he returned emphatically.

"And the other ladies," remarked Lulu, "say I am to call them Grandma Rose
and Grandma Elsie. And the gentleman told me and Max to call him grandpa."

"May I come in?" asked Max at the door, which stood wide open.

"Yes," his father and Violet both answered.

"Oh!" he cried, gazing at Violet in undisguised admiration, "how lovely,
how splendid you look! What shall I call you?--you said, you know, and of
course anybody can see it, that you're not old enough to be my mother."

"No," she said, with a look of amusement and pleasure, "so you may use the
name Lulu and Gracie will call me--Mamma Vi."

"Miss Wilet," said Agnes, appearing at the door, "dey says dey's waitin'
suppah fo' you and de captain."

"Ah, then we must not linger here! Lulu dear, let Agnes tie this ribbon on
your hair. She can do it more tastefully than I. Max, I see you are
dressed for the evening."

"Yes, Mamma Vi, your brother Herbert showed me my room--a very nice one in
the story over this--and had my trunk carried up. Am I all right?"

"You'll do very well," his father said laughingly, but with a gleam of
fatherly pride in his eye. "Give your arm to your sister and we will go
down--if you are ready, little wife."

The last words were spoken in a fond whisper, close to Violet's ear, as he
drew her hand within his arm, and were answered by a bright, sweet smile
as she lifted her azure eyes to his.

The two cottages stood but a few feet apart, with no fence or wall of
separation between, and were connected by a covered way; so that it was
very much as if they were but one house.

The room in which the feast was spread was tastefully decorated with
evergreens, flags and flowers; the table too was adorned with lovely
bouquets and beautifully painted china and sparkled with silver and cut
glass.

The Dinsmores, Travillas, and Raymonds gathered about it as one family, a
bright, happy party. Edward was there with his Zoe, looking extremely
pretty in bridal attire, each apparently as devoted as ever to the other.

Max and Lulu behaved themselves admirably, the latter feeling quite
subdued by the presence of her father and so many elegantly dressed and
distinguished-looking people.

It was certainly a great change from Mrs. Scrimp's little dining-room with
its small, plainly furnished table, the three to sit down to it, and Ann
to wait upon them--a very pleasant change to Lulu. She enjoyed it greatly.

She and Max scarcely spoke during the meal, occupying themselves in eating
and listening to the lively discourse going on around them, but were well
waited upon, the servants being attentive, and both Elsie and Violet
interesting themselves to see that the little strangers were not
neglected.

On leaving the table, all repaired to the veranda and front door yard, for
the enjoyment of a moonlight evening and the sea breeze.

The young Travillas and Raymonds speedily grew quite intimate and were
mutually pleased; but the latter, fatigued with the journey and
excitements of the day, were ready to retire at an early hour.

They waited only for family worship, conducted for both households by Mr.
Dinsmore, then Violet and they bade good-night and went back to their own
dwelling, leaving the captain to sit some time longer on the veranda with
the other gentlemen.

"Have you everything you want in your room, Max?" Violet asked in a kindly
tone, as the boy took up his bedroom candle.

"Yes, thank you, Mamma Vi," he answered cheerfully, but with a longing
look at her.

"What is it, Max?" she asked, with her sweet smile. "Don't be afraid to
tell me if there is anything you want."

"I--I'm afraid I oughtn't to ask it," he stammered, blushing vividly,
"I've no right, and--and it might be disagreeable, but--oh, I should like
to kiss you good-night!"

"You may, Max," she said, laughing, then put her arms round his neck and
gave the kiss very heartily.

"Thank you," he cried in blushing delight; then hurried away, calling
back, "Ah, good-night, Lu!"

"Good-night," she answered, looking wistfully at Violet.

"Shall I have a good-night kiss from you too, dear?" Violet asked,
offering her lips.

Lulu accepted the invitation in an eager, joyous way, then asked, "May I
see Gracie before I go to bed?"

"Yes, dear; we will go in very quietly lest we should wake her if she is
asleep."

They found Gracie awake, Aunt Chloe shaking up her pillow and smoothing
the cover over her.

"O mamma!" she cried in her little weak voice, "how beautiful you are!
And, Lulu, where did you get those pretty things?"

"Mamma Vi gave them to me," Lulu said. "O Gracie dear, are you better?"

"Yes, I don't feel sick now, only weak. She's very good to me, she and
everybody," with a grateful look at her sable nurse.

"Yes," Violet said, "mammy is always good and kind, especially to a sick
person. Now Lulu and I will kiss you good-night and leave you to go to
sleep again."

"You are nice and kind to come, both of you," Gracie said, receiving and
returning their caresses.

"Mammy," Violet said as she turned to leave the room, "I'm afraid you are
not able to take the care of her through the night."

"Yes, I is, honey darlin'," responded the old woman with warmth. "I'll hab
a quilt spread down dar on de flo', and I'll lie dar an' sleep, an' ef de
chile stirs I'll wake right up and gib her eberyting she wants."

"Mamma Vi, don't you want to see my room?" Lulu asked as they neared its
door. "I think it is ever so pretty."

"So it is," Violet said, stepping inside with her, "and I am very glad you
like it. If you think of anything else you want in it, don't hesitate to
ask for it; both your papa and I wish to do all in our power to make his
children happy."

"Thank you. Oh, it is so nice to have a new mamma! such a sweet, kind
one," Lulu exclaimed with impulsive warmth, setting down her candle and
throwing her arms about Violet's neck.

"Dear child!" Violet said, returning the embrace, "I am very glad you are
beginning to love me. I hope we shall all love each other better every day
and be very happy together. You won't forget to ask God's protection
before you sleep, and thank him for his love and care? What a mercy that
we met with no accident on our journey!"

"Yes, indeed! and I won't forget to say my prayers, Mamma Vi."

They exchanged an affectionate good-night, and Violet went to her own
room.

Agnes was there, waiting to assist her in disrobing, to take down her
hair, and put things in place.

As the maid withdrew, her duty finished, Elsie came softly in.

"Dearest mamma!" cried Vi joyously, "I am so glad you have come! I thought
you would."

"Yes, daughter, I have just seen Rosie and Walter in bed, and could not
deny myself the pleasure of one of the old-time private talks with my dear
Vi. Ah, you don't know how I have missed them ever since Capt. Raymond
carried you away from Ion!"

They were standing together with their arms about each other.

"Mamma," Violet said with an earnest, tenderly affectionate look into her
mother's face, "how very beautiful you are! and how youthful in
appearance! there is not a line in your face, not a silver thread in your
hair, and it still has that exquisite golden tinge it has had ever since I
can remember."

"Ah, dear child! we can see many beauties in those we love that are
imperceptible to other eyes," Elsie returned with a quiet smile.

"But, mamma, every one sees you to be both young and beautiful in looks.
You look far too young to be addressed as grandma by Max and Lulu, or even
Gracie. I wish you would not allow it, but let them call you auntie."

"It does not make me really any older, or even to feel or look so," the
mother said, with a low silvery laugh of amusement at Violet's
earnestness.

"But I don't like it, dear mamma."

"Then I am sorry I gave them permission; yet having done so, I do not like
to recall it. But, daughter dear, old age will come to us all, if we live,
and it is quite useless to fight against the inevitable."

"Yet we needn't hurry it on, mamma."

"No; but consider; had I and my eldest daughter married as early in life
as my mother did I might now have own grandchildren as old as Max and
Lulu. Beside," she added gayly, "how can I hope to deceive people into
supposing me young when I have three married children."

"Yes, mamma, that is true," Violet said, after a moment's thought; "and
perhaps the children may be more ready to submit to the guidance and
control of a grandma than of an aunt. Oh, how thankful I am that when
their father is no longer here to govern them, they will not be left to my
management alone!"




CHAPTER XXI.

REBELLION.


The next morning Violet began her housekeeping; a not very arduous
undertaking, as competent servants had been brought from Ion for her
establishment as well as for that next door.

It was pleasant to her and the captain to sit down to a well-appointed
table of their own.

Max and Lulu too, coming in fresh and rosy from a stroll along the beach,
thought it extremely nice that at last they had a home of their own with
their father and so sweet and pretty a new mamma to take the head of the
table.

The oysters and fish, just out of the ocean that morning, and Aunt
Phillis's corn-bread and muffins were very delicious to the keen young
appetites, and as Gracie was reported much better, every one was in good
spirits.

The captain and Violet had both been in to see her and ask how she had
passed the night, before coming down to the breakfast-room.

Immediately after the meal the captain conducted family worship. That
over, Max and Lulu seized their hats, and were rushing out in the
direction of the beach, but their father called them back.

"Where are you going?" he asked.

"Down by the waves," said Lulu.

"To the beach, sir," said Max.

"Without a word to any one!" he remarked a little severely. "How do you
know that you are not wanted by your mamma or myself? We are going
directly for a drive on the beach and I had intended to take you both
along. Now I am inclined to leave you behind."

The children hung their heads, looking crestfallen and disappointed.

"O Levis, please let them go!" pleaded Violet, laying her hand
persuasively on her husband's arm. "I am sure they did not mean to do
wrong."

"Well, my love," he answered, "I will overlook it for this time for your
sake. But, Max and Lulu, you must understand that you are under authority
and are not to leave the house without first reporting yourselves to your
mother or me and asking permission, stating where you desire to go and
about how long you expect or wish to stay."

"Yes, sir," said Max; "but if you and Mamma Vi should both happen to be
out?"

"Then you may go to Grandpa Dinsmore or Grandma Elsie."

"Yes, sir," Max answered in a pleasant tone; adding, "I'm sorry to have
displeased you, papa, and will be careful in future to obey the orders
you've just given."

But Lulu remained silent, and her countenance was sullen. She had been so
long in the habit of defying Mrs. Scrimp's authority that now she was
disposed to resist even her father's control in small matters, and think
she ought to be permitted to go and come at her own sweet will, and the
thought of being subjected to the sway of her new mother and her relatives
seemed to the proud, passionate child almost beyond endurance.

The expression of her face did not escape her father's observation, but he
thought it best to take no notice of it, hoping her angry and rebellious
feelings would soon pass away and leave her again the pleasant, lovable
child she had been a few moments since.

The carriage was already at the door.

"I think the air would do Gracie good," he remarked to Vi, "and the drive
not prove too fatiguing if I support her in my arms. We have room for one
more than our party. Will not your mother go with us?"

"Thank you; I'll run in and ask her," Vi said, tripping away.

Elsie accepted the invitation, remarking gayly, "I have no housekeeping
cares to prevent me. I'm just a daughter at home in her father's house,"
giving him a loving look and smile, "as I used to be in the glad, free
days of my girlhood."

The captain came down with Gracie in his arms, hers about his neck, her
little pale face on his shoulder. She looked thin and weak, but very
happy.

Grandma Elsie and Mamma Vi greeted her with loving inquiries and tender
kisses.

"Do you feel strong enough for the drive, dear?" asked the former.

"Yes, ma'am; with papa to hold me in his strong arms."

"Papa's dear baby girl!" murmured the captain low and tenderly, imprinting
a gentle kiss on the pale forehead.

Mr. Dinsmore came over, handed the ladies and Lulu into the carriage, then
held Gracie till her father was seated in it and ready to take her again.

It was a bright, fair morning with a delicious breeze from the sea, and
all enjoyed the drive greatly, unless perhaps Lulu, who had not yet
recovered her good humor. She sat by her father's side, scarcely speaking,
but no one seemed to notice it.

Gracie was asleep when they returned, and her father carried her up to her
room and laid her down so gently that she did not wake.

The others had paused in the veranda below. Zoe and Rosie came running
over to say the bathing hour was near at hand, and to ask if they were
going in.

"I am not," Elsie said.

"Nor I," said Violet, "I'm a little tired and should prefer to sit here
and chat with mamma."

"I'd like to go in," said Max. "When papa comes down I'll ask if I may."

"Mamma," said Rosie, "I don't care to go in to-day, but may I go down on
the beach and watch the bathers?"

"Yes, daughter. Take a servant with you to carry some camp-chairs and to
watch over Walter, if he wants to go with you."

"You'll come too, won't you?" Rosie said to Lulu; "it's good fun to watch
the people in the water."

"I'll have to ask leave first," replied Lulu in a sullen tone. "Can you
wait till papa comes down?"

"That is not necessary since your father has invested me with authority to
give you permission," remarked Violet pleasantly. "You may go if you will
keep with Rosie and the others. But, Lulu, my dear, I wish you would first
go up to your room, take off those coral ornaments and put them away
carefully. They do not correspond well with the dress you have on, and
are not suitable for you to wear down on the beach at this time of day."

She had noticed, on first seeing the child that morning, that she had them
on, but said nothing about it till now.

"You said you gave them to me to keep!" cried Lulu, turning a flushed and
angry face toward her young step-mother; "and if they are my own, I have a
right to wear them when and where I please, and I shall do so."

"Lucilla Raymond, to whom were you speaking?" asked her father sternly,
stepping into their midst from the open door-way.

The child hung her head in sullen silence, while Vi's face was full of
distress; Elsie's but little less so.

"Answer me!" commanded the captain in a tone that frightened even insolent
Lulu. "I overheard you speaking in an extremely impertinent manner to some
one. Who was it?"

"Your new wife," muttered the angry child.

The captain was silent for a moment, trying to gain control over himself.
Then he said calmly, but not less sternly than he had spoken before, "Come
here."

Lulu obeyed, looking pale and frightened.

He leaned down over her, unclasped the coral ornaments from her neck and
arms, and handing them to Violet, said, "My dear, I must ask you to take
these back. I cannot allow her to keep or wear them."

"O Levis!" began Vi in a tone of entreaty; but a look and a gentle "Hush,
love!" silenced her.

"Now, Lucilla," he said, resuming his stern tone of command, "ask your
mamma's pardon for your impertinence, and tell her you will never be
guilty of the like again."

"I won't!" exclaimed Lulu passionately.

At that, her father, with a look of utter astonishment at her presumption,
took her by the hand and led her into the house, upstairs and to her own
room.

"My daughter," he said, "I must be obeyed. I could not have believed you
would be so naughty and disobedient so soon after my return to you, for I
thought you loved me."

He paused for a reply, and Lulu burst out with passionate vehemence, "You
don't love me, papa! I knew you wouldn't when you got a new wife. I knew
she'd steal all your love away from your own children!"

In that moment of fierce, ungovernable anger all Vi's sweet kindness was
forgotten and old prejudices returned in full force.

The captain was too much shocked and astonished to speak for a moment. He
had not dreamed that his child possessed so terrible a temper.

"You were never more mistaken, Lulu," he said at length in a moved tone;
"I never loved my children better than I love them now. Are you not sorry
for your rebellious reply to me a moment since? will you not tell me so,
and do at once what I have bidden you?"

"No; I'll never ask her pardon!"

"You will stay in this room in solitary confinement until you do, though
it should be all summer," he said firmly, went out, locked the door on the
outside, and put the key into his pocket.

Zoe and Rosie had hastened away the moment the captain appeared upon the
scene in the veranda, and as he led Lulu into the house Violet burst into
tears.

"O mamma!" she sobbed, "what shall I do? I wish I had not said a word
about the ornaments, but just let her wear them! I never meant to make
trouble between my husband and his children! I never should have done so
intentionally."

"My dear child, you have no cause to blame yourself," Elsie said
soothingly.

"No, not a bit of it, Mamma Vi," cried Max, coming to her side. "I love Lu
dearly, but I know she has a very bad temper, and I think it's for her own
good that papa has found it out already, so that he can take means to help
her conquer it. Dear me! I should never dare to say 'I won't' to him. Nor
I shouldn't want to, because he's such a good father to us, and I love him
dearly."

"Dear Max," Violet said, smiling through her tears as she took his hand
and pressed it affectionately in hers. "I am sure he is a good, kind,
loving father; his children could never doubt it if they had heard all he
has said to me about them, and I trust you will never do anything to give
him pain."

The captain rejoined them presently, asking the ladies with an assumed
cheerfulness if they intended bathing.

They answered in the negative, and turning to Max he said kindly, "My son,
if you wish to do so, I will take you with me. The surf is fine this
morning and I feel inclined to go in."

"Oh, thank you, papa!" cried Max, "it will be splendid to go in with you!"

The captain re-entered the house and Violet followed. He turned at the
sound of her quick, light step, saw the distress in her face, the tears in
her eyes, and was much moved thereby.

"My love, my darling!" he said, taking her in his arms, "do not let this
thing trouble you. Ah, it pains me deeply that a child of mine should have
already brought tears to those sweet eyes."

"O Levis!" she sobbed, hiding her face on his breast, "forgive her for my
sake. Don't insist on her asking my pardon. I would not have her so
humiliated."

"There are few things you would ask, love, that I would not grant," he
said tenderly, softly smoothing the golden hair; "but for my daughter's
own sake I must compel her obedience. What would become of her if left to
the unrestrained indulgence of such a temper and spirit of insubordination
as she has shown this morning?"

"I know you are right," she sighed, "but I cannot help feeling sorry for
her, and oh it almost breaks my heart to think that I was the cause of the
trouble."

"Ah, but in that you are mistaken, sweet wife," he said, repeating his
caresses; "Lulu's own evil temper was the exciting cause. I could see that
she was in a sullen, rebellious mood from the time that I called her in
before our drive. That I must begin already to discipline one of my
children gives me a sad heart, but I must try to do my duty by her at what
ever cost of pain to her or myself."

As her father turned the key in the lock, Lulu stamped with passion, and
clenched her fists until the nails were buried in the flesh. "I'll never
do it!" she hissed between her tightly-shut teeth, "no, never! if he
keeps me here till I die. I just wish I could die and make him sorry for
treating me so!"

Then throwing herself on the bed she sobbed herself to sleep.

She must have slept several hours, for she was waked by the opening of her
door, and starting up found her father standing beside her with a small
salver in his hand. On it were a plate of graham bread, a china bowl
containing milk, and a silver spoon.

"Here is your dinner, Lucilla," he said, speaking in a quiet, grave tone,
as he set the salver on a little stand in a corner between the windows;
"unless you are ready to obey me. In that case, I shall take you down to
your mamma, and when you have begged her pardon and told me you are sorry
for your rebellious words and conduct toward me, you can eat your dinner
with us."

"I don't want to go downstairs, papa," she said, turning her face away
from him. "I'd rather stay here. But I should think you'd feel mean to eat
all sorts of good things and give me nothing but skim-milk and that black
bread."

"I give you that bread because it contains more nutriment than the white,"
he said. "As to the good things the rest of us may have to eat, you shall
share them as soon as you are ready to submit to my authority, but not
till then."

He waited a moment for a reply, but receiving none, went out and locked
the door.

When he came again at tea-time, bringing a fresh supply of the same sort
of fare, he found the first still untouched.

Lulu was very hungry, and really for the last hour had quite longed to eat
the bread and milk, but from sheer obstinacy would not touch it. She
thought if she held out long enough in her refusal to eat it, something
better would be furnished her.

But now she fairly quailed before the glance of her father's eye as he set
the second salver down and seating himself said, "Come here to me!"

She obeyed, looking pale and frightened.

He drew her in between his knees, put one arm round her, and taking the
bowl he had just brought in the other hand, held it to her lips, with the
command, "Drink this! every drop of it!"

When that was done, he commanded, "Now break this bread into that other
bowl of milk, take your spoon and eat it."

Now thoroughly frightened, she did not dare disobey.

He sat and watched her till the meal was finished, she feeling that his
stern eye was upon her, but never once venturing to look at him.

"Have you anything to say to me, Lucilla?" he asked as he rose to go.

"No, sir," she answered, with her eyes upon the carpet.

"My child, you are grieving me very much," he said, took up the salver and
went out.

Lulu did love her father--though not nearly so well as her own
self-will--and his parting words brought a gush of tears from her eyes.
She was half inclined to call to him to come back, and say she would obey.

But no! her heart rose up in fierce rebellion at the thought of asking
pardon of his "new wife." "I'll never do it!" she repeated half aloud,
"and when I get sick and die from being kept shut up here papa will wish
he hadn't tried to make me."

So she hardened her heart day after day and refused to yield.

Her fare continued the same, her father bringing it to her three times
daily, now in silence, now asking if she were ready to obey.

She saw no one else but the maid who came each morning to put her room in
order; except as she caught sight of one or another from the window. She
liked to look at the sea and watch the vessels sailing by, but was often
seized with a great longing to get down close to the waves.

After the second day she grew very, very weary of her imprisonment and
indulged in frequent fits of crying as she heard the gay voices of Max and
the young Travillas at sport on the veranda, in the yards below, or knew
from the sound of wheels, followed by an hour or more of quiet, that
drives were being taken.

She knew she was missing a great deal of enjoyment. Being of an active
temperament, extremely fond of out-door exercise, made this close
confinement even more irksome to her than it would have been to many
another.

She had nothing to do. She had turned over the contents of her trunk
several times, had found her doll, and tried to amuse herself with it, but
there was little fun in that without a playmate. She had no book but her
Bible, and that she did not care to read; there was too much in it to
condemn her.

"Papa," she said, when he came with her breakfast on the fourth day,
"mayn't I go and run on the beach for ten minutes and then come back?"

"What did I tell you about leaving this room?" he asked.

"I know you said I shouldn't do it till I asked her pardon," she replied,
bursting into a fit of passionate weeping, "but I'll never do that, and if
I get sick and die you'll be sorry for keeping me shut up so."

"You must not talk to your father in that impertinent manner," he said
sternly. "It is not I who keep you here, it is your own self-will; and
just so long as that lasts you will remain here."

"I haven't a friend in the world," she sobbed; "my own father is cruel to
me since he----"

"Hush!" he said in stern indignation. "I will have no more of that
impertinence! Will you force me to try the virtue of a rod with you,
Lucilla?"

She started and looked up at him with frightened eyes.

"I should be very loath to do so, but advise you to be very careful how
you tempt me to it any farther," he said, and left her.

He went down with a heavy heart to the breakfast-room where his wife, Max
and Gracie awaited his coming.

All three greeted his entrance with loving smiles. Vi was looking very
lovely, and he noticed with gratitude that Gracie's eyes were bright and
her cheeks faintly tinged with pink. She was improving rapidly in the
bracing sea-air and winning all hearts by her pretty ways.

She ran to meet him, crying, "Good-morning, my dear papa!"

He took her in his arms and kissed her tenderly two or three times,
longing to be able to do the same by the other one upstairs, put her in
her place at the table and took his own.

A tempting meal was spread upon it, but he felt that he could scarcely
enjoy it because it must not be shared with Lulu.

Vi read it all in his face, and her heart bled for him. She had seen
through all these days of conflict with his stubborn, rebellious child,
that his heart was sore over it, though he made great efforts to appear as
usual, and never spoke of Lulu except when it was quite necessary.

He had had to explain to Gracie why her sister was not to be seen, and to
entreat Vi not to grieve over her unintentional share in occasioning the
struggle, or let it hinder her enjoyment.

Elsie had made a generous settlement upon each of her married children; so
Vi had abundant means of her own. She longed to spend some of her money on
her husband's children, especially in pretty, tasteful dress for the two
little girls. She asked his consent, deeming it mot right to act without
it.

He seemed pleased that she had it in her heart to care for them in that
way, but said nothing could be done for Lulu at present, she might do what
she would for Gracie, but the expense must be his; nor could she move him
from that decision.

She had begun to carry out her plans for Gracie, delighting herself in
making her look as pretty as possible, and each day hoping that Lulu's
submission would make it possible to do the same by her.

She knew this morning, by her husband's countenance and his coming in
alone, that that hope had again failed, and her heart sank; but for his
sake she assumed an air of cheerfulness and chatted of other things with a
sprightliness and gayety that won him from sad thoughts in spite of
himself.




CHAPTER XXII.

    "Prithee, forgive me!"


"Papa, can't I see Gracie?" Lulu asked when he came in with her dinner.

"Certainly, if you are ready to obey."

The child's lip quivered. "I'm so tired of that bread and milk," she said.
"Can't I have something else? I'm sure you and everybody in the house have
a great many good things."

"We have, and it is a great grief to me that I cannot share them with my
little Lulu. I have very little enjoyment in them because of that."

"Papa, I'm sorry I've been so naughty, so impertinent to you. I don't mean
ever to be so again; and I'll be a good girl every way after this, if
you'll let me out."

"Then come with me to your mamma," he said, holding out his hand.

"I can't ask pardon of her," she said, turning away with a sob.

"You must, Lucilla," he said in a tone that made her tremble. "You need
not think to conquer your father. I shall keep you here on this plain
fare and in solitary confinement until you are entirely penitent and
submissive."

He waited a moment, but receiving no reply, went out and locked the door.

"She is still stubborn," he said to Violet, whom he found alone in their
room across the hall, sighing deeply as he spoke; "and the close
confinement is telling upon her; she grows pale and thin. Oh, how my heart
bleeds for her, my dear child! But I must be firm. This is an important
crisis in her life, and her future character--therefore her happiness for
time and eternity--will depend greatly upon how this struggle ends."

The next day was the Sabbath, and on returning from church, he went to
Lulu's room.

Little had passed between them since the talk of yesterday when he carried
in her dinner. He found her now sitting in a listless attitude, and she
did not look up on his entrance.

He lifted her from her chair, sat down in it himself, and took her on his
knee.

"Has this holy day brought no good thoughts or feelings to my little
girl?" he asked, gently smoothing the hair back from her forehead.

"You know I couldn't go to church, papa," she said, without looking at
him.

"No; I know you could have gone, had you chosen to be a good, obedient
child."

"Papa, how can you go on trying to make me tell a lie when you have always
taught me it was such a wicked, wicked thing to do?"

"I try to make you tell a lie! what can you mean, daughter?" he asked in
great surprise.

"Yes, papa, you are trying to make me ask Mamma Vi's pardon after I have
said I wouldn't."

"Ah, my child, that was a wicked promise because it was rebellion against
your father's authority, which God commands you to respect. Therefore the
sin was in making it, and it is your duty to break it."

Then he made her repeat the fifth commandment, and called her attention to
its promise of long life and prosperity, as far as it shall be for God's
glory and their own good, to all such as keep it.

"I want you to inherit that blessing, my child," he said, "and to escape
the curses pronounced against those who refuse obedience to their
parents."

Opening the Bible, he read to her, "The eye that mocketh at his father and
despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out,
and the young eagles shall eat it."

She gave him a frightened look, then, with a slight shudder, hid her face
on his breast, but did not speak.

"Lulu," he said, again softly stroking her hair, "about nine years ago I
came home from a long voyage to find a dear little dark-eyed baby
daughter, and as I took her in my arms, oh how my heart went out in love
to her and gratitude to God for giving her to me! I loved her dearly then.
I have loved her ever since with unabated affection, and never doubted her
love to me until now."

"Papa, I do love you," she said, hastily brushing away a tear. "I've said
I was sorry for being naughty to you and didn't mean to do so any more."

"And yet are continuing to be naughty and disobedient all the time. It is
quite possible, Lulu, that you may some day be fatherless; if that time
should come, do you think you will look back with pleasure to these days
of rebellion?"

At that she cried quite bitterly, but her father waited in vain for a word
of reply.

He put her on her knees on the floor, knelt beside her, and with his hand
on her head prayed earnestly, tenderly that the Lord would cast out her
wicked temper, forgive her sins, give her a new heart, and make her his
own dear child.

Rising, he took her in his arms again for a moment, she still sobbing, but
saying not a word, then putting her gently aside, he left the room.

To her surprise her dinner of bread and milk was presently brought up by
Agnes, who set it down and went out without exchanging a word with her.

The same thing occurred at supper-time.

Lulu began to be filled with curiosity not unmingled with apprehension,
but was too proud to question the girl.

All through the afternoon and evening her thoughts dwelt much upon what
her father had said to her, and the words and tender tones of his prayer
rang in her ears and melted her heart. Beside she had become thoroughly
convinced that what he had said he would do, so that there was no hope of
release until won by obedience.

She was disappointed that he did not come with her supper nor afterward,
for she had almost resolved to submit. She cried herself to sleep that
night, feeling such a love for her father as she had never known before,
and an intense longing for his kiss of forgiveness.

She became not willing only, but eager to do his bidding that she might
receive it.

In the morning she dressed herself with neatness and care and impatiently
awaited his coming. She was sure it must be long past the usual hour when
at last the door opened and Violet came in with the waiter of bread and
milk.

She set it down and turned to the little girl, who stood gazing at her in
silent surprise.

"Lulu, dear, your father is very ill," she said in tones quivering with
emotion, and then the child noticed that there were traces of tears about
her eyes and on her cheeks, "He was in terrible pain all night, and is
very little better this morning," she went on. "O Lulu, I had a dear, dear
father once, and he was taken ill very much as yours has been and--in a
few days. Oh, how I loved him! and while he lived I thought I was a good
daughter to him, for I don't remember ever being wilfully disobedient, but
after he was gone my heart reproached me with having neglected
opportunities to give him pleasure, and not having always obeyed quite so
promptly and cheerfully as I might, and I would have given worlds to go
back and be and do all I ought."

She ended with a burst of tears, covering her face with her hands and
sobbing, "O papa, papa! O my husband, my dear, dear husband!"

"O Mamma Vi! I will ask your pardon--I do! won't you please forgive me for
being so very, very naughty and impertinent? when you have been so good
and kind to me too," sobbed Lulu, dropping on her knees at Violet's feet.

"I do with all my heart," Violet said, lifting her up and kissing her.
"And shall we not always love each other for your dear father's sake?"

"Oh, yes, yes, indeed! I do love you! I don't know what made me be so
wicked and stubborn. Mayn't I go to papa and tell him how sorry I am, and
ask him to forgive me too?"

"Yes, dear, come; perhaps it may help him to grow better, for I know he
has grieved very much over this," Vi said, taking the child's hand and
leading her into the room where the captain lay.

As he saw them come in thus his eye brightened in spite of the severe pain
he was enduring.

With one bound, Lulu was at his side, sobbing, "Papa, papa! I'm so sorry
for all my badness, and all your pain. Please, please forgive me. I've
done it--asked Mamma Vi's pardon, and--and I'll never talk so to her
again, nor ever disobey you any more."

"I hope not, my darling," he said, drawing her down to give her a tender
fatherly kiss of forgiveness. "I am rejoiced that you have given up your
rebellion so that now I can love and pet you to my heart's content--if God
spares me to get up from this bed of pain. I do forgive you gladly, dear
daughter."

For several days the captain was very ill, but the best of medical advice
was at hand, the best of nursing was given him by Elsie and Violet,
assisted by Mr. and Mrs. Dinsmore and others, and, by the blessing of
Providence, upon these means he recovered.

Lulu seemed very unhappy and remorseful until it was quite certain that he
would get well, took little interest in any kind of recreation, and was
often found hovering about the door of his room, eager to learn how he was
and if possible gain admission to his presence, or permission to do
something for his relief.

She was a changed child from that time, perfectly respectful, obedient,
and affectionate toward both her father and Violet.

When the captain had once begun to mend, the improvement was very rapid,
and he was soon able to share in the drives and other recreations of their
party.

During his illness Grandma Elsie had been very kind to his children,
acting a mother's part by them, attending to their wants, comforting and
encouraging them with hope of his recovery, and they had grown very fond
of her.

At first Lulu shrank from all her new mamma's relatives, and even from Max
and Gracie, ashamed of her misconduct and expecting to receive unpleasant
reminders of it.

But she met with nothing of the kind, except that Max, when she first came
downstairs, said. "It does seem strange, Lulu, that when so many men have
to obey papa the instant he speaks, his own little girl should stand out
so long and stubbornly against his authority;" and Gracie, with her arms
about her sister's neck, sobbed, "O Lu how could you make dear papa so
sorry for so many days?"

"Was he so sorry?" sobbed Lulu.

"Yes, indeed; sometimes he hardly ate anything, and looked so sad that the
tears came in my eyes, and in Mamma Vi's too."

"Oh, I hope that wasn't what made him sick!" cried Lulu, the tears
streaming down her face. "I'll never, never behave so to him again."

Lulu was still more remorseful as time went on and everybody was so kind
to her, seeming never to remember her naughtiness and disgrace, but giving
her a share in all the pleasures devised for themselves which were
suitable to her age.

She was especially touched and subdued by the interest Violet took in
seeing her provided with new dresses made and trimmed in the fashion
(which, to her extreme vexation, Mrs. Scrimp had always disregarded), and
with many other pretty things.

When she thanked her new mamma, she was told, "Your father pays for them
all, dear."

Then she went to him with tears in her eyes, and putting her arms round
his neck, thanked him for all his goodness, confessing that she did not
deserve it.

"You are very welcome nevertheless, daughter," he said, "and all I ask in
return is that you will be good and obedient."

Vi wished to return to Lulu the pink coral ornaments, but that he would
not allow.

It was a great disappointment to Lulu, for she admired them extremely, but
she showed herself entirely submissive under it.




CHAPTER XXIII

MAX.


"Papa," said Max one morning, as they rose from the breakfast-table, "I
feel as if a long walk would do me good. I'd like to go farther down the
beach than I ever have yet."

"Very well, my son, you may go, only keep out of danger and come home in
time for dinner," was the indulgent rejoinder, and the lad set off at
once.

He presently fell in with two other lads a little older than himself,
boarders in one of the near hotels, and casual acquaintances of his. They
joined him and the three rambled on together, whistling, talking, and
occasionally stooping to pick up a shell, pebble, or bit of seaweed or
sponge.

At length they reached an inlet that seemed to bar their farther progress,
but looking about they spied an old boat stranded by yesterday's tide a
little higher up the inlet, and were of course instantly seized with a
great desire to get her into the water and set sail in her.

"Wouldn't it be jolly fun?" cried Bob Masters, the eldest of the trio.
"Come on, boys."

Max was a rather heedless fellow, and never stopping to consider the right
or wrong of the thing, or whether he were running into danger or not, went
with the others.

They found the boat, as they thought, in fair condition; there were two
oars in her, and both Max and John Cox, the other lad, thought they knew
pretty well how to use them, while Masters was sure he could steer.

With a good deal of exertion they set the little craft afloat; then
climbing in they pushed boldly out into deep water and bore down toward
the ocean.

Max had thought they were only going to cross to the farther side of the
inlet and continue their walk; but almost before he knew it, they were out
upon the sea, and the boat was rocking upon the waves in a way that seemed
to him decidedly alarming.

"Boys," he said, "let's put back as fast as we can. We don't know anything
about managing a boat out here, and see how big the waves are!"

"That's because the tide's coming in," laughed Masters, "so if we should
upset it'll wash us ashore."

"I don't know," said Max, "I'd rather not risk it; there's the undertow to
carry us out again."

"Oh, you're a coward!" sneered Cox.

"I'm not going to turn back yet," said Masters; "so stick to your oar,
Raymond, and if the sight of the big waves frightens you, just turn your
back to 'em."

At that moment a hail came from a fishing-smack not far away. "Halloo!
boys, you'd better put back as fast as you can; that boat's not safe,
especially in the hands of such green-horns as you."

At the same moment a big incoming wave washed over them, carrying away
their hats and Max's coat, which he had pulled off when taking the oar.

Masters and Cox were now sufficiently frightened to be willing to turn
back; they made the attempt at once, but found it far more difficult than
they had anticipated. They struggled hard, and several times nearly gave
themselves up for lost; but at last, after many narrow escapes, a huge
wave carried them high on to the beach, and left them there with barely
strength to crawl up out of the way of the next.

It was a good while before they were able to do anything but lie panting
and gasping on the sand.

Max had not been long gone when Zoe ran into the cottage of the Raymonds,
to tell of a plan just set on foot in the other house to get up a party
to visit some points of interest several miles distant.

They were to go in carriages, take a lunch with them, and not return till
late in the afternoon, when all would dine together at Mrs. Dinsmore's
table.

"Mamma is not going," she said, "and offers to take care of Gracie, if the
child stays behind. Every one seems to fear the ride would be too long and
wearisome for her."

"Yes, I think so," the captain said, fondling her, for she was sitting on
his knee.

"I'd like to go, papa," she said, looking up coaxingly into his face, "I
like to go driving, and to sit on your knee."

"And I love to have my baby girl in my arms, and to give her pleasure," he
responded, repeating his caresses, "but I should feel very sad to see her
made sick."

"Then I'll be good and not ask to go, papa," she said, with a slight sigh,
laying her head on his shoulder.

"That's my dear, good little Gracie! You shall have a short drive every
day when I can manage it. Perhaps a moonlight drive along the beach,
to-morrow evening. Will not that be nice?"

"Oh, ever so nice, dear papa!" she cried, clapping her hands in delight.

"Mamma not going, Zoe!" exclaimed Violet in a tone of disappointment.
"That will rob the excursion of half its charm for me. Is she not well?"

"She has a very slight headache, she says, and fears the sun would
increase it. Besides she is so much interested in a book she is reading
that she prefers staying at home to finish it. We had hard work to
persuade grandpa to go without her, but he has consented at last; only, I
believe, because Grandma Rose refused to go without him, and mamma insists
that she is in no danger of a bad headache if she keeps quiet."

"Yes, grandpa is so fond and careful of her."

"We have two large carriages, so that there is abundance of room for
everybody," pursued Zoe; "and we hope, Captain, that you will let Max and
Lulu go."

"Lulu shall certainly, if she chooses," he said, turning with a kind,
fatherly smile to the little girl who stood silently at his side, waiting
with a wistful, eager look, to hear if she were to be of the party, but
ashamed to ask the indulgence because of a vivid remembrance of her late
rebellion and disgrace.

"Oh, thank you, papa!" she cried joyously, giving him a hug and kiss.
"Mamma Vi, what shall I wear?"

"Your travelling dress will be the most suitable I think," said Violet.

"Then I'll run and put it on," returned Lulu, hastening away with cheerful
alacrity.

"Max shall go too, Captain, shan't he?" queried Zoe, with whom the boy was
a great favorite.

"He might if he were here," the father answered; "but unfortunately he has
gone off for a long walk and may not be back before dinner-time."

"And we must start in a few minutes," remarked Vi; "I am really sorry, for
I know Max will regret missing it. Gracie, dear, I'm going over to speak
to mamma; shall I take you with me?"

"Yes, if you please, Mamma Vi, when I've kissed my dear papa good-by."

Having done so, she took her doll in her arms and gave her hand to Violet.
She felt a little lonely at the thought of being left behind, but was
quite comforted on learning that little Walter Travilla had decided to
stay at home and play with her.

The excursionists drove off, and Elsie, having provided the little ones
with amusement, gave herself up to the enjoyment of her book and an
easy-chair set where she could catch the pleasant sea breeze without
feeling the sun. Still, she did not forget the children, but now and then
laid aside her book for a little, while she suggested or invented some
new game for their entertainment.

So the morning passed quietly and pleasantly.

It was a little past noon when, stepping out upon the veranda, she caught
sight of a forlorn figure, hatless, coatless, and dishevelled generally,
yet bearing a strangely familiar look, slowly approaching the other
cottage. A second glance told her who it was.

"Max!" she exclaimed in astonishment, and forgetting all about her
headache, caught up a sunshade and hurried to meet him.

"Max! can it be you?" she asked. "Why, my poor boy, where have you been?
and what has happened to you?"

"O Grandma Elsie!" he said, looking much mortified and ready to cry, "I
did hope I'd be able to get into the house without anybody seeing me! Do
you know where my father is?"

"Yes; the two families have all gone on an excursion except Gracie,
Walter, and me. But come in out of the sun," she added, leading the way
into the Raymonds' cottage. Max followed her, and won to confidence by her
sweet and kindly sympathy, told her the whole story of his morning's
adventure.

"O Max, my dear boy! what a narrow escape!" she said, with tears in her
eyes. "What a mercy that you are alive to tell the tale! What a terrible,
terrible shock it would have been to your father to learn that his only
son was drowned! and that while in the act of disobeying him, for you say
he bade you not to go into any danger."

"Yes, Grandma Elsie, and if he finds it out I'll be pretty sure to get a
severe flogging. I deserve it, I know; but I don't want to take it. You
won't tell on me, will you? Perhaps he'll find it out through the loss of
the coat and hat, but I hope he won't miss them, at I have several
others."

"No, Max, I shall certainly not tell on you; no one shall ever learn from
me what you have told me in confidence; but I do hope, my dear boy, that
you will not try to deceive your kind, loving father, but will confess all
to him as soon as he comes home, and patiently bear whatever punishment he
sees fit to inflict. It is the only right and honorable course, Max, and
will save you a great deal of suffering from remorse and fear of
detection."

"But it will be dreadfully hard to confess!" sighed Max. "I believe I
really dread that more than the flogging."

"Yet take courage, my boy, and do it. Do not allow yourself to indulge in
moral cowardice, but dare to do right, asking help of God, who is able and
willing to give it."

Max made no reply, but sat there before her, looking very guilty and
miserable.

"You must be hungry," she said presently, "and it is not easy to be brave
and strong on an empty stomach. Suppose you go to your room and make
yourself neat, then come into the other house and join me and the little
folks in a nice luncheon."

The proposal was accepted with thankfulness.

Max looked several degrees less miserable after satisfying his appetite,
yet all the afternoon seemed restless and unhappy.

Elsie said little to him, but many times silently lifted up her heart on
his behalf, asking that he might have strength given him to do the duty he
felt to be so difficult and painful.

As the time drew near when the pleasure-seekers might be expected to
return, he slipped away out of her sight.

Presently the carriages drove up and deposited their load. Max stood
waiting in the veranda, his heart beating very fast and loud, as his
father, Violet, and Lulu came up the path that led from the garden-gate.

All three greeted him affectionately, expressing their regret that he had
missed the pleasure of the excursion; then Vi and Lulu passed into the
house and on upstairs.

The captain was about to follow when Max, stepping close to his side,
said, with a slight tremble in his voice, "Papa, I--want to speak to you."

"Very well, my son, say on," answered the captain, stopping and turning
toward him.

"It's something I want to tell you, sir," and Max hung his head, his
cheeks flushing hotly.

His father gave him a searching look, took his hand, and led him into the
parlor.

"Don't be afraid of your father, Max," he said kindly, "why should you?"

"Because I've been a bad boy, sir, deserving of a flogging, and expect you
to give it to me," Max burst out desperately.

"Tell me all about it, my son," the captain said in a moved tone, "and
tell it here," seating himself and drawing the boy to his knee. "Perhaps
it will be easier."

"Oh, yes, papa, because it makes me know you love me even if I am bad; but
it makes me more ashamed and sorry for having disobeyed you," sobbed Max,
no longer able to refrain from tears as he felt the affectionate clasp of
his father's enfolding arm.

"Then it has a right effect. My boy, I think if you knew how much I love
you, you would never disobey. It will be a sore trial to me, as well as to
you, if I find it my duty to inflict any severe punishment upon you. But
let me hear your story."

Max told it in broken accents, for he was full of remorse for having
behaved so ill to so kind a parent.

When he had finished there was a moment of silence. It was the captain who
broke it.

"My boy," he said, with emotion, "it was a really wonderful escape, and we
must thank God for it. If you had been drowned, Max, do you know that it
would have gone near to break your father's heart? To lose my first-born,
my only son, and in the very act of disobedience--oh, how terrible!"

"Papa, I didn't, I really didn't think about its being disobedience when I
got into the boat, because it didn't seem dangerous till we were fairly
out among the waves."

"Do you think I ought to excuse you on that account?"

"No, sir; you've reproved me so often for not thinking, and for not being
careful to obey your orders; and I know I deserve a flogging. But, O papa,
please don't let Mamma Vi know about it, or anybody else. Can't you take
me upstairs here when they are all in the other house?"

"I shall not use corporal punishment this time, Max," the captain said, in
a moved tone. Dressing the boy closer to his side, "I shall try free
forgiveness, for I think you are truly sorry. And then you have made so
frank and full a confession of wrong-doing, that I might perhaps never
have discovered in any other way."

"O papa, how good you are to me! I don't think I can ever be so mean and
ungrateful as to disobey you again," exclaimed Max, feelingly. "But I
don't deserve to be praised, or let off from punishment, because of
confessing, for I shouldn't have done it if Grandma Elsie hadn't talked to
me about the duty of it, and persuaded me to take courage to do it because
it was right."

"Bless her for it! the dear, good woman!" the captain said, with earnest
gratitude. "But I think, Max, you do deserve commendation for taking her
advice. I have something more to say to you, my son, but not now, for the
call to dinner will come directly, and I must go and prepare for it."

There was a hearty embrace between them, and they separated, the captain
going to his room to make his toilet and Max to the other house, where he
soon managed to let Grandma Elsie into the secret of his confession and
its happy result, thanking her with tears in his eyes for her kind, wise
advice.

Elsie rejoiced with and for him, telling him he had made her heart glad
and that she hoped he would always have courage to do right.

As Max prepared for bed that night he was wondering to himself what more
his father had to say to him, when he heard the captain's step on the
stairs, and the next moment he came in.

Max started a little apprehensively. Could it be that his father had
changed his mind, and was about to give him the dreaded flogging after
all?

But with one glance up into the grave yet kindly face looking down at him,
all his fear vanished. He drew a long breath of relief.

"My boy," the captain said, laying his hand on Max's shoulder, "I told you
I had something more to say to you, and I have come to say it now. You are
'my first-born, my might and the beginning of my strength.' Never until
you are a father yourself can you know or understand the tide of love,
joy, and thankfulness that swept over me at the news of your birth. Nor do
you know how often, on land and on sea, in storm and in calm, my thoughts
dwell with deep anxiety upon the future of my son, not only for time, Max,
but for eternity."

The captain paused for a moment, his emotions seemingly too big for
utterance, and Max, throwing his arms around his neck, hid his face on his
breast.

"Papa," he sobbed, "I didn't know you loved me so much! Oh, I wish I'd
always been a good boy!"

The captain sat down and drew him to his knee.

"My dear son," he said, "I have no doubt that you are sorry for every act
of disobedience toward me, and I fully and freely forgive them all; but
what I want you to consider now is your sinfulness toward God, and your
need of forgiveness from him. You are old enough to be a Christian now,
Max, and it is what I desire for you more than anything else. Think what
blessedness to be made a child of God, an heir of glory! to have Jesus,
the sinner's Friend, for your own Saviour, your sins all washed away in
his precious blood, his righteousness put upon you."

"Papa, I don't know how."

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved,' the Bible
says. It tells us that we have all broken God's holy law, that we all
deserve his wrath and curse forever, and cannot be saved by anything that
we can do or Buffer; but that 'God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but
have everlasting life.' He offers this salvation to us as his free gift,
and so we are to take it, for we can have it in no other way. Go to God,
my son, just as you have come to me, with confession of your sins and
acknowledging that you deserve only punishment; but pleading for pardon
through the blood and merits of Jesus Christ. Accept the salvation offered
you by the Lord Jesus, giving yourself to him to be his, his only forever.
'Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, to
give repentance to Israel and remission of sins,' and he will give them to
you if you ask for them with all your heart. He says, 'Him that cometh to
me, I will in no wise cast out.' My son, my dear son, will not you come
now? God's time is always _now_, and only the present is ours."

"Papa, I will try; I am sorry for my sins against God, and I do want to
belong to him. Papa, won't you pray for me?"

They knelt down together, and with his son's hand in his the captain
poured out a fervent prayer on the boy's behalf, of confession and
entreaty for pardon and acceptance in the name and for the sake of Him
"who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our
justification."

Then, with a silent, tender embrace he left him.




CHAPTER XXIV.

    "Home again, home again, from a foreign shore,
     And oh it fills my soul with Joy to see my friends once more."


The rest of the summer and early fall passed delightfully to our
sojourners by the sea; though the happiness of the captain and Violet was
somewhat marred by the knowledge that soon they must part for a season of
greater or less duration, he to be exposed to all the dangers of the
treacherous deep.

But they did not indulge in repining or lose the enjoyment of the present
in vexing thoughts concerning the probable trials of the future.

It was necessary, however, to give it some consideration, and make
arrangements in regard to his children.

Thinking of the guidance and control they all needed, the temper and
stubbornness Lulu had shown, the watchful care requisite for Gracie in her
feeble state, he hesitated to ask Mrs. Dinsmore and Elsie if they still
felt inclined to undertake the charge of them.

But to his great relief and gratitude, those kind friends did not wait for
him to broach the subject, but renewed their offer, saying they had
become much attached to the children, and desired more than ever to give
them a happy home with themselves; upon the conditions formerly stated,
namely, that he would delegate his authority to them during his absence,
and give the children distinctly to understand that he had done so.

These conditions the captain gladly accepted. He told the children all
about the arrangement he had made for them, and in the presence of the
whole family, bade them obey Mr. and Mrs. Dinsmore, Grandma Elsie and
Mamma Vi as they would himself.

"One master and three mistresses!" Edward remarked lightly; "are you not
imposing rather hard conditions, Captain?"

"No, I think not, Ned, for I am satisfied that their commands will never
conflict; but should they do so, Mr. Dinsmore, as patriarch of the whole
tribe, is of course the highest authority."

It had been decided that Harold and Herbert should now enter college. The
others, on being left by the captain, would all return to Ion and spend
the winter there or at Viamede. Edward would take charge of the Ion
plantation, his grandfather giving him some slight supervision at the
start.

This arrangement would leave Mr. Dinsmore almost without employment, and,
as he liked to be busy, he said he would gladly act the part of tutor to
Max, and also hear some of the recitations of Rosie and Lulu. Grandma
Elsie and Mamma Vi would for the present undertake the rest of the work of
educating the girls and little Walter.

Their plans settled, they gave themselves up to quiet enjoyment of each
other's society while Capt. Raymond waited for orders.

Early in October there came a great and joyful surprise. A train had
steamed into the neighboring depot a few moments before, but as they were
not looking for any addition to their party, no one had taken particular
note of the fact.

But a carriage came driving from that direction, and drew up before the
gate of Mr. Dinsmore's cottage, where the whole family were gathered.

A gentleman hastily alighted, handed out a lady; a servant-woman
followed--having first handed him an odd-looking, rather large bundle,
which he received with care--then turned to collect packages and parcels,
while the other two hurried to the house, the lady a little in advance.

"Elsie!" was the simultaneous exclamation of many voices in varied tones
of astonishment and delight, and the next instant there was a wonderful
confusion of greetings and embraces mingled with tears of joy and
thankfulness.

Lester and his wife had been heard from frequently during the past months,
their letters always cheerful and full of bright hopes and anticipations,
but containing no hint of any intention of returning to America before the
coming spring.

As they afterward explained, it had been a very sudden resolve, caused by
a severe fit of homesickness, and there really was no time to write.

Lester shared the joyous welcome given to Elsie; the servant woman having
relieved him of his bundle, of which, in their joyous excitement, no one
had taken particular notice.

Only waiting, a trifle impatiently, till the greetings and introductions
were over, Elsie Leland took it from her, and with a proud, happy, yet
tearful smile laid it--a lovely sleeping babe--in her mother's arms.

"Our boy, mother dear. We have named him for his grandpa--Edward
Travilla."

Elsie Travilla folded the child to her heart, kissed it softly, tenderly,
the great silent tears rolling down her cheeks.

"Ah, could he but have seen it! our first grandchild," she sighed.

Then, wiping away her tears, and sending a glance of mingled joy and
maternal pride around the little circle, she folded the babe still
closer, saying, with an arch, sweet smile, "Ah, no one now can deny that I
am in very truth Grandma Elsie!"


THE END.

       *       *       *      *       *

=THE MERRY LYNN SERIES=


By HARRIET PYNE GROVE Cloth Bound. Jackets in Colors.

       *       *       *       *       *

The charm of school and camp life, out-door sports and European travel is
found in these winning tales of Merilyn and her friends at boarding school
and college. These realistic stories of the everyday life, the fun, frolic
and special adventures of the Beechwood girls will be enjoyed by all girls
of high school age.

    MERILYN ENTERS BEECHWOLD
    MERILYN AT CAMP MEENAHGA
    MERILYN TESTS LOYALTY
    MERILYN'S NEW ADVENTURE
    MERILYN FORRESTER, CO-ED.
    THE "MERRY LYNN" MINE


       *       *       *       *       *

A.L. BURT COMPANY, _Publishers_

114-120 EAST 23rd STREET NEW YORK

[Illustration]

=The Ann Sterling Series=

By HARRIET PYNE GROVE

Stories of Ranch Life and Adventure. For Girls 12 to 16 Years.

Handsome Cloth Binding with Attractive Jackets in Color

       *       *       *       *       *


    ANN STERLING
    THE COURAGE OF ANN
    ANN AND THE JOLLY SIX
    ANN CROSSES A SECRET TRAIL
    ANN'S SEARCH REWARDED
    ANN'S AMBITIONS


       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent on receipt of price by the Publishers

=A.L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 E. 23d St., NEW YORK=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

=MARJORIE DEAN=

=POST-GRADUATE=

=SERIES=


By PAULINE LESTER

Author of the Famous Marjorie Dean High School and College Series.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles.

_With Individual Jackets in Colors._

    MARJORIE DEAN, POST GRADUATE
    MARJORIE DEAN, MARVELOUS MANAGER
    MARJORIE DEAN AT HAMILTON ARMS
    MARJORIE DEAN'S ROMANCE
    MARJORIE DEAN MACY


       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent on receipt of price by the Publishers

=A.L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 E. 23d St., NEW YORK=






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Grandmother Elsie, by Martha Finley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRANDMOTHER ELSIE ***

***** This file should be named 14883.txt or 14883.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/4/8/8/14883/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
eIehe Project Gutenberg eBook, Andromeda and Other Poems, by Charles Kingsley


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Andromeda and Other Poems

Author: Charles Kingsley

Release Date: February 12, 2004  [eBook #11064]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDROMEDA AND OTHER POEMS***




Transcribed by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk




ANDROMEDA AND OTHER POEMS




Contents:

   Andromeda
   Hypotheses Hypochondriacae
   Trehill Well
   In an Illuminated Missal
   The Weird Lady
   Palinodia
   A Hope
   The Poetry of a Root Crop
   Child Ballad
   Airly Beacon
   Sappho
   The Bad Squire
   Scotch Song
   The Young Knight
   A New Forest Ballad
   The Red King
   The Outlaw
   Sing Heigh-ho!
   A March
   A Lament
   The Night Bird
   The Dead Church
   A Parable from Liebig
   The Starlings
   Old and New
   The Watchman
   The World's Age
   The Sands of Dee
   The Tide Rock
   Elegiacs
   Dartside
   My Hunting Song
   Alton Locke's Song
   The Day of the Lord
   A Christmas Carol
   The Oubit
   The Three Fishers
   Sonnet
   Margaret to Dolcino
   Dolcino to Margaret
   The Ugly Princess
   Sonnet
   The Swan-neck
   A Thought from the Rhine
   The Longbeards' Saga.  A.D. 400
   Saint Maura.  A.D. 304
   On the Death of a Certain Journal
   Down to the Mothers
   To Miss Mitford
   Ballad of Earl Haldan's Daughter
   Frank Leigh's Song.  A.D. 1586
   Ode to the North-east Wind
   A Farewell
   To G. A. G.
   The South Wind
   The Invitation
   The Find
   Fishing Song
   The Last Buccaneer
   The Knight's Return
   Pen-y-gwrydd
   Ode
   Songs from 'The Water-babies'
      The Tide River
      Young and Old
      The Summer Sea
      My Little Doll
   The Knight's Leap
   The Song of the Little Baltung.  A.D. 395
   On the Death of Leopold, King of the Belgians
   Easter Week
   Drifting Away
   Christmas Day
   September 21, 1870
   The Mango-tree
   The Priest's Heart
   'Qu'est Qu'il Dit'
   The Legend of La Brea
   Hymn
   The Delectable Day
   Juventus Mundi
   Valentine's Day
   Ballad
   Martin Lightfoot's Song



ANDROMEDA



Over the sea, past Crete, on the Syrian shore to the southward,
Dwells in the well-tilled lowland a dark-haired AEthiop people,
Skilful with needle and loom, and the arts of the dyer and carver,
Skilful, but feeble of heart; for they know not the lords of Olympus,
Lovers of men; neither broad-browed Zeus, nor Pallas Athene,
Teacher of wisdom to heroes, bestower of might in the battle;
Share not the cunning of Hermes, nor list to the songs of Apollo.
Fearing the stars of the sky, and the roll of the blue salt water,
Fearing all things that have life in the womb of the seas and the livers,
Eating no fish to this day, nor ploughing the main, like the Phoenics,
Manful with black-beaked ships, they abide in a sorrowful region,
Vexed with the earthquake, and flame, and the sea-floods, scourge of
Poseidon.
   Whelming the dwellings of men, and the toils of the slow-footed oxen,
Drowning the barley and flax, and the hard-earned gold of the harvest,
Up to the hillside vines, and the pastures skirting the woodland,
Inland the floods came yearly; and after the waters a monster,
Bred of the slime, like the worms which are bred from the slime of the Nile-
bank,
Shapeless, a terror to see; and by night it swam out to the seaward,
Daily returning to feed with the dawn, and devoured of the fairest,
Cattle, and children, and maids, till the terrified people fled inland.
   Fasting in sackcloth and ashes they came, both the king and his people,
Came to the mountain of oaks, to the house of the terrible sea-gods,
Hard by the gulf in the rocks, where of old the world-wide deluge
Sank to the inner abyss; and the lake where the fish of the goddess,
Holy, undying, abide; whom the priests feed daily with dainties.
There to the mystical fish, high-throned in her chamber of cedar,
Burnt they the fat of the flock; till the flame shone far to the seaward.
Three days fasting they prayed; but the fourth day the priests of the
goddess,
Cunning in spells, cast lots, to discover the crime of the people.
All day long they cast, till the house of the monarch was taken,
Cepheus, king of the land; and the faces of all gathered blackness.
Then once more they cast; and Cassiopoeia was taken,
Deep-bosomed wife of the king, whom oft far-seeing Apollo
Watched well-pleased from the welkin, the fairest of AEthiop women:
Fairest, save only her daughter; for down to the ankle her tresses
Rolled, blue-black as the night, ambrosial, joy to beholders.
Awful and fair she arose, most like in her coming to Here,
Queen before whom the Immortals arise, as she comes on Olympus,
Out of the chamber of gold, which her son Hephaestos has wrought her.
Such in her stature and eyes, and the broad white light of her forehead.
Stately she came from her place, and she spoke in the midst of the people.
   'Pure are my hands from blood:  most pure this heart in my bosom.
Yet one fault I remember this day; one word have I spoken;
Rashly I spoke on the shore, and I dread lest the sea should have heard it.
Watching my child at her bath, as she plunged in the joy of her girlhood,
Fairer I called her in pride than Atergati, queen of the ocean.
Judge ye if this be my sin, for I know none other.'  She ended;
Wrapping her head in her mantle she stood, and the people were silent.
   Answered the dark-browed priests, 'No word, once spoken, returneth,
Even if uttered unwitting.  Shall gods excuse our rashness?
That which is done, that abides; and the wrath of the sea is against us;
Hers, and the wrath of her brother, the Sun-god, lord of the sheepfolds.
Fairer than her hast thou boasted thy daughter?  Ah folly! for hateful,
Hateful are they to the gods, whoso, impious, liken a mortal,
Fair though he be, to their glory; and hateful is that which is likened,
Grieving the eyes of their pride, and abominate, doomed to their anger.
What shall be likened to gods?  The unknown, who deep in the darkness
Ever abide, twyformed, many-handed, terrible, shapeless.
Woe to the queen; for the land is defiled, and the people accursed.
Take thou her therefore by night, thou ill-starred Cassiopoeia,
Take her with us in the night, when the moon sinks low to the westward;
Bind her aloft for a victim, a prey for the gorge of the monster,
Far on the sea-girt rock, which is washed by the surges for ever;
So may the goddess accept her, and so may the land make atonement,
Purged by her blood from its sin:  so obey thou the doom of the rulers.'
   Bitter in soul they went out, Cepheus and Cassiopoeia,
Bitter in soul; and their hearts whirled round, as the leaves in the eddy.
Weak was the queen, and rebelled:  but the king, like a shepherd of people,
Willed not the land should waste; so he yielded the life of his daughter.
   Deep in the wane of the night, as the moon sank low to the westward,
They by the shade of the cliffs, with the horror of darkness around them,
Stole, as ashamed, to a deed which became not the light of the sunshine,
Slowly, the priests, and the queen, and the virgin bound in the galley,
Slowly they rowed to the rocks:  but Cepheus far in the palace
Sate in the midst of the hall, on his throne, like a shepherd of people,
Choking his woe, dry-eyed, while the slaves wailed loudly around him.
They on the sea-girt rock, which is washed by the surges for ever,
Set her in silence, the guiltless, aloft with her face to the eastward.
Under a crag of the stone, where a ledge sloped down to the water;
There they set Andromeden, most beautiful, shaped like a goddess,
Lifting her long white arms wide-spread to the walls of the basalt,
Chaining them, ruthless, with brass; and they called on the might of the
Rulers.
   'Mystical fish of the seas, dread Queen whom AEthiops honour,
Whelming the land in thy wrath, unavoidable, sharp as the sting-ray,
Thou, and thy brother the Sun, brain-smiting, lord of the sheepfold,
Scorching the earth all day, and then resting at night in thy bosom,
Take ye this one life for many, appeased by the blood of a maiden,
Fairest, and born of the fairest, a queen, most priceless of victims.'
   Thrice they spat as they went by the maid:  but her mother delaying
Fondled her child to the last, heart-crushed; and the warmth of her weeping
Fell on the breast of the maid, as her woe broke forth into wailing.
   'Daughter! my daughter! forgive me!  Oh curse not the murderess!  Curse
not!
How have I sinned, but in love?  Do the gods grudge glory to mothers?
Loving I bore thee in vain in the fate-cursed bride-bed of Cepheus,
Loving I fed thee and tended, and loving rejoiced in thy beauty,
Blessing thy limbs as I bathed them, and blessing thy locks as I combed them;
Decking thee, ripening to woman, I blest thee:  yet blessing I slew thee!
How have I sinned, but in love?  Oh swear to me, swear to thy mother,
Never to haunt me with curse, as I go to the grave in my sorrow,
Childless and lone:  may the gods never send me another, to slay it!
See, I embrace thy knees--soft knees, where no babe will be fondled--
Swear to me never to curse me, the hapless one, not in the death-pang.'
   Weeping she clung to the knees of the maid; and the maid low answered--
'Curse thee!  Not in the death-pang!'  The heart of the lady was lightened.
Slowly she went by the ledge; and the maid was alone in the darkness.
   Watching the pulse of the oars die down, as her own died with them,
Tearless, dumb with amaze she stood, as a storm-stunned nestling
Fallen from bough or from eave lies dumb, which the home-going herdsman
Fancies a stone, till he catches the light of its terrified eyeball.
So through the long long hours the maid stood helpless and hopeless,
Wide-eyed, downward gazing in vain at the black blank darkness.
Feebly at last she began, while wild thoughts bubbled within her--
'Guiltless I am:  why thus, then?  Are gods more ruthless than mortals?
Have they no mercy for youth? no love for the souls who have loved them?
Even as I loved thee, dread sea, as I played by thy margin,
Blessing thy wave as it cooled me, thy wind as it breathed on my forehead,
Bowing my head to thy tempest, and opening my heart to thy children,
Silvery fish, wreathed shell, and the strange lithe things of the water,
Tenderly casting them back, as they gasped on the beach in the sunshine,
Home to their mother--in vain! for mine sits childless in anguish!
O false sea! false sea!  I dreamed what I dreamed of thy goodness;
Dreamed of a smile in thy gleam, of a laugh in the plash of thy ripple:
False and devouring thou art, and the great world dark and despiteful.'
   Awed by her own rash words she was still:  and her eyes to the seaward
Looked for an answer of wrath:  far off, in the heart of the darkness,
Blight white mists rose slowly; beneath them the wandering ocean
Glimmered and glowed to the deepest abyss; and the knees of the maiden
Trembled and sunk in her fear, as afar, like a dawn in the midnight,
Rose from their seaweed chamber the choir of the mystical sea-maids.
Onward toward her they came, and her heart beat loud at their coming,
Watching the bliss of the gods, as they wakened the cliffs with their
laughter.
   Onward they came in their joy, and before them the roll of the surges
Sank, as the breeze sank dead, into smooth green foam-flecked marble,
Awed; and the crags of the cliff, and the pines of the mountain were silent.
Onward they came in their joy, and around them the lamps of the sea-nymphs,
Myriad fiery globes, swam panting and heaving; and rainbows
Crimson and azure and emerald, were broken in star-showers, lighting
Far through the wine-dark depths of the crystal, the gardens of Nereus,
Coral and sea-fan and tangle, the blooms and the palms of the ocean.
   Onward they came in their joy, more white than the foam which they
scattered,
Laughing and singing, and tossing and twining, while eager, the Tritons
Blinded with kisses their eyes, unreproved, and above them in worship
Hovered the terns, and the seagulls swept past them on silvery pinions
Echoing softly their laughter; around them the wantoning dolphins
Sighed as they plunged, full of love; and the great sea-horses which bore
them
Curved up their crests in their pride to the delicate arms of the maidens,
Pawing the spray into gems, till a fiery rainfall, unharming,
Sparkled and gleamed on the limbs of the nymphs, and the coils of the mermen.
   Onward they went in their joy, bathed round with the fiery coolness,
Needing nor sun nor moon, self-lighted, immortal:  but others,
Pitiful, floated in silence apart; in their bosoms the sea-boys,
Slain by the wrath of the seas, swept down by the anger of Nereus;
Hapless, whom never again on strand or on quay shall their mothers
Welcome with garlands and vows to the temple, but wearily pining
Gaze over island and bay for the sails of the sunken; they heedless
Sleep in soft bosoms for ever, and dream of the surge and the sea-maids.
   Onward they passed in their joy; on their brows neither sorrow nor anger;
Self-sufficing, as gods, never heeding the woe of the maiden.
She would have shrieked for their mercy:  but shame made her dumb; and their
eyeballs
Stared on her careless and still, like the eyes in the house of the idols.
Seeing they saw not, and passed, like a dream, on the murmuring ripple.
   Stunned by the wonder she gazed, wide-eyed, as the glory departed.
'O fair shapes! far fairer than I!  Too fair to be ruthless!
Gladden mine eyes once more with your splendour, unlike to my fancies;
You, then, smiled in the sea-gleam, and laughed in the plash of the ripple.
Awful I deemed you and formless; inhuman, monstrous as idols;
Lo, when ye came, ye were women, more loving and lovelier, only;
Like in all else; and I blest you:  why blest ye not me for my worship?
Had you no mercy for me, thus guiltless?  Ye pitied the sea-boys:
Why not me, then, more hapless by far?  Does your sight and your knowledge
End with the marge of the waves?  Is the world which ye dwell in not our
world?'

   Over the mountain aloft ran a rush and a roll and a roaring;
Downward the breeze came indignant, and leapt with a howl to the water,
Roaring in cranny and crag, till the pillars and clefts of the basalt
Rang like a god-swept lyre, and her brain grew mad with the noises;
Crashing and lapping of waters, and sighing and tossing of weed-beds,
Gurgle and whisper and hiss of the foam, while thundering surges
Boomed in the wave-worn halls, as they champed at the roots of the mountain.
Hour after hour in the darkness the wind rushed fierce to the landward,
Drenching the maiden with spray; she shivering, weary and drooping,
Stood with her heart full of thoughts, till the foam-crests gleamed in the
twilight,
Leaping and laughing around, and the east grew red with the dawning.
   Then on the ridge of the hills rose the broad bright sun in his glory,
Hurling his arrows abroad on the glittering crests of the surges,
Gilding the soft round bosoms of wood, and the downs of the coastland;
Gilding the weeds at her feet, and the foam-laced teeth of the ledges,
Showing the maiden her home through the veil of her locks, as they floated
Glistening, damp with the spray, in a long black cloud to the landward.
High in the far-off glens rose thin blue curls from the homesteads;
Softly the low of the herds, and the pipe of the outgoing herdsman,
Slid to her ear on the water, and melted her heart into weeping.
Shuddering, she tried to forget them; and straining her eyes to the seaward,
Watched for her doom, as she wailed, but in vain, to the terrible Sun-god.
   'Dost thou not pity me, Sun, though thy wild dark sister be ruthless;
Dost thou not pity me here, as thou seest me desolate, weary,
Sickened with shame and despair, like a kid torn young from its mother?
What if my beauty insult thee, then blight it:  but me--Oh spare me!
Spare me yet, ere he be here, fierce, tearing, unbearable!  See me,
See me, how tender and soft, and thus helpless!  See how I shudder,
Fancying only my doom.  Wilt thou shine thus bright, when it takes me?
Are there no deaths save this, great Sun?  No fiery arrow,
Lightning, or deep-mouthed wave?  Why thus?  What music in shrieking,
Pleasure in warm live limbs torn slowly?  And dar'st thou behold them!
Oh, thou hast watched worse deeds!  All sights are alike to thy brightness!
What if thou waken the birds to their song, dost thou waken no sorrow;
Waken no sick to their pain; no captive to wrench at his fetters?
Smile on the garden and fold, and on maidens who sing at the milking;
Flash into tapestried chambers, and peep in the eyelids of lovers,
Showing the blissful their bliss--Dost love, then, the place where thou
smilest?
Lovest thou cities aflame, fierce blows, and the shrieks of the widow?
Lovest thou corpse-strewn fields, as thou lightest the path of the vulture?
Lovest thou these, that thou gazest so gay on my tears, and my mother's,
Laughing alike at the horror of one, and the bliss of another?
What dost thou care, in thy sky, for the joys and the sorrows of mortals?
Colder art thou than the nymphs:  in thy broad bright eye is no seeing.
Hadst thou a soul--as much soul as the slaves in the house of my father,
Wouldst thou not save?  Poor thralls! they pitied me, clung to me weeping,
Kissing my hands and my feet--What, are gods more ruthless than mortals?
Worse than the souls which they rule?  Let me die:  they war not with ashes!'
   Sudden she ceased, with a shriek:  in the spray, like a hovering foam-bow,
Hung, more fair than the foam-bow, a boy in the bloom of his manhood,
Golden-haired, ivory-limbed, ambrosial; over his shoulder
Hung for a veil of his beauty the gold-fringed folds of the goat-skin,
Bearing the brass of his shield, as the sun flashed clear on its clearness.
Curved on his thigh lay a falchion, and under the gleam of his helmet
Eyes more blue than the main shone awful; around him Athene
Shed in her love such grace, such state, and terrible daring.
Hovering over the water he came, upon glittering pinions,
Living, a wonder, outgrown from the tight-laced gold of his sandals;
Bounding from billow to billow, and sweeping the crests like a sea-gull;
Leaping the gulfs of the surge, as he laughed in the joy of his leaping.
Fair and majestic he sprang to the rock; and the maiden in wonder
Gazed for a while, and then hid in the dark-rolling wave of her tresses,
Fearful, the light of her eyes; while the boy (for her sorrow had awed him)
Blushed at her blushes, and vanished, like mist on the cliffs at the sunrise.
Fearful at length she looked forth:  he was gone:  she, wild with amazement,
Wailed for her mother aloud:  but the wail of the wind only answered.
Sudden he flashed into sight, by her side; in his pity and anger
Moist were his eyes; and his breath like a rose-bed, as bolder and bolder,
Hovering under her brows, like a swallow that haunts by the house-eaves,
Delicate-handed, he lifted the veil of her hair; while the maiden
Motionless, frozen with fear, wept loud; till his lips unclosing
Poured from their pearl-strung portal the musical wave of his wonder.
   'Ah, well spoke she, the wise one, the gray-eyed Pallas Athene,--
Known to Immortals alone are the prizes which lie for the heroes
Ready prepared at their feet; for requiring a little, the rulers
Pay back the loan tenfold to the man who, careless of pleasure,
Thirsting for honour and toil, fares forth on a perilous errand
Led by the guiding of gods, and strong in the strength of Immortals.
Thus have they led me to thee:  from afar, unknowing, I marked thee,
Shining, a snow-white cross on the dark-green walls of the sea-cliff;
Carven in marble I deemed thee, a perfect work of the craftsman.
Likeness of Amphitrite, or far-famed Queen Cythereia.
Curious I came, till I saw how thy tresses streamed in the sea-wind,
Glistening, black as the night, and thy lips moved slow in thy wailing.
Speak again now--Oh speak!  For my soul is stirred to avenge thee;
Tell me what barbarous horde, without law, unrighteous and heartless,
Hateful to gods and to men, thus have bound thee, a shame to the sunlight,
Scorn and prize to the sailor:  but my prize now; for a coward,
Coward and shameless were he, who so finding a glorious jewel
Cast on the wayside by fools, would not win it and keep it and wear it,
Even as I will thee; for I swear by the head of my father,
Bearing thee over the sea-wave, to wed thee in Argos the fruitful,
Beautiful, meed of my toil no less than this head which I carry,
Hidden here fearful--Oh speak!'
   But the maid, still dumb with amazement,
Watered her bosom with weeping, and longed for her home and her mother.
Beautiful, eager, he wooed her, and kissed off her tears as he hovered,
Roving at will, as a bee, on the brows of a rock nymph-haunted,
Garlanded over with vine, and acanthus, and clambering roses,
Cool in the fierce still noon, where streams glance clear in the mossbeds,
Hums on from blossom to blossom, and mingles the sweets as he tastes them.
Beautiful, eager, he kissed her, and clasped her yet closer and closer,
Praying her still to speak--
   'Not cruel nor rough did my mother
Bear me to broad-browed Zeus in the depths of the brass-covered dungeon;
Neither in vain, as I think, have I talked with the cunning of Hermes,
Face unto face, as a friend; or from gray-eyed Pallas Athene
Learnt what is fit, and respecting myself, to respect in my dealings
Those whom the gods should love; so fear not; to chaste espousals
Only I woo thee, and swear, that a queen, and alone without rival
By me thou sittest in Argos of Hellas, throne of my fathers,
Worshipped by fair-haired kings:  why callest thou still on thy mother?
Why did she leave thee thus here?  For no foeman has bound thee; no foeman
Winning with strokes of the sword such a prize, would so leave it behind
him.'
   Just as at first some colt, wild-eyed, with quivering nostril,
Plunges in fear of the curb, and the fluttering robes of the rider;
Soon, grown bold by despair, submits to the will of his master,
Tamer and tamer each hour, and at last, in the pride of obedience,
Answers the heel with a curvet, and arches his neck to be fondled,
Cowed by the need that maid grew tame; while the hero indignant
Tore at the fetters which held her:  the brass, too cunningly tempered,
Held to the rock by the nails, deep wedged:  till the boy, red with anger,
Drew from his ivory thigh, keen flashing, a falchion of diamond--
'Now let the work of the smith try strength with the arms of Immortals!'
Dazzling it fell; and the blade, as the vine-hook shears off the vine-bough,
Carved through the strength of the brass, till her arms fell soft on his
shoulder.
Once she essayed to escape:  but the ring of the water was round her,
Round her the ring of his arms; and despairing she sank on his bosom.
Then, like a fawn when startled, she looked with a shriek to the seaward.
   'Touch me not, wretch that I am!  For accursed, a shame and a hissing,
Guiltless, accurst no less, I await the revenge of the sea-gods.
Yonder it comes!  Ah go!  Let me perish unseen, if I perish!
Spare me the shame of thine eyes, when merciless fangs must tear me
Piecemeal!  Enough to endure by myself in the light of the sunshine
Guiltless, the death of a kid!'
   But the boy still lingered around her,
Loth, like a boy, to forego her, and waken the cliffs with his laughter.
'Yon is the foe, then?  A beast of the sea?  I had deemed him immortal.
Titan, or Proteus' self, or Nereus, foeman of sailors:
Yet would I fight with them all, but Poseidon, shaker of mountains,
Uncle of mine, whom I fear, as is fit; for he haunts on Olympus,
Holding the third of the world; and the gods all rise at his coming.
Unto none else will I yield, god-helped:  how then to a monster,
Child of the earth and of night, unreasoning, shapeless, accursed?'
   'Art thou, too, then a god?'
      'No god I,' smiling he answered;
'Mortal as thou, yet divine:  but mortal the herds of the ocean,
Equal to men in that only, and less in all else; for they nourish
Blindly the life of the lips, untaught by the gods, without wisdom:
Shame if I fled before such!'
   In her heart new life was enkindled,
Worship and trust, fair parents of love:  but she answered him sighing.
   'Beautiful, why wilt thou die?  Is the light of the sun, then, so
worthless,
Worthless to sport with thy fellows in flowery glades of the forest,
Under the broad green oaks, where never again shall I wander,
Tossing the ball with my maidens, or wreathing the altar in garlands,
Careless, with dances and songs, till the glens rang loud to our laughter.
Too full of death the sad earth is already:  the halls full of weepers,
Quarried by tombs all cliffs, and the bones gleam white on the sea-floor,
Numberless, gnawn by the herds who attend on the pitiless sea-gods,
Even as mine will be soon:  and yet noble it seems to me, dying,
Giving my life for a people, to save to the arms of their lovers
Maidens and youths for a while:  thee, fairest of all, shall I slay thee?
Add not thy bones to the many, thus angering idly the dread ones!
Either the monster will crush, or the sea-queen's self overwhelm thee,
Vengeful, in tempest and foam, and the thundering walls of the surges.
Why wilt thou follow me down? can we love in the black blank darkness?
Love in the realms of the dead, in the land where all is forgotten?
Why wilt thou follow me down? is it joy, on the desolate oozes,
Meagre to flit, gray ghosts in the depths of the gray salt water?
Beautiful! why wilt thou die, and defraud fair girls of thy manhood?
Surely one waits for thee longing, afar in the isles of the ocean.
Go thy way; I mine; for the gods grudge pleasure to mortals.'
   Sobbing she ended her moan, as her neck, like a storm-bent lily,
Drooped with the weight of her woe, and her limbs sank, weary with watching,
Soft on the hard-ledged rock:  but the boy, with his eye on the monster,
Clasped her, and stood, like a god; and his lips curved proud as he answered--
   'Great are the pitiless sea-gods:  but greater the Lords of Olympus;
Greater the AEgis-wielder, and greater is she who attends him.
Clear-eyed Justice her name is, the counsellor, loved of Athene;
Helper of heroes, who dare, in the god-given might of their manhood,
Greatly to do and to suffer, and far in the fens' and the forests
Smite the devourers of men, Heaven-hated, brood of the giants,
Twyformed, strange, without like, who obey not the golden-haired Rulers.
Vainly rebelling they rage, till they die by the swords of the heroes,
Even as this must die; for I burn with the wrath of my father,
Wandering, led by Athene; and dare whatsoever betides me.
Led by Athene I won from the gray-haired terrible sisters
Secrets hidden from men, when I found them asleep on the sand-hills,
Keeping their eye and their tooth, till they showed me the perilous pathway
Over the waterless ocean, the valley that led to the Gorgon.
Her too I slew in my craft, Medusa, the beautiful horror;
Taught by Athene I slew her, and saw not herself, but her image,
Watching the mirror of brass, in the shield which a goddess had lent me.
Cleaving her brass-scaled throat, as she lay with her adders around her,
Fearless I bore off her head, in the folds of the mystical goat-skin
Hide of Amaltheie, fair nurse of the AEgis-wielder.
Hither I bear it, a gift to the gods, and a death to my foe-men,
Freezing the seer to stone; to hide thine eyes from the horror.
Kiss me but once, and I go.'
   Then lifting her neck, like a sea-bird
Peering up over the wave, from the foam-white swells of her bosom,
Blushing she kissed him:  afar, on the topmost Idalian summit
Laughed in the joy of her heart, far-seeing, the queen Aphrodite.
   Loosing his arms from her waist he flew upward, awaiting the sea-beast.
Onward it came from the southward, as bulky and black as a galley,
Lazily coasting along, as the fish fled leaping before it;
Lazily breasting the ripple, and watching by sandbar and headland,
Listening for laughter of maidens at bleaching, or song of the fisher,
Children at play on the pebbles, or cattle that pawed on the sand-hills.
Rolling and dripping it came, where bedded in glistening purple
Cold on the cold sea-weeds lay the long white sides of the maiden,
Trembling, her face in her hands, and her tresses afloat on the water.
   As when an osprey aloft, dark-eyebrowed, royally crested,
Flags on by creek and by cove, and in scorn of the anger of Nereus
Ranges, the king of the shore; if he see on a glittering shallow,
Chasing the bass and the mullet, the fin of a wallowing dolphin,
Halting, he wheels round slowly, in doubt at the weight of his quarry,
Whether to clutch it alive, or to fall on the wretch like a plummet,
Stunning with terrible talon the life of the brain in the hindhead:
Then rushes up with a scream, and stooping the wrath of his eyebrows
Falls from the sky, like a star, while the wind rattles hoarse in his
pinions.
Over him closes the foam for a moment; and then from the sand-bed
Rolls up the great fish, dead, and his side gleams white in the sunshine.
Thus fell the boy on the beast, unveiling the face of the Gorgon;
Thus fell the boy on the beast; thus rolled up the beast in his horror,
Once, as the dead eyes glared into his; then his sides, death-sharpened,
Stiffened and stood, brown rock, in the wash of the wandering water.
   Beautiful, eager, triumphant, he leapt back again to his treasure;
Leapt back again, full blest, toward arms spread wide to receive him.
Brimful of honour he clasped her, and brimful of love she caressed him,
Answering lip with lip; while above them the queen Aphrodite
Poured on their foreheads and limbs, unseen, ambrosial odours,
Givers of longing, and rapture, and chaste content in espousals.
Happy whom ere they be wedded anoints she, the Queen Aphrodite!
   Laughing she called to her sister, the chaste Tritonid Athene,
'Seest thou yonder thy pupil, thou maid of the AEgis-wielder?
How he has turned himself wholly to love, and caresses a damsel,
Dreaming no longer of honour, or danger, or Pallas Athene?
Sweeter, it seems, to the young my gifts are; so yield me the stripling;
Yield him me now, lest he die in his prime, like hapless Adonis.'
   Smiling she answered in turn, that chaste Tritonid Athene:
'Dear unto me, no less than to thee, is the wedlock of heroes;
Dear, who can worthily win him a wife not unworthy; and noble,
Pure with the pure to beget brave children, the like of their father.
Happy, who thus stands linked to the heroes who were, and who shall be;
Girdled with holiest awe, not sparing of self; for his mother
Watches his steps with the eyes of the gods; and his wife and his children
Move him to plan and to do in the farm and the camp and the council.
Thence comes weal to a nation:  but woe upon woe, when the people
Mingle in love at their will, like the brutes, not heeding the future.'
   Then from her gold-strung loom, where she wrought in her chamber of cedar,
Awful and fair she arose; and she went by the glens of Olympus;
Went by the isles of the sea, and the wind never ruffled her mantle;
Went by the water of Crete, and the black-beaked fleets of the Phoenics;
Came to the sea-girt rock which is washed by the surges for ever,
Bearing the wealth of the gods, for a gift to the bride of a hero.
There she met Andromeden and Persea, shaped like Immortals;
Solemn and sweet was her smile, while their hearts beat loud at her coming;
Solemn and sweet was her smile, as she spoke to the pair in her wisdom.
   'Three things hold we, the Rulers, who sit by the founts of Olympus,
Wisdom, and prowess, and beauty; and freely we pour them on mortals;
Pleased at our image in man, as a father at his in his children.
One thing only we grudge to mankind:  when a hero, unthankful,
Boasts of our gifts as his own, stiffnecked, and dishonours the givers,
Turning our weapons against us.  Him Ate follows avenging;
Slowly she tracks him and sure, as a lyme-hound; sudden she grips him,
Crushing him, blind in his pride, for a sign and a terror to folly.
This we avenge, as is fit; in all else never weary of giving.
Come, then, damsel, and know if the gods grudge pleasure to mortals.'
   Loving and gentle she spoke:  but the maid stood in awe, as the goddess
Plaited with soft swift finger her tresses, and decked her in jewels,
Armlet and anklet and earbell; and over her shoulders a necklace,
Heavy, enamelled, the flower of the gold and the brass of the mountain.
Trembling with joy she gazed, so well Haephaistos had made it,
Deep in the forges of AEtna, while Charis his lady beside him
Mingled her grace in his craft, as he wrought for his sister Athene.
Then on the brows of the maiden a veil bound Pallas Athene;
Ample it fell to her feet, deep-fringed, a wonder of weaving.
Ages and ages agone it was wrought on the heights of Olympus,
Wrought in the gold-strung loom, by the finger of cunning Athene.
In it she wove all creatures that teem in the womb of the ocean;
Nereid, siren, and triton, and dolphin, and arrowy fishes
Glittering round, many-hued, on the flame-red folds of the mantle.
In it she wove, too, a town where gray-haired kings sat in judgment;
Sceptre in hand in the market they sat, doing right by the people,
Wise:  while above watched Justice, and near, far-seeing Apollo.
Round it she wove for a fringe all herbs of the earth and the water,
Violet, asphodel, ivy, and vine-leaves, roses and lilies,
Coral and sea-fan and tangle, the blooms and the palms of the ocean:
Now from Olympus she bore it, a dower to the bride of a hero.
Over the limbs of the damsel she wrapt it:  the maid still trembled,
Shading her face with her hands; for the eyes of the goddess were awful.
   Then, as a pine upon Ida when southwest winds blow landward,
Stately she bent to the damsel, and breathed on her:  under her breathing
Taller and fairer she grew; and the goddess spoke in her wisdom.
   'Courage I give thee; the heart of a queen, and the mind of Immortals;
Godlike to talk with the gods, and to look on their eyes unshrinking;
Fearing the sun and the stars no more, and the blue salt water;
Fearing us only, the lords of Olympus, friends of the heroes;
Chastely and wisely to govern thyself and thy house and thy people,
Bearing a godlike race to thy spouse, till dying I set thee
High for a star in the heavens, a sign and a hope to the seamen,
Spreading thy long white arms all night in the heights of the aether,
Hard by thy sire and the hero thy spouse, while near thee thy mother
Sits in her ivory chair, as she plaits ambrosial tresses.
All night long thou wilt shine; all day thou wilt feast on Olympus,
Happy, the guest of the gods, by thy husband, the god-begotten.'
   Blissful, they turned them to go:  but the fair-tressed Pallas Athene
Rose, like a pillar of tall white cloud, toward silver Olympus;
Far above ocean and shore, and the peaks of the isles and the mainland;
Where no frost nor storm is, in clear blue windless abysses,
High in the home of the summer, the seats of the happy Immortals,
Shrouded in keen deep blaze, unapproachable; there ever youthful
Hebe, Harmonie, and the daughter of Jove, Aphrodite,
Whirled in the white-linked dance with the gold-crowned Hours and the Graces,
Hand within hand, while clear piped Phoebe, queen of the woodlands.
All day long they rejoiced:  but Athene still in her chamber
Bent herself over her loom, as the stars rang loud to her singing,
Chanting of order and right, and of foresight, warden of nations;
Chanting of labour and craft, and of wealth in the port and the garner;
Chanting of valour and fame, and the man who can fall with the foremost,
Fighting for children and wife, and the field which his father bequeathed
him.
Sweetly and solemnly sang she, and planned new lessons for mortals:
Happy, who hearing obey her, the wise unsullied Athene.

Eversley, 1852,



HYPOTHESES HYPOCHONDRIACAE {211}



And should she die, her grave should be
Upon the bare top of a sunny hill,
Among the moorlands of her own fair land,
Amid a ring of old and moss-grown stones
In gorse and heather all embosomed.
There should be no tall stone, no marble tomb
Above her gentle corse;--the ponderous pile
Would press too rudely on those fairy limbs.
The turf should lightly he, that marked her home.
A sacred spot it would be--every bird
That came to watch her lone grave should be holy.
The deer should browse around her undisturbed;
The whin bird by, her lonely nest should build
All fearless; for in life she loved to see
Happiness in all things--
And we would come on summer days
When all around was bright, and set us down
And think of all that lay beneath that turf
On which the heedless moor-bird sits, and whistles
His long, shrill, painful song, as though he plained
For her that loved him and his pleasant hills;
And we would dream again of bygone days
Until our eyes should swell with natural tears
For brilliant hopes--all faded into air!
As, on the sands of Irak, near approach
Destroys the traveller's vision of still lakes,
And goodly streams reed-clad, and meadows green;
And leaves behind the drear reality
Of shadeless, same, yet ever-changing sand!
And when the sullen clouds rose thick on high
Mountains on mountains rolling--and dark mist
Wrapped itself round the hill-tops like a shroud,
When on her grave swept by the moaning wind
Bending the heather-bells--then would I come
And watch by her, in silent loneliness,
And smile upon the storm--as knowing well
The lightning's flash would surely turn aside,
Nor mar the lowly mound, where peaceful sleeps
All that gave life and love to one fond heart!
I talk of things that are not; and if prayers
By night and day availed from my weak lips,
Then should they never be! till I was gone,
Before the friends I loved, to my long home.
Oh pardon me, if e'er I say too much; my mind
Too often strangely turns to ribald mirth,
As though I had no doubt nor hope beyond--
Or brooding melancholy cloys my soul
With thoughts of days misspent, of wasted time
And bitter feelings swallowed up in jests.
Then strange and fearful thoughts flit o'er my brain
By indistinctness made more terrible,
And incubi mock at me with fierce eyes
Upon my couch:  and visions, crude and dire,
Of planets, suns, millions of miles, infinity,
Space, time, thought, being, blank nonentity,
Things incorporeal, fancies of the brain,
Seen, heard, as though they were material,
All mixed in sickening mazes, trouble me,
And lead my soul away from earth and heaven
Until I doubt whether I be or not!
And then I see all frightful shapes--lank ghosts,
Hydras, chimeras, krakens, wastes of sand,
Herbless and void of living voice--tall mountains
Cleaving the skies with height immeasurable,
On which perchance I climb for infinite years; broad seas,
Studded with islands numberless, that stretch
Beyond the regions of the sun, and fade
Away in distance vast, or dreary clouds,
Cold, dark, and watery, where wander I for ever!
Or space of ether, where I hang for aye!
A speck, an atom--inconsumable--
Immortal, hopeless, voiceless, powerless!
And oft I fancy, I am weak and old,
And all who loved me, one by one, are dead,
And I am left alone--and cannot die!
Surely there is no rest on earth for souls
Whose dreams are like a madman's!  I am young
And much is yet before me--after years
May bring peace with them to my weary heart!

Helston, 1835.



TREHILL WELL



There stood a low and ivied roof,
   As gazing rustics tell,
In times of chivalry and song
   'Yclept the holy well.

Above the ivies' branchlets gray
   In glistening clusters shone;
While round the base the grass-blades bright
   And spiry foxglove sprung.

The brambles clung in graceful bands,
   Chequering the old gray stone
With shining leaflets, whose bright face
   In autumn's tinting shone.

Around the fountain's eastern base
   A babbling brooklet sped,
With sleepy murmur purling soft
   Adown its gravelly bed.

Within the cell the filmy ferns
   To woo the clear wave bent;
And cushioned mosses to the stone
   Their quaint embroidery lent.

The fountain's face lay still as glass--
   Save where the streamlet free
Across the basin's gnarled lip
   Flowed ever silently.

Above the well a little nook
   Once held, as rustics tell,
All garland-decked, an image of
   The Lady of the Well.

They tell of tales of mystery,
   Of darkling deeds of woe;
But no! such doings might not brook
   The holy streamlet's flow.

Oh tell me not of bitter thoughts,
   Of melancholy dreams,
By that fair fount whose sunny wall
   Basks in the western beams.

When last I saw that little stream,
   A form of light there stood,
That seemed like a precious gem,
   Beneath that archway rude:

And as I gazed with love and awe
   Upon that sylph-like thing,
Methought that airy form must be
   The fairy of the spring.

Helston, 1835.



IN AN ILLUMINATED MISSAL {216}



I would have loved:  there are no mates in heaven;
I would be great:  there is no pride in heaven;
I would have sung, as doth the nightingale
The summer's night beneath the moone pale,
But Saintes hymnes alone in heaven prevail.
My love, my song, my skill, my high intent,
Have I within this seely book y-pent:
And all that beauty which from every part
I treasured still alway within mine heart,
Whether of form or face angelical,
Or herb or flower, or lofty cathedral,
Upon these sheets below doth lie y-spred,
In quaint devices deftly blazoned.
   Lord, in this tome to thee I sanctify
   The sinful fruits of worldly fantasy.

1839.



THE WEIRD LADY



The swevens came up round Harold the Earl,
   Like motes in the sunnes beam;
And over him stood the Weird Lady,
In her charmed castle over the sea,
   Sang 'Lie thou still and dream.'

'Thy steed is dead in his stall, Earl Harold,
   Since thou hast been with me;
The rust has eaten thy harness bright,
And the rats have eaten thy greyhound light,
   That was so fair and free.'

Mary Mother she stooped from heaven;
She wakened Earl Harold out of his sweven,
   To don his harness on;
And over the land and over the sea
He wended abroad to his own countrie,
   A weary way to gon.

Oh but his beard was white with eld,
   Oh but his hair was gray;
He stumbled on by stock and stone,
And as he journeyed he made his moan
   Along that weary way.

Earl Harold came to his castle wall;
   The gate was burnt with fire;
Roof and rafter were fallen down,
The folk were strangers all in the town,
   And strangers all in the shire.

Earl Harold came to a house of nuns,
   And he heard the dead-bell toll;
He saw the sexton stand by a grave;
'Now Christ have mercy, who did us save,
   Upon yon fair nun's soul.'

The nuns they came from the convent gate
   By one, by two, by three;
They sang for the soul of a lady bright
Who died for the love of a traitor knight:
   It was his own lady.

He stayed the corpse beside the grave;
   'A sign, a sign!' quod he.
'Mary Mother who rulest heaven,
Send me a sign if I be forgiven
   By the woman who so loved me.'

A white dove out of the coffin flew;
   Earl Harold's mouth it kist;
He fell on his face, wherever he stood;
And the white dove carried his soul to God
   Or ever the bearers wist.

Durham, 1840.



PALINODIA



Ye mountains, on whose torrent-furrowed slopes,
And bare and silent brows uplift to heaven,
I envied oft the soul which fills your wastes
Of pure and stern sublime, and still expanse
Unbroken by the petty incidents
Of noisy life:  Oh hear me once again!

Winds, upon whose racked eddies, far aloft,
Above the murmur of the uneasy world,
My thoughts in exultation held their way:
Whose tremulous whispers through the rustling glade
Were once to me unearthly tones of love,
Joy without object, wordless music, stealing
Through all my soul, until my pulse beat fast
With aimless hope, and unexpressed desire--
Thou sea, who wast to me a prophet deep
Through all thy restless waves, and wasting shores,
Of silent labour, and eternal change;
First teacher of the dense immensity
Of ever-stirring life, in thy strange forms
Of fish, and shell, and worm, and oozy weed:
To me alike thy frenzy and thy sleep
Have been a deep and breathless joy:  Oh hear!

Mountains, and winds, and waves, take back your child!
Upon thy balmy bosom, Mother Nature,
Where my young spirit dreamt its years away,
Give me once more to nestle:  I have strayed
Far through another world, which is not thine.
Through sunless cities, and the weary haunts
Of smoke-grimed labour, and foul revelry
My flagging wing has swept.  A mateless bird's
My pilgrimage has been; through sin, and doubt,
And darkness, seeking love.  Oh hear me, Nature!
Receive me once again:  but not alone;
No more alone, Great Mother!  I have brought
One who has wandered, yet not sinned, like me.
Upon thy lap, twin children, let us lie;
And in the light of thine immortal eyes
Let our souls mingle, till The Father calls
To some eternal home the charge He gives thee.

Cambridge, 1841.



A HOPE



Twin stars, aloft in ether clear,
   Around each other roll alway,
Within one common atmosphere
   Of their own mutual light and day.

And myriad happy eyes are bent
   Upon their changeless love alway;
As, strengthened by their one intent,
   They pour the flood of life and day.

So we through this world's waning night
   May, hand in hand, pursue our way;
Shed round us order, love, and light,
   And shine unto the perfect day.

1842.



THE POETRY OF A ROOT CROP



Underneath their eider-robe
Russet swede and golden globe,
Feathered carrot, burrowing deep,
Steadfast wait in charmed sleep;
Treasure-houses wherein lie,
Locked by angels' alchemy,
Milk and hair, and blood, and bone,
Children of the barren stone;
Children of the flaming Air,
With his blue eye keen and bare,
Spirit-peopled smiling down
On frozen field and toiling town--
Toiling town that will not heed
God His voice for rage and greed;
Frozen fields that surpliced lie,
Gazing patient at the sky;
Like some marble carven nun,
With folded hands when work is done,
Who mute upon her tomb doth pray,
Till the resurrection day.

Eversley, 1845.



CHILD BALLAD



Jesus, He loves one and all,
Jesus, He loves children small,
Their souls are waiting round His feet
On high, before His mercy-seat.

While He wandered here below
Children small to Him did go,
At His feet they knelt and prayed,
On their heads His hands He laid.

Came a Spirit on them then,
Better than of mighty men,
A Spirit faithful, pure and mild,
A Spirit fit for king and child.

Oh! that Spirit give to me,
Jesu Lord, where'er I be!

1847.



AIRLY BEACON



Airly Beacon, Airly Beacon;
   Oh the pleasant sight to see
Shires and towns from Airly Beacon,
   While my love climbed up to me!

Airly Beacon, Airly Beacon;
   Oh the happy hours we lay
Deep in fern on Airly Beacon,
   Courting through the summer's day!

Airly Beacon, Airly Beacon;
   Oh the weary haunt for me,
All alone on Airly Beacon,
   With his baby on my knee!

1847.



SAPPHO



She lay among the myrtles on the cliff;
Above her glared the noon; beneath, the sea.
Upon the white horizon Atho's peak
Weltered in burning haze; all airs were dead;
The cicale slept among the tamarisk's hair;
The birds sat dumb and drooping.  Far below
The lazy sea-weed glistened in the sun;
The lazy sea-fowl dried their steaming wings;
The lazy swell crept whispering up the ledge,
And sank again.  Great Pan was laid to rest;
And Mother Earth watched by him as he slept,
And hushed her myriad children for a while.
She lay among the myrtles on the cliff;
And sighed for sleep, for sleep that would not hear,
But left her tossing still; for night and day
A mighty hunger yearned within her heart,
Till all her veins ran fever; and her cheek,
Her long thin hands, and ivory-channelled feet,
Were wasted with the wasting of her soul.
Then peevishly she flung her on her face,
And hid her eyeballs from the blinding glare,
And fingered at the grass, and tried to cool
Her crisp hot lips against the crisp hot sward:
And then she raised her head, and upward cast
Wild looks from homeless eyes, whose liquid light
Gleamed out between deep folds of blue-black hair,
As gleam twin lakes between the purple peaks
Of deep Parnassus, at the mournful moon.
Beside her lay her lyre.  She snatched the shell,
And waked wild music from its silver strings;
Then tossed it sadly by.--'Ah, hush!' she cries;
'Dead offspring of the tortoise and the mine!
Why mock my discords with thine harmonies?
Although a thrice-Olympian lot be thine,
Only to echo back in every tone
The moods of nobler natures than thine own.'

Eversley, 1847
From Yeast.



THE BAD SQUIRE



The merry brown hares came leaping
   Over the crest of the hill,
Where the clover and corn lay sleeping
   Under the moonlight still.

Leaping late and early,
   Till under their bite and their tread
The swedes and the wheat and the barley
   Lay cankered and trampled and dead.

A poacher's widow sat sighing
   On the side of the white chalk bank,
Where under the gloomy fir-woods
   One spot in the ley throve rank.

She watched a long tuft of clover,
   Where rabbit or hare never ran;
For its black sour haulm covered over
   The blood of a murdered man.

She thought of the dark plantation,
   And the hares, and her husband's blood,
And the voice of her indignation
   Rose up to the throne of God.

'I am long past wailing and whining--
   I have wept too much in my life:
I've had twenty years of pining
   As an English labourer's wife.

'A labourer in Christian England,
   Where they cant of a Saviour's name,
And yet waste men's lives like the vermin's
   For a few more brace of game.

'There's blood on your new foreign shrubs, squire,
   There's blood on your pointer's feet;
There's blood on the game you sell, squire,
   And there's blood on the game you eat.

'You have sold the labouring-man, squire,
   Body and soul to shame,
To pay for your seat in the House, squire,
   And to pay for the feed of your game.

'You made him a poacher yourself, squire,
   When you'd give neither work nor meat,
And your barley-fed hares robbed the garden
   At our starving children's feet;

'When, packed in one reeking chamber,
   Man, maid, mother, and little ones lay;
While the rain pattered in on the rotting bride-bed,
   And the walls let in the day.

'When we lay in the burning fever
   On the mud of the cold clay floor,
Till you parted us all for three months, squire,
   At the dreary workhouse door.

'We quarrelled like brutes, and who wonders?
   What self-respect could we keep,
Worse housed than your hacks and your pointers,
   Worse fed than your hogs and your sheep?

'Our daughters with base-born babies
   Have wandered away in their shame,
If your misses had slept, squire, where they did,
   Your misses might do the same.

'Can your lady patch hearts that are breaking
   With handfuls of coals and rice,
Or by dealing out flannel and sheeting
   A little below cost price?

'You may tire of the jail and the workhouse,
   And take to allotments and schools,
But you've run up a debt that will never
   Be paid us by penny-club rules.

'In the season of shame and sadness,
   In the dark and dreary day,
When scrofula, gout, and madness
   Are eating your race away;

'When to kennels and liveried varlets
   You have cast your daughter's bread,
And, worn out with liquor and harlots,
   Your heir at your feet lies dead;

'When your youngest, the mealy-mouthed rector,
   Lets your soul rot asleep to the grave,
You will find in your God the protector
   Of the freeman you fancied your slave.'

She looked at the tuft of clover,
   And wept till her heart grew light;
And at last, when her passion was over,
   Went wandering into the night.

But the merry brown hares came leaping
   Over the uplands still,
Where the clover and corn lay sleeping
   On the side of the white chalk hill.

Eversley, 1847.
From Yeast.



SCOTCH SONG



Oh, forth she went like a braw, braw bride
   To meet her winsome groom,
When she was aware of twa bonny birds
   Sat biggin' in the broom.

The tane it built with the green, green moss,
   But and the bents sae fine,
And the tither wi' a lock o' lady's hair
   Linked up wi' siller twine.

'O whaur gat ye the green, green moss,
   O whaur the bents sae fine?
And whaur gat ye the bonny broun hair
   That ance was tress o' mine?'

'We gat the moss fra' the elditch aile,
   The bents fra' the whinny muir,
And a fause knight threw us the bonny broun hair,
   To please his braw new fere.'

'Gae pull, gae pull the simmer leaves,
   And strew them saft o'er me;
My token's tint, my love is fause,
   I'll lay me doon and dee.'

1847.



THE YOUNG KNIGHT:  A PARABLE



A gay young knight in Burley stood,
Beside him pawed his steed so good,
His hands he wrung as he were wood
   With waiting for his love O!

'Oh, will she come, or will she stay,
Or will she waste the weary day
With fools who wish her far away,
   And hate her for her love O?'

But by there came a mighty boar,
His jowl and tushes red with gore,
And on his curled snout he bore
   A bracelet rich and rare O!

The knight he shrieked, he ran, he flew,
He searched the wild wood through and through,
But found nought save a mantle blue,
   Low rolled within the brake O!

He twined the wild briar, red and white,
Upon his head the garland dight,
The green leaves withered black as night,
   And burnt into his brain O!

A fire blazed up within his breast,
He mounted on an aimless quest,
He laid his virgin lance in rest,
   And through the forest drove O!

By Rhinefield and by Osmondsleigh,
Through leat and furze brake fast drove he,
Until he saw the homeless sea,
   That called with all its waves O!

He laughed aloud to hear the roar,
And rushed his horse adown the shore,
The deep surge rolled him o'er and o'er,
   And swept him down the tide O!

New Forest, July 12, 1847.



A NEW FOREST BALLAD



Oh she tripped over Ocknell plain,
   And down by Bradley Water;
And the fairest maid on the forest side
   Was Jane, the keeper's daughter.

She went and went through the broad gray lawns
   As down the red sun sank,
And chill as the scent of a new-made grave
   The mist smelt cold and dank.

'A token, a token!' that fair maid cried,
   'A token that bodes me sorrow;
For they that smell the grave by night
   Will see the corpse to-morrow.

'My own true love in Burley Walk
   Does hunt to-night, I fear;
And if he meet my father stern,
   His game may cost him dear.

'Ah, here's a curse on hare and grouse,
   A curse on hart and hind;
And a health to the squire in all England,
   Leaves never a head behind.'

Her true love shot a mighty hart
   Among the standing rye,
When on him leapt that keeper old
   From the fern where he did lie.

The forest laws were sharp and stern,
   The forest blood was keen;
They lashed together for life and death
   Beneath the hollies green.

The metal good and the walnut wood
   Did soon in flinders flee;
They tost the orts to south and north,
   And grappled knee to knee.

They wrestled up, they wrestled down,
   They wrestled still and sore;
Beneath their feet the myrtle sweet
   Was stamped to mud and gore.

Ah, cold pale moon, thou cruel pale moon,
   That starest with never a frown
On all the grim and the ghastly things
   That are w