eAustrian hultimatum!
Austrian hultimatum!"

"My God!" Tony cried, a light coming into his eyes. "It can't really
mean war? How perfectly glorious! Wonderful! Get out, you rascals!" and
he hustled the old-clothes men out of the flat.

Three weeks later Dorothy received the following letter from Flanders:

     DEAREST DOODLES,--You'd simply love this. I never enjoyed myself so
     much in all my life. Can't write you a decent letter because I'm
     just off chivvying Uhlans. It's got fox-hunting beat a thousand
     times. Sorry we had that row when I made such an ass of myself at
     Arrowsmith's that night. It's a lucky thing you were firm, because
     you've got just enough to go on with until I get back. Mustn't say
     too much in a letter; but I suppose we shall have chivvied these
     bounders back to Berlin in two or three months. Then I shall really
     have to settle down and do something in earnest. A man in ours says
     that Queensland isn't such a bad sort of hole. Old Cleveden put me
     against it by cracking it up so. It's suddenly struck me that
     Houston is probably a spy. If he is, you might make it rather
     unpleasant for him. I feel I haven't explained properly how sorry I
     am, but it's so deuced hard in a letter. By the way, Uncle Chat has
     just written rather a stupid letter about my mother's jointure.
     Perhaps you'd go down and talk to him about it. He ought to
     understand I'm too busy to bother about domestic finance at
     present. I had another notion--rather a bright one--that when I get
     back you and I could appear on the stage together. Rather a rag,
     eh? The captain of my troop was pipped last week. Awful good egg.
     I'm acting captain now. Paignton sends his love. Dear old thing, I
     wish you were out here with me.

     Yours ever,

     TONY.

A week later the fifth Earl of Clarehaven was killed in action.




CHAPTER VI


I

Dorothy was at Little Cherrington when the news of Tony's death reached
her. The dowager had already vacated Clare Lodge, and with a few of her
dearest possessions was now established in Cherrington Cottage. Only
extreme necessity could have driven her into that particular abode,
because in order for her to go into it, Mr. Greenish had to go out of
it, which upset Mr. Greenish so much that he went out of Cherrington
altogether, out of Devonshire, even, and as far away as Hampshire. His
choice of a county was the dowager's only consolation; Connie lived in
Hampshire; the world was small; Mr. Greenish and Bella might even yet
come together. Bella, absorbed in her short stories--one of which had
been accepted, but not published, and another of which had been
published but not paid for--found that the chief objection to being in
Cherrington Cottage was the noise that the children made going to and
from school. It was strange to find Bella, who in her youth had made as
much noise even as Connie, so dependent now upon quiet; but in whatever
divine hands mortals fall, their behavior usually changes radically
afterward. We all know what love can do for anybody; we all know what
the Salvation Army can do for anybody; and if Virgil's account of the
Cumaean Sibyl may be trusted, the transforming influence of Apollo is
second to none.

Tony's consideration in securing Cherrington Cottage to his mother could
only have been bettered if he had made some provision for a sum of
money to maintain it, or, for that matter, herself; delicious as the
exterior of it undoubtedly was, the walls were not edible. The sudden
stoppage in the payment of her jointure put the dowager in the
humiliating position of having to ask her brother, Lord Chatfield, to
pay the weekly bills, and it was with the intention of dealing with this
matter that Dorothy had gone down much against her will to the scene
that was consecrated to her greatest triumph and her greatest failure.
Perhaps the nerves of the usually so genial Uncle Chat had been too much
wrought upon by the outbreak of war. As deputy lieutenant of the county
he had been harried by a series of telegrams from the War Office, each
of which had contradicted its predecessor. He had had to lend not merely
all his own horses to England, but to arrange to lend most of his
neighbors', some of whom were not quite such willing lenders as his
lordship. His eldest son, Paignton, was already at the front in the
North Devon Dragoons, and his second son was assisting an elderly
gentleman who had lived in obscurity since Tel-el-Kebir--where he had
been jabbed in the liver by a dervish--to command, drill, and generally
produce for their country's need the two hundred and ten rustics that at
present constituted the Seventh Service Battalion of the King's Own
Devon Light Infantry. His daughters, Lady Maud and Lady Mary, had given
him no rest till they were allowed to do something or other; though
before he understood what exactly this was the war had lasted many
months longer than the greatest pessimist had believed possible. His
sister, Lady Jane, in despair of finding anything else to do, was
collecting mittens for the soldiers, a hobby which made the ground floor
of Chatfield Hall look like a congested wool-warehouse in the city.

At such a moment the problem of his younger sister's financial future
struck poor Uncle Chat as much more hopelessly insoluble than it would
have seemed in those happy days when he had nothing to talk about
except cigars and pigs. Bella immediately after the outbreak of war put
down the pen and took up the sword, or in other words yearned to join
the V.A.D., and it was the imperative need of finding money for Bella to
gratify her patriotism in London that drove the dowager into discussing
her finances with her brother. Dorothy, who could not bear the
suggestion that Tony had heartlessly left for France without any heed of
his family obligations, a suggestion that reflected upon herself, at
once turned over to the dowager half of the L2,000 in the bank.
Actually, she only left herself with something over L600, for extra
money had had to be found for Tony's equipment and for the payment of
bills he had overlooked. There was no reason to suppose that Uncle Chat
was really criticizing her behavior in the least; but his air of general
irritation gave her the impression that he was, which preyed upon her
mind so much that she began to feel almost on a level with her
unfortunate namesake who had lost the Derby. She fancied that everybody
was ascribing Tony's mad career to his marriage, and thinking that if he
had only married a nice girl in his own class none of these disasters
would have happened. She fancied that the disapproval of the family
which had been carefully concealed all these years out of deference to
Tony's feelings was now making itself known, she was embittered by the
imagined atmosphere of hostility, and she made up her mind that as soon
as possible she would cut herself off from the Fanhopes and from what
was left of the Clares.

Tony in his last letter had proposed that he and she should go on the
stage when he came home, which of course would have been ridiculous;
but, now that Tony was dead, there was surely nothing to prevent her
return to the stage. When she got back to town she might go and ask Sir
John Richards if he could not find a part in the autumn production at
the Vanity Theater. Whatever was now lacking to her voice, whatever the
years had added to her appearance, and notwithstanding the wear and tear
that had added very little, would be counterbalanced in the eyes of the
British public by the privilege of reading upon the program the name of
the Countess of Clarehaven. Nothing was any longer owing to the family
name; no, indeed, except Bella still bore it, and if third-rate stories
were to appear in third-rate magazines under the signature of Arabella
Clare, there was no reason why a bill of the play should not advertise
the Countess of Clare. It happened that Harry Tufton had come down to
Cherrington to assist at the memorial service which was to be held in
Clarehaven church. Dorothy supposed that he was anxious to keep in with
the Chatfields, and in speaking to him about her project she was not
actuated by any desire for the sympathy of an old friend. She asked his
advice in a practical spirit, because he was connected with the theater,
and when he tried to discourage her by hinting at the fickleness of
public affection, she discerned in his opposition to her plan nothing
except the tired anxiety of one who was being importuned by an old
friend to give the best advice compatible with the minimum of trouble to
himself. Tufton's doubtfulness of her capacity still to attract the
favor of an audience had the effect of strengthening her resolve to test
his opinion; she asked him with that indifferent smile of hers, which
had lost none of its magic of provocation, if he really thought that the
British public was as fickle as himself. Tufton protested against the
imputation, and excused himself for the evasion of friendship implicit
in his attitude by pleading that the War Office kept him so very busy
nowadays.

"Of course it was an awful blow when they wouldn't accept me for active
service," he said, earnestly. "Heart, don't you know."

"Oh, your heart is weak," she inquired, with a mocking air of concern.
"I suppose the very idea of war produced palpitations. Don't strain it
going up-stairs in Whitehall."

"Somebody must do the work at home," he said, irritably.

"Yes, I feel so sorry for you poor Cinderellas," she murmured. "But
never mind, you'll always be able to feel that if it wasn't for you the
poor fellows at the front, don't you know, wouldn't be able to get
along. I suppose you call yourselves the noble army of martyrs?"

It had been fun to twist the tail of that ship's rat, Dorothy thought,
when she saw him hurry away from Cherrington to catch the first train
back to town after the service.

The news of Tony's death had reached Cherrington on the morning of the
day that Dorothy was going back to the flat. When she had made over half
of her money to the dowager and was clear of the fancied atmosphere of
hostility at Chatfield, she had begun to feel penitently that she had
misjudged her mother-in-law and sister-in-law. It had seemed dreadful to
leave them here in this cottage almost within sight and sound of the
changes at Clare Court, and she had invited them to come and stay with
her in Halfmoon Street until the flat was given up. The dowager had been
unwilling to leave the country, and when the news of her son's death
arrived was firm in her determination to remain in Cherrington.

"He was born here," she said, "and it is here that I shall always think
of him best. I don't think I can afford to put up a window to his
memory; he must just have a simple stone slab. I should like to copy
that inscription at Rhodes. Do you remember it? 'Anthony, Fifth Earl of
Clarehaven. With God. 1914.'"

Dorothy's grief at the death of Tony had for the moment been kept in
control by the tremendous effort she had been called upon to make in
facing the future; it was the future which had occupied her mind to the
exclusion of any contemplation of the past. Now when her mother-in-law
spoke these simple words she burst into tears. They linked Tony with so
many generations of his house; and they brought home to her almost as a
visible fact his death. She had spent so many years perpetually on the
verge, as it were, of broken promises, of resolutions never carried out,
of little optimisms and extenuations, that when the announcement of his
death arrived it was more than usually true in her case that she did not
at first realize it. The telegraphic form in which the news had been
conveyed to her involuntarily merged itself with so many telegrams in
the past which had turned out false, and only when the dowager stated
his death like this in terms that admitted of no doubt did Dorothy
suddenly confront the reality. She remembered that once a telegram had
arrived almost on this very date to say that Tony could not get away
from camp in time to be present at the annual show. There was no annual
show this year--war had obliterated it--but on the afternoon of this day
on which she had meant to return to town she walked, instead, about the
field where the show had customarily been held, and so vivid was the
familiar scene of hot women and blazing dahlias that she was transported
back in imagination and found herself excusing on the ground of his
military duties her husband's absence from this spectral exhibition. A
farmer, one of her late tenants, passed her while she was wandering over
the field, touched his cap, and begged to express his sorrow at the
news.

"'Tis going to be a handsome year for partridges, too," he said. "But
there, my lady, his lordship of late never seemed to care for partridges
so much as he belonged. I remember when he was a youngster he'd regular
walk me off my feet, as the saying is, after they birds. And he was
uncommon fond of land-rails. Yes, it always seemed to give him a sort of
extra pleasure, as you might say, when he could get a shot at a
land-rail."

The reproach that was implied in the farmer's first words was mitigated
by these reminiscences of Tony as a boy, and Dorothy thought that if her
son had lived he would already be over six years old and within
measurable distance of shooting his first land-rail in the company of
the burly farmer beside her. Her son! Would it have made any difference
to Tony if he had had an heir? Ought she to thank God or reproach Him
for her childlessness?

Three days later Mr. Beadon sang for the late earl a requiem at
Clarehaven church. Whoever should be the new owner of Clare--nobody had
materialized from that mysterious firm of Reinhardt & Co.--he was not
yet flaunting his proprietorship. The mourners passed slowly through the
somber groves of pines and looked back at the empty house across the
short herbage burnished by the drought of August, and the house empty
and solemn, perhaps more solemn because it had not been dressed for
grief, eyed with all its windows their progress seaward.

It would be cynical to say that at such a moment Mr. Beadon derived a
positive pleasure from conducting a mass of requiem for the dead earl,
and if for a moment he regarded with a kind of gloomy triumph Squire
Kingdon's inevitable conformity to the majestic ritual of woe expressed
by the catafalque from which depended the dead earl's hatchment, he made
up by the grave eloquence of his funeral oration for any fleeting
pettiness. The windows of the little church on the cliff were wide open
to the serene air, and if ever the preacher fell mute for a space to
recover from his emotion the plaint of the tide was heard in a monody
above the mourners' tears; but above the preacher's voice, above all the
sounds of nature in communion with human grief, there was continuously
audible a gay chattering of birds among the tombs, of whinchats and
stonechats that were mobilizing along these cliffs, unaware that there
was anything very admirable or very adventurous about their impending
migration. A cynic listening to those birds might have criticized the
rector's sermon for its exaggeration of the spirit in which the young
earl had set out to Flanders; a cynic might have given himself leave to
doubt if the fifth Earl of Clarehaven was inspired by the same spirit as
inspired Sir Gilbert Clare to defend Rhodes against the Moslem; but,
whatever the spirit in which he had set forth, no cynic could impugn the
spirit in which he had died; no living man, indeed, had any longer the
right to sneer at his frailties and follies or to condemn his vices and
his extravagance. Besides, a cynic contemporary with Sir Gilbert Clare
may have questioned the spirit in which the Hospitaller had watched the
cliffs of Devon fade out in the sunset. Who knows? There were stonechats
and whinchats then as now.

On the morning after the requiem Dorothy was confronted with the
possibility of an event that in its significance, should it come to
fruition, would obliterate all that had happened in the past and would
provide her in the future with a task so tremendous that she almost fell
on her knees then and there to pray for strength and wisdom to sustain
it. This was the possibility that she was going to have a child.

Such a prospect changed every plan for the future that she had been
making and destroyed her freedom in the very moment it had been given
back to her by the death of her husband. Her intention of proving to
Harry Tufton that she could again be a favorite of the public must now
be relinquished; her ambition to withdraw haughtily from the protection
of Lord Chatfield must presumably be abandoned. Yet need they? She
should not be too impulsive. Who now except herself had the right to say
a word about her child's future? Who else could claim to be the guardian
of its destiny? If she was right about her condition, she should rejoice
that Tony was dead. If he had been alive and in that mood he was in
before the outbreak of war solved his future so rapidly and so
completely, this wonderful prospect would only have led to
recriminations, even to open hatred. It would have been he who had
robbed their child of its inheritance, and she could never have
refrained from taunting him with his egotism. Nor was it likely that he
would have been reformed by the prospect of being a father; he had not
shown much inclination that way in the early years of their marriage;
and even if for a while he had changed his habits, he would gradually
have relapsed, and, moreover, with his genial and indulgent character he
would have held out not merely a bad, but also an attractive, example,
which would doubtless have been eagerly and assiduously imitated by any
child of his. Yes, but now the future lay in her hands ... and meanwhile
she must not be too sure that she was going to have a child at all, nor,
even if it were established that she was, must she make too many plans
in advance, because everything would be ruled by whether it was a boy or
a girl. If it should be a girl, she might go back to the stage next
year; she would only be thirty-one next March. It was odd how much
younger thirty-one seemed than thirty. But if it should be a boy ...
well, even if it should be a boy, why should she not go back to the
stage and by her own exertions keep him, educate him, prepare him to be
what he must be--landless, houseless, moneyless, but still the sixth
Earl of Clarehaven? Stoic, indeed, should be his training, and his
nobility should be won as well as conferred.

Several days of uncertainty went by, and finally Dorothy decided to ask
Doctor Lane his opinion of her condition. He was a very old man now and
no longer in practice, but at least he would know how to keep a secret,
and a secret she intended his opinion to remain at present. Already
plans were seething in her head for the immediate future, and when
Doctor Lane assured her that she was going to have a baby, without
saying a word even to the dowager she left next day for London.

Dorothy, who had been fancying that Tony's family wanted to be rid of
her, soon found that, on the contrary, they would not let her alone,
and when the lease expired at Michaelmas and while she was still
wondering where she was going to live next, she received an invitation
to join the dowager, Bella, and Lady Jane at the Chatfield town mansion
in Grosvenor Square. It appeared that Lady Jane had by this time become
so inextricably entangled in unknitted wool that the only way she could
disentangle herself was by coming up to town to continue there with
proper help the preparation of mittens against the winter cold.

"Not that it will be necessary," everybody said, "but it's as well to be
prepared, and of course it _might_ drag on till the spring."

The dowager, who had been worked up by her sister to feel that even
though she had given a son to England she was still in debt, and Bella
were among the twenty ladies collected by Lady Jane to make mittens, and
the spinster was anxious to add Dorothy to her flock, for what between
wool and ladies she was become very pastoral. So great pressure was put
on Dorothy to make mittens, too. Uncle Chat was very penitent for his
behavior over the jointure, and he now insisted that the money Dorothy
had shared with her mother-in-law should be returned to her. Had it not
been for her condition, she would have taken pleasure in refusing this;
in the circumstances she accepted it, but she still did not say a word
about her pregnancy, for reasons compounded of superstition and pride.
Her experience of child-bearing had destroyed her self-confidence and
she felt that she could not bear to have a great fuss made about her and
to be installed in state at Chatfield Hall to wait there doing nothing
through all this anxious winter of war. Nor did the manufacture of
mittens in Grosvenor Square appeal to her. Moreover, it was possible
that the news would not be welcome. She could not have borne to see
Uncle Chat's face fall again at the prospect of having to support a
grandnephew of the same rank as himself, and though she did not think
that the dowager would attempt to interfere, or that she would be
anything but delighted and tactful, there was the chance that after her
son's death she might arrogate to herself a right to spoil her grandson.
If Dorothy accepted for him the charity of his grandmother's family, she
could not avoid admitting the dowager to the privilege of maternity; but
if during the months of expectation she kept close her secret and if it
were a boy, untrammeled by any obligations she should be at liberty to
make her own decision about his up-bringing. More and more she was
forming all her plans to fit the future of a boy, and one of her chief
reasons for not relying upon the good will of the family was her desire
to spare this son prenatal coddling by coddling herself.

Dorothy might have found it hard to analyze justly all the motives that
inspired her to take the step she did; but whatever they were, a hot
morning in late September found her sitting at the window of her old
room in Lonsdale Road.


II

If outwardly Lonsdale Road presented the same appearance as it had
presented on that September morning twelve years ago when Dorothy, after
washing her hair, made up her mind to be engaged to Wilfred Curlew, the
standpoint from which she now looked out of her window was so profoundly
changed that the road itself was transmuted by the alchemy of her mind
to achieve the significant and incommunicable landscape of a dream. It
was as if in looking at Lonsdale Road she were looking at herself, and a
much truer self than she ever used to see portrayed in that old mirror
upon her dressing-table.

In an upper room of the house opposite a servant was dusting. Down
below, amid that immemorial acrid smell of privet, two little girls were
busily digging in the front garden. These were the daughters of her
second sister, the rightful Dorothy, who was staying with her parents
because her husband, Claude Savage, had left Norbiton for France with
his regiment of territorials. Mrs. Savage, a dark, neat little woman, as
capable a housewife as she had promised to become, and at twenty-eight
not quite so annoying as formerly, came into the room from time to time
and glanced out of the window to see that her little girls were not
making themselves too dirty.

"Hope they're not disturbing you with their chattering."

"No, no," said the countess. "I like listening to them."

Ah, there was Edna down below, not as twelve years ago giggling back
from school with Agnes, but wheeling a perambulator and from time to
time bending cautiously over to arrange the coverlet over her sleeping
baby. Edna was a dull edition of Agnes, and already at twenty-six much
more like Mrs. Caffyn than any of her sisters. Her chin was rather
furry; she was indefinite, not so indefinite as her mother because
modern education had not permitted to her what was formerly considered a
prerogative of woman. Edna had been married for about three years to
Walter Hume, a young doctor in Golders Green, who was stationed at some
northern camp with the R.A.M.C. She, too, was staying with her
parents.

"Edna keeps on fussing with the coverlet," said Mrs. Savage, critically.
"But she ought not to be walking along the sunny side of the pavement."

The countess did not pay much attention to the practical sister looking
over her shoulders; she was thinking of Agnes and wondering what she was
doing, and how her baby was getting on.

"Have you heard from Agnes lately?" she asked.

"Yes. Her husband has gone in for politics. But of course politics out
there must be very different from what they are in England. You can't
imagine Agnes as the wife of a politician. Tut-tut! Ridiculous!"

"What did she call her little boy?"

"Oh, gracious, don't ask me! Some perfectly absurd name. Could it be
Xenophon? I know Claude laughed muchly when he heard it. Thank goodness,
he wouldn't have let me choose such names for Mary and Ethel. I suppose
Agnes is happy. She seems to be. I sometimes wonder where some of the
members of our family get their taste for adventure."

"But you've no idea what a lovely place Aphros is ... it lies in the
middle of a circle of islands and...."

"Yes, yes," Mrs. Savage interrupted, "but it's a long way from England,
and the idea of living abroad doesn't appeal to me."

"Don't you ever want to travel?"

"Well, Claude and I had planned to go to Switzerland with a party this
August, but of course the war put a stop to that."

"By the way, isn't the war rather an adventure for Claude?" the countess
asked, with a smile.

"An adventure?" Mrs. Savage echoed. "It's a great inconvenience."

She bustled out of the room to look after her own daughters and give
Edna some advice about hers; soon after she was gone Gladys and
Marjorie, the prototypes of those little girls in the front garden,
strolled in to gossip with their eldest sister. Although it was nearly
noon, they were only just out of bed, because they had been up late at a
dance on the night before. Gladys, a girl of twenty, was very like her
eldest sister at the same age. She was not quite so tall and perhaps she
lacked her air of having been born to grandeur, but she was sufficiently
like to make Dorothy wonder if her career would at all resemble her own.
On the whole, she thought that probably herself and Agnes had exhausted
the right of the Caffyns to astonish their neighbors. Gladys and
Marjorie, the latter a charming new edition of the original Dorothy,
with flashing deep-blue eyes, dark hair, and an Irish complexion, were
already, at twenty and nineteen, too free to be ambitious. Twelve years
had made a great difference to the liberty of girls in West Kensington,
and Mr. Caffyn no longer objected to the young men who came to his
house, mostly in uniform nowadays, which provided one more excuse for
emancipation. Gladys and Marjorie frequently arrived home unchaperoned
from dances at three o'clock in the morning, and their father did not
turn a hair; perhaps he was already so white that he was incapable of
showing any more marks of life's fitful fever. No doubt he had long ago
given up the ladies of Lauriston Mansions, and probably at no period in
his career was he more qualified to be the secretary of the Church of
England Purity Society than upon the eve of his retirement from the
post. Dorothy had not seen her father since that night she drove him
back in her car from the Vanity. Tacitly they had been friends at once
when the countess came to live at home for a while; indeed, she fancied
that she could grow quite fond of him, and she was even compelled to
warn herself against a slight inclination to accept his flattery a
little too complacently. Mrs. Caffyn, with a perversity that is often
shown by blondes upon the verge of sixty, would not go white, and her
hair was of so indefinite a shade as to be quite indescribably the very
expression of her own indefinite personality.

Of the boys--it was odd to hear of the boys again--Roland had long been
married and already had four children. At this rate he was likely to
surpass his father, whom on a larger scale he was beginning to resemble.
Roland was continually in a state of being expected to come and look the
family up. He was so long in doing so that he became almost a myth to
his eldest sister, and when at last, one afternoon, he did materialize
with the largest mustache she had ever seen, his appearance gave her the
same kind of thrill that she used to get at the Zoo, when at short
intervals the sea-lion would emerge from the water and flap about among
the rocks of his cage. It was obvious that Roland regarded her with a
mixture of suspicion, jealousy, and disapproval, for he had not brought
his wife with him, and when the countess asked him if he had also left
his pipe at home, he growled out that he supposed she was far too grand
for pipes. Dorothy remembered that sometimes when they were children he
and she had seemed upon the path of mutual understanding, and, feeling
penitent for her share in the way they had for twelve years been walking
away from each other, she tried to be specially affectionate with
Roland; but he was already out of earshot. He evidently was thinking
that her abrupt re-entry into the family circle would probably mean a
reduction in his share of any money left by their parents, because he
was continually alluding to her financial state and his own. She tried
to ascribe this to his position as the manager of a branch bank; but she
knew in her heart that he was dividing L500 a year first by eight and
then by nine and thinking what a difference to his holiday that extra L7
would make. Of Dorothy's other brothers, Cecil was in camp somewhere,
and hoping to get to France soon with the R.A.M.C.; he had been married
only a few months, and his wife was living in the nearest town to his
quarters. Vincent, who had won a scholarship at Sydney Sussex College,
Cambridge, had already enlisted and wrote home as confidently of
promotion in the near future as twelve years ago he had boasted that he
would soon be in the eleven of St. James's Preparatory School.

Perhaps the most striking result of the countess's return was the
impetus it gave to Mrs. Caffyn's Wednesday afternoons. The punctilious
ladies came as they had been coming steadily for twelve years; but a
quantity of less punctilious ladies also came and were so much over-awed
by meeting a countess in a West Kensington drawing-room that they had no
appetite for cakes, which was just as well because otherwise the strain
put upon the normal provision by so many extra visitors might have been
too much for it. In addition to the Wednesday ladies, several friends of
Dorothy's youth visited No. 17 in the evenings, and though by now the
billiard-table was more like a neglected tennis-lawn, she played one or
two games to remind her of old times, thinking how scornful she would
have been twelve years ago if any one had prophesied to her such
indulgence in sentiment. Among these friends of youth came Wilfred
Curlew, who in outward appearance was the least changed of all. His
career had been successful, if the editorship of a society paper can be
considered success. Being a journalist, he rightly considered himself
indispensable at home, and it is unlikely that his inaccurate and cheery
paragraphs in _The Way of the World_ did any more to make the war
ridiculous than some of the inaccurate and cheery despatches sent home
from the front by generals. A slight tendency which he had formerly had
toward a cockney accent had been checked by an elocutionist who had
imprisoned his voice in his throat, whence it was never allowed to
stray. If Lady Clarehaven had once been a Vanity girl, Mr. Wilfred
Curlew, the editor of _The Way of the World_, had once written fierce
revolutionary articles about Society in _The Red Lamp_; and whereas Lady
Clarehaven had long been indifferent to her past, Mr. Curlew was still
sensitive about his, as sensitive as a man who oils the wheels of
railway-coaches in termini would be if it were known that he had once
been a train-wrecker.

After the first awkwardness of such a rencounter had worn off Dorothy
found Wilfred entertaining. It was astonishing to learn how accurately
the failings and follies of so many of her friends and acquaintances
were known to the editor, who had never met one of them. At first he
pretended that he had met them; but as gradually he saw more of the
countess he gave up this pretense, and finally he revealed the existence
in his mind of a perpetual and abominable dread that soon or late in one
of his cheery paragraphs he should make a mistake, not, of course, a
mistake of fact or even an unjust imputation--that would be nothing--but
a mistake of form. He was really haunted day and night by such bogies as
referring to a maid of honor after marriage without her prefix, though
to have suggested that her behavior with somebody else's husband was
less honorable than that would no more have troubled him than to state
positively that her main hobby was breeding Sealyham terriers, when it
was really communicating every Sunday at St. Paul's, Knightsbridge. If
in Lonsdale Road Dorothy beheld her present self, in Wilfred Curlew she
saw the reflection of what she was twelve years ago, enough of which old
self still existed to make her feel proud that never in her most anxious
moments had she revealed to another person her own dread of making a
mistake.

One day after a long talk about well-known people in society, Curlew
exclaimed from the depths of his inmost being, "If only I had you
always!"

"Is this a proposal?" she laughed.

He rose and walked about the room in his agitated fashion; then
supporting with one arm the small of his back as he used, and wrenching
his voice back into his throat whence in his emotion it had nearly
escaped, he paused to mutter:

"Presumptuous, I know, but sincere."

This phrase remained in Dorothy's mind for long afterward, and in her
gloomiest hours she could always smile when she repeated gently to
herself, "Presumptuous, I know, but sincere."

Naturally, she told Curlew as kindly as she could that his proposal was
far outside the remotest bounds of possibility.

"Besides," she added, "you'd really be much better off without my help.
Readers of your paper will always greatly prefer your view of society to
my view. My view would pull your circulation down to nothing in less
than no time."

"It's true," Curlew groaned. "How wise you are!"

Only that morning he had received a sharp reminder from the great brain
of which _The Way of the World_ was merely an inquisitive and
insignificant tentacle, to say that the last three or four numbers of
the paper had shown a marked falling off in their ability to provide
what the public required.

"You have to admit that I am right," Dorothy pointed out kindly.

"Yes, but if you'd marry me, in a year or two I would give up journalism
and write novels. I've got a theory about the form of the English novel
which I should like to put into practice."

"I'm afraid," said Dorothy, "I have heard too many theories about the
form of race-horses to believe much in theories of form about anything.
Form is a capricious quality."

"It's an awful thing," poor Wilfred groaned, "for a man who knows he can
write good stuff never to have an opportunity of doing so. I'm afraid
I've sold my soul," he murmured, in a transport of remorse.

"We all of us do that sooner or later," she said. "And it's only when we
don't get a good price for it that we repent."

Dorothy's faculty for aphorisms had no doubt been fostered by the
respect which was accorded to her at Lonsdale Road, but she was far from
talking merely for the sake of talking, and her inspiration was really
the fruit of experience, not the mere flowering of words. She had,
perhaps, been wiser than she had realized in coming home for a while.
Notwithstanding those two younger sisters nearly as beautiful as
herself, notwithstanding the knowledge generally diffused that she was
without money, her beauty and rank were still sufficiently remarkable in
West Kensington to preserve her dignity. Here she ran no risks of
acquiring a deeper cynicism from the behavior of old friends like
Tufton, and inasmuch as misfortune had made her more truly the equal of
those around her she had no temptation now to lord it over her sisters,
as no doubt they had expected she would; in the homage of West
Kensington she let the pleasant side of herself develop and, by a strong
effort resisting an inclination to worry about the future, she resigned
herself to whatever fortune had in store for her.

Dorothy was not content with waiting for all her old friends to visit
her; there was one whom she herself sought out soon after she reached
West Kensington. She had not seen Olive Airdale since her marriage, and
she was glad she was visiting her for the first time humbly and on foot,
even if Olive should think that it was only in adversity that she cared
to seek out the companions of her early days. What rubbish! As if Olive
would think anything except that she was glad to see her old friend. It
was an opalescent afternoon in mid-October when Dorothy rang the bell of
the little red house in Gresley Road, and Olive's welcome of her was as
if the mist over London had suddenly melted to reveal that very paradise
which for the fanciful wayfarer existed somewhere behind these
enchanting and transfigurative autumnal airs.

"My dearest Dorothy," she exclaimed. "But why do you reproach yourself?
As if I hadn't always perfectly understood! I've been so worried about
you. And I wish you could have met Jack--but of course he enlisted at
once. You don't know him or you'd realize that of course he had to."

They talked away as if there had never been the smallest break in their
association; Rose and Sylvius, those nice fat twins who would be five
years old next April, interested the countess immensely now that she
would soon be a mother herself.

"And Sylvia?" Dorothy asked.

"Oh, my dear, we don't know. Isn't it dreadful? None of us knows. She
was engaged to be married to Arthur Madden--you remember him, perhaps at
the Frivolity last year--and suddenly he married another girl and
Sylvia vanished--utterly and completely. She went abroad, that's all we
know."

So Sylvia with all her self-assurance had not been able to escape a
fall. In Dorothy's present mood it would have been unfair to say that
she was glad to find that Sylvia was vulnerable, but she did feel that
if she ever met Sylvia again she should perhaps get back her old
affection for her more easily. And while she was thinking this about
Sylvia she suddenly realized that all these other people must be feeling
the same about herself.

The revival of her intimacy with Olive made a great difference to
Dorothy's stay in West Kensington, and she might even have stayed on at
Lonsdale Road until her baby was born had not her two married sisters
turned out to be going to have babies also. Though Dorothy had never
possessed a very keen sense of humor, her sense of the ridiculous had
been sufficiently developed to make her feel that the sight of three
young women in an interesting condition round the dining-room table of
No. 17 would be a little too much of a good thing. She therefore wrote
to Doctor Lane to say that she wanted her child to be born in
Devonshire, and asked for his advice. He suggested that she should go to
a nursing-home he knew of in Ilfracombe. Thither she went in the month
of January, taking with her from Lonsdale Road that old colored
supplement inscribed "Yoicks! Tally-Ho"; and there, without any of those
raptures that marked her first pregnancy, but with abundant health and
serenity of purpose, she waited for her time to come, and at the end of
April bore a posthumous son to Clarehaven.


III

Not until her son was actually born did Dorothy apprise the dowager of
the event. It was lucky that spring was already warm over France and
that the sudden famine of mittens did not inconvenience the troops at
this season, because the instant withdrawal of the dowager, Lady Jane,
and Lady Arabella from the house in Grosvenor Square left the twenty
ladies they had gathered together with neither wool to continue their
good work nor with addresses to which it could be sent. The dowager in a
state of perfect happiness began to trace in the lineaments of the baby
a strong likeness to her dead son, and, as Dorothy had expected, to
lament loudly his disinheritance; Lady Jane insisted that he must be
taken at once to Chatfield, where Uncle Chat would be more than
delighted to look after him entirely; Bella, who had been working
herself up into a state of great excitement over a baby that Connie
expected to bring into the world at the end of May, ceased to take the
least interest in Connie or her child and celebrated the advent of her
nephew, the sixth earl, by abandoning prose for a paean of rhapsodic
verse. As for Dorothy, she who during the months of waiting had supposed
that she had at last reached that high summit of complete indifference
to the world, lost nearly all her superiority, and with her strength
renewed and increasing every day was on fire to secure somehow or other
to her son the material prosperity that his rank demanded. She was still
averse to taking him to Chatfield, because even if at such an early age
it was improbable that the externals of Chatfield would make the least
impression upon his character, she did not like to surrender all her
fine schemes of independence at once. She compromised by consenting to
take the baby to Cherrington Cottage, where his arrival elicited from
their former tenants a most moving demonstration of affection for the
family.

Clare Court was still vacant, and during that summer Dorothy used to
wheel the perambulator of her baby round and round the domains of which
he had been robbed. For his name she had gone back to her old choice of
Lucius, and she felt that by doing so she was conferring upon this
posthumous son the greatest compliment in her capacity. The dowager was
at first a little distressed that he was not christened Anthony, but
when Dorothy read to her, out of a volume of Clarendon she borrowed from
the rector, that this namesake was "'a person of such prodigious parts
of learning and knowledge, of that inimitable sweetness and delight in
conversation, of so flowing and obliging a humanity and goodness to
mankind, and of that primitive simplicity and integrity of life, that if
there were no other brand upon this odious and accursed civil war than
that single loss, it must be most infamous and execrable to all
posterity.' 'Thus,'" Dorothy read on, "'fell that incomparable young
man, in the four-and-thirtieth year of his age, having so much
despatched the true business of life that the eldest rarely attain to
that immense knowledge, and the youngest enter not into the world with
more innocency.'"

"Yes, yes," sighed the dowager. "Dear old Tony! He was in his
thirty-second year. Dear old boy!"

Dorothy looked at her mother-in-law to see if she were serious; when she
saw that indeed she was she had not the heart to say that the eulogy
might as a description of Tony's life be considered somewhat elevated.
After all, Tony had died for his king and his country; Lord Falkland had
died for his king only.

On the anniversary of the fifth earl's death, when the wind at dusk was
cooing round Cherrington Cottage like a mighty dove, Dorothy was seized
with a sudden restlessness and a desire to encounter the mysterious and
uneasy air of this gusty twilight of late summer. Her son was fast
asleep, with both his grandmother and his aunt Arabella ready to
minister to his most incomprehensible baby wish and serve him, were it
possible, with the paradisal milk of which he dreamed. He had been
restless all day, and now that he was sleeping so calmly Dorothy felt
that she could allow herself to take air and exercise. Owing to the
continued emptiness of the Court, she had grown into the habit of
walking about the park whenever she felt inclined, and except for the
solemnity and silence of the house itself she was hardly conscious that
she was no longer the mistress of Clare, because the lodge-keepers and
various servants of the estate were familiar to her and always showed
how glad they were to see her among them.

The park that evening was haunted by strange noises; but Dorothy's mind
never ran on the supernatural, and neither swooping owl, nor flitting
bat, nor weasel swiftly jigging across her path, nor sudden scurry of
deer startled at their drinking-pool alarmed her. She walked on until
the dusk had deepened to a wind-blown starlight, and she found herself
in the gardens, where on the curved seat of the pergola she sat until
the moon rose and the statues shivered like ghosts in a light changing
from silver to gray, from gray to silver, as the scud traveled over the
moon's face. But Dorothy had no eyes that night for shadows. She was
keeping the anniversary of the fifth earl's death by concentrating upon
one supreme problem--the restoration of all these moonlit acres, of all
these surging yews and cedars, of every stone and statue, to the
rightful heir. If any ghost had walked in Clare that night she would
have thought of nothing but the best way to retain him for her son's
service. Each extravagant idea that came into her head seemed to stay
there but for an instant before it was caught by the wind and blown out
of reach forever. Restlessly she left the pergola and wandered round the
empty house where the wind in the pines on either side was like a sea
and the scent of the magnolias in bloom against the walls swirled upon
the air with an extraordinary sweetness. She entered one of the groves
and passed through to the lawn behind, where a wild notion came into her
head, inspired by the wild night and this mad close of summer, to find
an ax and deface the escutcheon of Clare, to mutilate the angelic
supporters, to eclipse forever that stone moon in her complement, and so
spoil for the intruding owner at least one of his trophies. The
unheraldic moon was not yet above the pine-trees on the eastern side of
the house, and such was the force of the wind blowing straight off the
sea from the northwest--blowing here with redoubled force on account of
the gap in the cliffs through which it had to travel--that when a cloud
passed over the still invisible moon on the far side, Dorothy had the
impression that the luminary was being blown out like a lamp, so dark
did it then become here in the shadow of the house. She had an impulse
to defy this wind, to walk down to the headland's edge and watch the
waves leaping like angry, foaming dogs against the face of the cliff;
but half-way to the sea she had to turn round, exhausted, and surrender
to the will of the wind. Her hair blown all about her shoulders,
spindrift and spume racing at her side, she let herself sail back along
the lea toward the house, looking to any one who should see her like a
mermaid cast up by the tempest upon a haunted island. Haunted it was,
indeed, for just as the moon shining down a gorge of clouds rose above
the pines she met the Caliban of this island.

"You!" she cried. "I knew it was you the whole time."

Houston was unable to speak for a minute, so frightened had he been by
this apparition from the sea, so frightened was he to be wandering round
this stolen house and in his wanderings to have provoked this spirit of
the place, and in the end more frightened than ever, perhaps, to find
who the spirit really was. Dorothy did not realize how strange she
looked, how magical and debonair, how perilous, how wild; she whose
brain was throbbing with one thought perceived in Houston's expression
only the shame he should naturally feel for having robbed her son.

"You look tremendously blown about," he managed to say, finally. "Won't
you come inside for a minute?"

Then suddenly as if the wind had got into his brain he said to her,
"Dorothy, why don't you marry me and take all this back for yourself?"

"Could I?"

She had appealed to herself, not to him; but he, misunderstanding her
question, began like a true Oriental to praise the gifts he would offer
her.

"Stop," she commanded. "All these things that you want to give to me,
will you give them to my son? Don't be so bewildered. You knew I had a
son? I can't stop here to argue about myself and what I can give you or
you can give me. If you will make over Clare as it stands with all its
land--oh yes, and buy back the Hopley estate which Tony's father
sold--to my son, I'll marry you."

"If you'll marry me I'll do anything," he vowed.

There was a momentary lull in the wind, and as if in the silence that
followed he was able to grasp how much he had undertaken, he stammered,
nervously:

"And you and I? Suppose you and I have children?"

"Well," said Dorothy, "they'll be half brothers and sisters of the sixth
Earl of Clarehaven, which will be quite enough for _them_, won't it?"

And that night, while the wind still cooed round Cherrington Cottage,
Dorothy, Countess of Clarehaven, wrote out for Debrett and read to
Augusta, Countess of Clarehaven:

"Clarehaven, Earl of (Clare.) (Earl. U.K. 1816. Bt. 1660.) Lucius Clare;
6th Earl and 11th Baronet; _b._ April 25, 1915; _s._ 1915; is patron of
one living.

"_Arms_--Purpure, two flanches ermine, on a chief sable a moon in her
complement argent. _Crest_--A moon in her complement argent, arising
from a cloud proper. _Supporters_--Two angels, vested purpure, winged
and crined, or, each holding in the exterior hand a key or.

"_Seat_--Clare Court, Devonshire."

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vanity Girl, by Compton Mackenzie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VANITY GIRL ***

***** This file should be named 39422.txt or 39422.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/4/2/39422/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 55573 ***

RUNOJA

Kirj.

L. ONERVA






Helsingissä,
Vihtori Kosonen,
1908.

Vihtori Kososen kirjapaino.




SISÄLLYS:

 Linna.

 1.

 Kohtalon käsky.
 Pilvien rusko --
 Usko.
 Raskas pisare.
 Tuska.
 Jähmetys.
 Pelko.
 Valkeat vallat.
 Pilvi.
 Ohi kuva kumma hiipi --
 Korkealla taivahalla --
 Voimakkaammalleni.
 Taivas niinkuin Luojan lempi --
 Tuntemattomalle.
 Tahto.
 Uhri.

 2.

 Ruusut.
 Tulit tuska.
 Tahtovat mun kasvatella --
 Valkea yö.
 Lintu puussa --
 Kukka, joka hallahan rakastuu --
 Valkeana valhetöissä --
 Barcarola.
 Kivikova armas --
 Tyhjässä tyhjyyden kammoin --
 Lähtö.
 Sydämeni.
 Poloinen rinta --
 Resitatiivi.
 Halla.
 Kuoleman saari.
 Mato.
 Mulla ennen ilot rinnan --
 Elegia.
 Sydämessä hiljaa, varmaan --

 3.

 Yölintu.
 Tuutilaulu.
 Kuutamo-meri.
 Auringon ruusu.
 Lähteensilmä.
 Muulinviejä.
 Kesän merkki.
 Nuorallatanssija.
 Neuvo.
 Painajainen.
 Tonttu.
 Révérence.
 Ystävälle.
 Surusi on mennyt hukkaan --
 Magdalena.
 Megairan laulu.
 Surmattujen laulu.
 Nainen.
 Aamun armahan laps --
 Syksy.
 Kuolon kukka.
 Merituuli.
 Talvi.
 Kalliokirkko.
 Kaksi kuvaa.

 4.

 Hopeinen tähti.
 Kaipaus.
 Kuljit ennen --
 Jo nyt minä ritarin silmät näin --
 Miksi, oi armas --
 Vieras.
 Tumma tuttu.
 Hän oli kuin --
 Aave.
 Mistä löydän ma sun --
 Hän on --
 Halavan alla.
 Tule, tule --
 Käy lempimään!
 Harmaa, kalsa katunainen --
 Keskellä saloa --
 Kukkia vaan.

 5.

 Kumminlahjat.
 Mater dolorosa.
 Etsijä.
 Vanhus.
 Erakko.
 Tietäjä.
 Kokonpolttaja.
 Hovinarrin ilta-aaria.
 Absintisti.
 Kaupunki allani --
 Äiti ja poika.
 Vikapää.




LINNA.


    On jäinen kenttä, jäässä kiertorauma,
    ja kivilinna keskeen lyöty sen,
    kuin vihanheitto jättein muinaisten,
    kirojen kirkko, harmaa, sammal-sauma.

    Vaan tuon jos sisään käyt, sun kohtaa lauma
    heleä huomensilmä-lapsien,
    sulossa suven niittu hopeinen,
    kultainen kunnahalla vilja-auma.

    Ja vastaas samoo herra satusarkain,
    niin hieno, herkkä, outo, hiljainen,
    kuin mielikuva aavistusten arkain,

    kuin parhain palo kaiken kauneuden,
    mi maailmassa syöstiin kanteesen
    ja nyt saa elää onneansa varkain.






1.




KOHTALON KÄSKY.


    Väkevät käymään ylhäällä yksin,
    heikot sortumaan sylityksin!

    Väkevät pahoiksi pusertumaan,
    heikot hellinä musertumaan!




PILVIEN RUSKO --


    Pilvien rusko ja unien lento,
    ohitse vaan!
    Viimeisen päiväni viimeinen ilta,
    ohitse vaan!

    Pimeiden aivojen autio kumina
    täyttää maan.

    Viimeisen yöni viimeiset hetket,
    tulkaa vaan!




USKO.


    Oikein määrää elon Herra
    kantamukset rinnan:
    sille paljon, joka jaksoi
    maksaa paljon hinnan.

    Oikein määrää elon Herra
    ihmisille eron:
    kuka syntyi kullat syliin,
    tuokoon kullan veron!




RASKAS PISARE.


    Raskas pisare hullun päähän,
    sade talvisäähän...
    Jokaiselta
    pisarelta
    halkee railo jäähän.

    Raskas pisare halki aivon,
    halki takaraivon...
    Järjen lakoon,
    tyhjään vakoon
    painuu taakka taivon.




TUSKA.


    Kovettumaan, kivettymään
    kaimaksi kallion kimmelpään.

    Ylentymään, alentumaan
    peikon rinnalle pimentolaan.

    Unhottumaan, vanhettumaan
    tuhansia vuosia paikallaan.




JÄHMETYS.


    Nyt on hullun hyvä olla,
    hiljainen ja tyyni,
    nyt ei paina pahuus muiden
    eikä omat syyni.

    Kaukaa katsoo kalvahtanut
    myrskyisätä merta,
    muistaa tarun lainehilta
    kesäisiltä kerta.

    Seisoo syyttä sydämetön,
    hyhmä jäinen saartuu,
    eikä tunne eikä tiedä:
    kinos päällä kaartuu...




PELKO.


    Puissa tuulen vongahtelu,
    sadeliukkaat kalliot...
    -- -- -- -- --
    Vaiti, seis! -- -- --
    -- -- -- Nyt mikä kiilsi?
    Kirkas, jäinen jättikyynel.
    Mikä korvahan viilsi?
    Avuttoman lapsen huuto.
    -- -- -- -- --
    Hiivi hiljaa,
    kuiski silmin:
    peikot asuu mailla näillä...
    Hiivi hiljaa varpaanpäillä...




VALKEAT VALLAT.


    Teihin ma uskoa tahdon,
    valkeat vallat,
    vaikkakin yö yhä lankeaa pakkaispieli.
    Teihin ma katsehen kannan,
    kuolottomat,
    vaikka mun sieluni silmissä kauneus kuolee.




PILVI.


    Sammuksissa silmä päivän.
    Mikä siellä?
    Pieni pilvi keskitiellä.

    Valtavuolla valoisalla
    pilvi mistä?
    Varjo öistä mennehistä.

    Miksi varjo yli-öinen
    mustan pelin?
    Itse yli yöni elin.




OHI KUVA KUMMA HIIPI --


    Ohi kuva kumma hiipi:
    viisti maata Herran siipi.
    Katsoin hetken, katsoin kaksi,
    siitä sorruin sokeaksi.

    Pimeys taas yllä, alla,
    taivas maasta korkealla,
    Herra maalla etäisellä,
    hulluus Herran nähnehellä.

    Lumi lankee hiljaa, hiljaa...
    Paina pääsi, valmis vilja,
    painu jälleen jäähän, hankeen,
    alle illan aavan, ankeen!




KORKEALLA TAIVAHALLA --


    Korkealla taivahalla houkutus huilun;
    ympärillä yösilmät kuoleman kuilun.

    Sinisillä kukkuloilla onnellisten kulku;
    alhaalla pimeys ja ahdistus ja sulku.

    Silmissä loittonevat elon tulitukset;
    sydämessä avartuvat tuonen uni-ukset.




VOIMAKKAAMMALLENI.


    Kun olen minä mieleltä pakana,
    sun Kohtaloksi ma sanon.
    Sua rukoile en,
    sua pelkää en,

    et kuule, jos kuinkakin anon.
    Olet heltymätön
    ja hengetön,

    olet voima, mi rattahaks paatui.
    Vain kuoleman ylitse käypi sun ties,
    ei konsana kohoa maasta se mies,
    joka kulkusi alle kaatui.




TAIVAS NIINKUIN LUOJAN LEMPI --


    Taivas niinkuin Luojan lempi,
    valkeata valkoisempi,
    yllä autioiden teiden,
    aivoin maaksi maatuneiden.

    Kuulto kylmä, aikaa vailla,
    Herran henki kalman mailla.
    Liikkumatta, pylväs jäinen,
    yössä lapsi yksinäinen.




TUNTEMATTOMALLE.


    Ah, julma herättäjä lyhven elon,
    mi sokkopäätä kansaa kuljetat
    ja taakse tuskan uuden karkkoat,
    jos vanhan selitystä sulta velon,

    jos pyydän syyn ja seurauksen selon
    ja nähdä kahden puolen valkamat,
    sen väylän, jota laivat liukuvat
    ja aina alla arvoituksen pelon,

    niin heittelet kuin kissa hiirenpoikaa,
    näin joka iskun väliin hymyillen:
    nyt iloitkaa ja uljahasti voikaa!

    Ja kuka uskoi helyyn hetkien,
    vain kahta varmemmasti kaadat sen.
    Ah, hautakellot lakkaamatta soikaa!




TAHTO.


    Nyt minä tahdon:
    murskaksi menköön
    vapahan virran
    vaappuva pato,
    tulkohon nälkä ja kato,
    suistukoon soraan
    saitojen perintösato!

    Nyt minä tahdon:
    synkkänä syököön
    vainiot valmiit
    lakkapää lahti,
    nouskohon maahisen mahti,
    soikohon korkean
    kohtalon kaatava tahti!

    Nyt minä tahdon:
    nouskohon ilojen
    heljälle hiekalle
    surupää surma,
    nouskohon tuho ja turma
    tuhojen tuojalle
    uuden luomisen hurma!




UHRI.


    Lankee halla härmähinen.
    Syön kuin särkkä,
    särkkä tuhatsärmähinen.

    Vartoo joukko sakeneva:
    missä viipyy,
    viipyy otus pakeneva?

    Rahvaan armo tyrkytetty.
    Viekää loitos!
    Viuhuu nuoli myrkytetty.

    Yltyy riemu sapettava:
    joutuu juhla,
    juhlaan uhri tapettava.

    Käskyt mulla ylhemmissä.
    Kun ma kaadun,
    kaadun öissä jylhemmissä.






2.




RUUSUT.


    Puhkee suuret tuliruusut
    taivahalla.
    Kukkii pienet lumiruusut
    pilven alla.

    Ajatusten aarniliekit
    räiskyy, palaa.
    Sydämessä kuolon kukat
    aukee salaa.




TULIT TUSKA.


    Tulit tuska
    niinkuin pieni tyttö,
    repaleinen,
    kalpee kulkutyttö;
    tulit varkain,
    tulit varoin,
    syrjäsilmäyksin aroin.

    Tulit tuska
    niinkuin Herran miesi,
    pyhän-käyjä,
    kovan-käyjä miesi,
    jaloin paljain
    kautta saloin,
    kautta tylypäisten taloin.

    Tulit tuska
    niinkuin viestintuoja
    armahalta,
    unisuukon suoja;
    tulit hiljaa
    tulppa suulla,
    istuit vaiti kangaspuulla.

    Tulit tuska
    niinkuin armas itse,
    ainukainen,
    ikävöity armas;
    tulit soutain
    elon kaarta
    kohti Manan höyhensaarta.




TAHTOVAT MUN KASVATELLA --


    Tahtovat mun kasvatella
    töihin tarkan tasapäisiin,
    kutsuvat mua kullallansa
    yhtymähän päiväläisiin.

    Turha kutsu, turha kulta!
    Tunnen elontyöni vanteen:
    yksinäisten hetkein hehku
    taottava taivaan kanteen.




VALKEA YÖ.


    Valkea yö,
    kalsea yö
    vartoen akkunalautaan lyö.

    Maaliskuu,
    Marjatan kuu.
    Hermot herkkinä seisoo puu.

    Kylmentyy,
    tähdittyy...
    Paljaana paistaa sydämen syy.




LINTU PUUSSA --


    Lintu puussa, kukka maassa,
    päivä puoleen kääntymässä.
    Aatos yksin, sydän jäässä,
    sielu nälkään nääntymässä.

    Putoo lehti, hijoo halla
    viikatetta viljallensa.
    Tuntee sielu illan tuulen,
    hymyy hyyssä hiljallensa.




KUKKA, JOKA HALLAHAN RAKASTUU --


    Kukka, joka hallahan rakastuu,
    umppunsa hehkuhun lakastuu.

    Poven, jolle armain on erämaan yö,
    paljaalta autio pakkanen syö.




VALKEANA VALHETÖISSÄ --


    Valkeana valhetöissä,
    syyttömänä synnin öissä,
    rikoksissa tahraa vailla,
    vilpin tiellä lapsen lailla...




BARCAROLA.


    Usvat uivat merta pitkin
    raskaana ja hiljaa.
    Minä etsin ulapoilta
    hukkunutta liljaa.

    Usvat uivat merta pitkin
    raskaana ja hiljaa.
    Alas, alas, mielipuoli,
    niin saat sata liljaa!




KIVIKOVA ARMAS --


    Kivikova armas, millaisen painon,
    millaisen synkän syöjätär-vainon
    langetit ylleni mun!
    Törmältä syöstynä, synnillinen,
    nään minä sammuvan taivaani sinen,
    taivaani kadotetun.

    Ah, tätä valhetta, mielien mätää!
    Näätkö sä sydämeni synkkää hätää,
    kohtalo ilvehinen?
    Käske mun tutkia Tuonelan syitä,
    kiviä kyntää, kitkeä kyitä,
    kivikova armahinen!




TYHJÄSSÄ TYHJYYDEN KAMMOIN --


    Tyhjässä tyhjyyden kammoin,
    onnessa olleessa ammoin
    vaiti ma kärsin ja käyn.

    Särkyvin, säikkyvin rinnoin,
    kivisin kimmelpinnoin
    kukilla kulkevaks näyn.




LÄHTÖ.


    Yksin
    meren kuultoa vasten ja taivaan,
    yksin
    yön vihkimä vaaraan ja vaivaan.
    Ah, hyvästi jääkää!
    Konsana en minä palaa.

    Ankkurit poikki ja pohjaan!
    Itseni irti nyt ohjaan.
    Sallikaa, jumalat korkeat,
    kantava tuuli
    sille ken kutsunne kuuli!
    Luokaa lempeä hauta,
    ell'en ma yllä
    kunne mun sieluni halaa!




SYDÄMENI.


    Mun sydämeni huojui kuin sammal ja suo
    ja kuulsi kuin kaste ja vieri kuin vuo,
    Ja siin' oli mun lempiä,
    levätä ja itkeä armas.

    Ah, aalto sa arka, et hetkeä sama,
    nyt maan elon ankaran armastama.
    Ei liiku kivi, ei lemmi kova,
    ei kyynelöi kallionparmas.




POLOINEN RINTA --


    Poloinen rinta ja poloinen pää
    kultapaltehin päätty,
    leirien leivällä ruokittu
    ja leirien lempehen säätty!

    Poloinen rinta ja poloinen pää
    vaivan vantehin väätty,
    taivahan tulilla taiottu
    ja sankarin sylihin säätty!




RESITATIIVI.


    Henki kohoo korkeana,
    riemuisana, rikkahana.
    Kirkkaat, aavat avaruudet
    viittaa, johtaa,
    tähdin hohtaa
    maailman kylmä,
    selvä, jäinen syksy.

    Maantien virstottua viertä
    kaikkein jalat kiertää,
    minä tahdon teitä muita
    salatuita,
    surmasuita.
    Tahdon mennä rajain yli,
    kullan, kunniankin yli,
    outoihin ja öisiin kyliin,
    syntisien syliin.

    Metsänpeikon huutelema,
    suutelema,
    tahdon olla;
    sill' on uskoon, rikkauteen
    valta vasta,
    jok' ei huoli ensimäisen
    eksyväisen
    satamasta,
    joka tohti
    outoa ja aavaa kohti.




HALLA.


    Kujatonta kulmakylää
    harmenevaan halla-yöhön
    painu taakse katsomatta
    vähäpäisten tyhjään työhön!

    Painu, tunto, niinkuin halla
    kukkamailta ihmislasten!
    Näin me käydään, kalsa kalma,
    kilpaa, rinta rintaa vasten.




KUOLEMAN SAARI.


    Tuolla on kuoleman saari,
    rannalla paari...
    Kuka minut joen yli kantaa?

    Rientävät tarjolle hullut.
    Vielä ei tullut
    hän, joka unen armot antaa.




MATO.


    Kukka kasvaa, mato kalvaa...
    Oboet ja huilut helää.
    -- Jos ma lähden, saatto seuraa,
    rikos kerran tehty elää.

    Joka askel, jonka astuin,
    oli käärme, jonka kätkin.
    Eessä teot ammoin tehdyt,
    eessä tekemättömätkin. --




MULLA ENNEN ILOT RINNAN --


    Mulla ennen ilot rinnan,
    tarhat auki pilvilinnan.

    Kohtaloiden kova tähti
    tietä neuvomahan lähti.

    Rakastamaan synkkää syytä,
    kaulaamahan kalman kyytä.

    Otti opistansa hinnan:
    sulki tarhat pilvilinnan.




ELEGIA.


    Miksi juuri sen vaikeista vaikehimman
    määräsit tiekseni mun,
    peikon tehtävän tehtäväks heltyvimmän
    lapsies joukossa sun,
    voi, kova kohtalo, tuskaa
    väärähän talutetun!

    Kylmänä astua uusien arvojen uumiin,
    käskysi ankaran saan,
    kantani alle heität sa armahan ruumiin:
    ylitse astua vaan!
    En saa säikkyä, heltyä,
    katsoa taaksenikaan...




SYDÄMESSÄ HILJAA, VARMAAN --


    Sydämessä hiljaa, varmaan,
    iva kylmä itää.
    Luonnonvoimat ainettansa
    pilkkanansa pitää.

    Sydämessä hiljaa, varmaan,
    ovet kiinni painuu.
    Kylmät, kalmat kahtialta
    toisiansa vainuu.






3.




YÖLINTU.


    Yölinnulla on siivessään
    surullinen sulo,
    lento korvin kuulumaton
    niinkuin illan tulo.

    Yölinnulla on silmässään
    himmee, hieno hiilu,
    kuulto liekin kaukahisen
    niinkuin kulon kiilu.

    Yölinnulla on äänessään
    sielu, jok'ei laula,
    joll'on suru suuri vaan
    ja vaitiolon paula.




TUUTILAULU.


    Mikä vaivaa valkeaa lasta?
       Kalma on katsonut akkunasta.

    Kuningasko vai kerjäläinen?
       Kruunu häll' oli hankipäinen.

    Kertoiko keväästä kultamurun?
       Suossa kuuvalo-kukka surun.

    Tuuti tuuti valkeaa lasta.
       Taivas on katsonut akkunasta.




KUUTAMO-MERI.


    Kylmä ja kirkas,
    kilpihirviö hopeasuomuinen,
    valkee ja tumma,
    uinuva peto, pettäväjuomuinen.

    Sireeni laulaa:
    palaa välkkinä surmien sulottaren.
    Ystävä itkee:
    kärsien hymyy hirviö hirtehinen.




AURINGON RUUSU.


    Auringon ruusu, keltainen umppu,
    suortuvi täyteen kukkaan.
    Syttyös, suuri punainen päivä,
    taikka se heräsi hukkaan!
    Hetehet helmien helinää nuokuu,
    silkkinen hipiä hiipuen huokuu:
    paista, jumalan punainen päivä!

    Auringon ruusun, päiväsen lapsen,
    rakehet ruoskia tohti.
    Väristen seisoo kultainen kukka
    huutaen taivasta kohti:
    kaikilla ei ole hartiat huolen,
    annatko onnen taikka ma kuolen,
    paista, elämän punainen päivä!




LÄHTEENSILMÄ.


    Lähteensilmä, lähteensilmä
    sinisempi muita;
    pyhät, pahat siunaelit,
    päästit kirotuita.

    Syötit, juotit synnilliset,
    malja lohdutarten,
    maantie-silmä, maantie-sielu,
    kulkureita varten.

    Moni otti, harva kiitti,
    ohi kulki monta;
    ällös, lähde lämmin-sielu,
    muista uskotonta!

    Maantie-rosvot, maantie-koirat
    veivät silmän sinen;
    hiljaa huokaa sammuvainen:
    minä onnellinen! --

    Peittyy peili kyynel-kaunis,
    kalvo kasvaa umpeen.
    Loitos seuraa matkamiestä
    luomi valjun lumpeen.




MUULINVIEJÄ.


    Kaunis kunnas kasvamassa
    kukkaisia,
    kelta-, kultatukkaisia...

    Kaihda, musta muulinviejä,
    keltaisia, kultaisia,
    varo niille laskemasta
    käsiäsi multaisia!




KESÄN MERKKI.


    Mistä tuntee meidän kesän,
    viinistäkö, viljoistako,
    lemupäistä liljoistako?

    Enpä tiedä, talven tuttu,
    leivät nään ma sekoisina,
    kukat keinotekoisina;

    vasta tänään löysin varsin
    ensimäisen merkin kesän:
    -- hävitetyn linnunpesän.




NUORALLA TANSSIJA.


    Jaksettu, maksettu markoin
    pilkkani hinta.
    Singota, lingota vastaan
    lempi ja -- halveksinta!



NEUVO.


    Kaipaat mainetta ja rahaa,
    valittelet aikaa pahaa,
    jok' on parhain, armahaisin
    tuta tunnoin sinunlaisin.

    Sanot, jalka alta liipee;
    älä huoli, kiipee, kiipee!
    porraspuilla onni monten,
    laiho laaja lahjatonten.




PAINAJAINEN.


    Kun mua painajainen joskus painaa,
    ei se tartu öisin rintapieliin
    niinkuin tuosta taru vanha kielii,
    vaan se sulaa koko maailman muotoon,
    muuttuu loitos merelliseen luotoon,
    nostaa pystyyn mantereen ja veden,
    taivaan, pilven, kevehimmän keden,
    pystyyn niinkuin seinä synkän vuonon
    taikka taulu taiteilijan huonon...
    Pistävinä kuvan kasvot painaa
    läpi maailman onton, ilmattoman,
    tukehtavan, saidan, sanattoman,
    seisovan kuin puuta vasten vainaa...
    Onko sua, kaiken tuntevainen,
    tullut vastaan tämä painajainen?




TONTTU.


    Minä tunnen tontun,
    oikean tontun,
    lippalakki-tontun,
    kepposten tekijän
    kamaritontun.

    Hän saapastelee,
    hän viisastelee
    ja nippii ja näppii,
    tuo pikkuinen pakana.
    Mut koetapas kiinni,
    niin haihtuu kuin akana;
    ja murrin purrin
    käyt työhösi jälleen.

    Vaan maltapas hetki:
    jo höltyvät siteet
    ja haipuvat ilmaan
    vaivalla hankitut
    mielipiteet...
    Siin' on hän taas
    tuo nurin-kurin-tonttu,
    näyttäen jälleen
    emännälleen
    loppumatonta pitkää nenää.

    Väittääkö kuka,
    ett'ei ole tonttuja enää?




RÉVÉRENCE.


    Luot ja lahjot, luonto luopa,
    paistaa päivä, lankee sade
    kasvaa maasta kansa kade,
    kansa pieni, pahansuopa,

    levenee kuin syksyn sieni
    sadepäivän saatuansa.
    Anteeks, sievä sienikansa,
    tästä yli käypi tieni...!




YSTÄVÄLLE.


    Oi ystävä, turhia harhaat.
    Tien vaikean heltehet heitä!
    Ovat kohtalon valjakot parhaat
    jo valmiina viemähän meitä.




SURUSI ON MENNYT HUKKAAN --


    Surusi on mennyt hukkaan,
    lapsi parka, etkö tiedä,
    mitä uinut?
    Tuli palaa, riemu elää...
    Katsoit kauan,
    liian kauan tuonen kukkaan.

    Suruni ei mennyt hukkaan,
    sen ma tunnen, sen ma tiedän,
    vaikka sydän
    nyt on kylmä, mykkä, valkee...
    Katson vielä,
    katson aina tuonen kukkaan.




MAGDALENA.


    Magdalena, Magdalena,
    ihanainen lapsi!
    Salamoista silmän-iskut,
    idän yöstä hapsi,
    joutsenkaula, aaltovarsi,
    valkolilja käsi...
    -- Sulosi on synnillistä,
    leiki synnilläsi! --

    Magdalena, Magdalena,
    illan liekit palaa,
    syttyy hehkut hekumoihin,
    haaveet herää, halaa...
    -- Katsos, tytär Israelin,
    tähdet kulkee yli...
    Iankee taivaat jalkoihisi,
    avaa, avaa syli! --

    Magdalena, Magdalena,
    ihanainen impi!
    Harvoin astui synnin tietä
    jalka kaunihimpi...
    Suuret tähdet, kuumat tähdet
    kehää sulle kutoo,
    kun sa viittaat, vallat vaipuu,
    helmaas kruunut putoo...

    Magdalena, Magdalena,
    kaunis katuja-nainen!
    -- Joko näit sa miten murtuu,
    mustuu mahti mainen?
    -- Ah niin, kirkas Jumalanpoika,
    synnillistä auta!
    Sull' on mahdit korkeammat,
    aate aistin hauta...

    Magdalena, Magdalena,
    sankaritar sadun!
    -- Piirsitkö sa inehmoiden
    kohtaloille ladun:
    kevehissä keinumahan
    lähemmäksi syvää,
    erehissä etsimähän
    loputonta hyvää?...




MEGAIRAN LAULU.


    Tuu tuu, huu huu,
    vihan vilja tuleentuu.
    Vaino pellon vakoi,
    sorto sirpin takoi,
    liekit löi, liekit löi;
    heelmät heilimöi.

    Riippuu raskaat rypäleet:
    kyyneleet, kyyneleet...
    Kuka kylvi veren,
    vihki vihan meren?
    Rientäkää, rientäkää!
    sato kerkeää.

    Elokuu, elokuu,
    elonkorjuun kuuma kuu!
    Vartoo sirppi säitä,
    tähkät kruunupäitä. --
    Pitkä syy, pitkä syy;
    kylvö kypsentyy.



SURMATTUJEN LAULU.


    Soita, soita,
    portto-noita!
    Vainaat valtahas astuu...
    Naura, naura,
    velho-nainen:
    huules hurmehin kastuu...

    Halpa hinta,
    valkorinta:
    hymy kruunupäistä.
    Kallis hinta,
    vilppirinta:
    henki joka häistä!




NAINEN.


    Nainen kevyt ja julkea,
    moni sai kauttasi ammoiset arvet,
    kammoksi kasvavat uhrien parvet,
    aika jo ovesi sulkea.

    -- Ihminen surusta sokea
    kolkutti ovelleni: päästä, päästä!
    sydämelleni: säästä, säästä,
    kova on talvea kokea!

    Nainen valheessa valkea,
    lemmettä vuoteesi lemmellä vyötit,
    omaan nälkääsi sydämiä syötit,
    eikö sun rintasi halkea?

    -- Onneni, jäissä otellut,
    kirkkaampi on kuin kirkas kukaan
    palanut tähtien tahdon mukaan,
    kohtalon kirjoja totellut.




AAMUN ARMAHAN LAPS --


    Aamun armahan laps,
    et sinä ymmärrä mua...
    Kutsut luoksesi helmahan heleän kedon,
    soiton helinään keinuvan huomen-kellon,
    tarjoat kastehelmiä välkkyvän hetken
    ja öiden lepoa lempeää onnellisten...
    Paistavin silmin ja sydämin aurinko-aukein
    yhä sa kutsut...
    Armas aurinko-laps,
    et sinä ymmärrä mua!

    Näätkö, sa lapsonen, ah,
    mun täytyvi kulkea ohi!
    Näätkö, mun päiväni laskee,
    näätkö, mun iltani joutuu,
    ja pääni päällä jo pilvessä seisoo
    rannaton yö...
    Näätkö, se hetkiä laskee saiturin sormin,
    kiertää kirpehin innoin
    kimmoista lankaa nuolta sinkovan kaaren.
    Näätkö, jo iltani joutuu,
    näätkö, jo hämäryys lankee,
    ja vielä on taipale pitkä astujan eessä. --
    Ah, sinä aurinko-laps,
    et sinä ymmärrä mua!




SYKSY.


    Keltainen lehti ja punainen lehti
    makaa maassa rinnan.
    Syksyn kylmä käärme kiipii
    yli jäisen pinnan.

    Kuiskasi kalpea: siunattu rauha,
    kestinkin loppuun asti!
    Virkahti verinen: katkesin kesken,
    katkesin kauniimmasti!

    Vaiti vainaat, haudat hiljaa!
    Madot maita mataa.
    Lentää, lentää uudet lehdet,
    syksyn sadut sataa...




KUOLON KUKKA.


    Orvon otsasi ma keksin kerta
    tomun halki, alta askelten;
    terästäsi tihkui vaivan verta,
    kuvat kuulsi illan varjojen.

    Tahdoin kyynelillä kylmän pestä,
    auttaa alta taakan tomuisen,
    silloin synkeästä sydämestä
    puhkes helavalkee heteiden.

    Vaan ma lähdin niinkuin orja, loinen,
    huulin kelmein, polvin hoippuvin;
    maailma sama, minä outo, toinen:
    kuolon kukkaa, hullu, suutelin!




MERITUULI.


    Ah, merituuli,
    haltia lakkapään laineen,
    aavojen lintu,
    vapaa vallasta aineen,
    milloin tulet
    ja päästät mun rintani paineen

    Ah, merituuli,
    milloin särjet sa jäät,
    vapautat valkeat
    unteni uhmapäät?
    Ah, merituuli,
    silloin on sieluni häät!




TALVI.


    Vaappumaton nietos-seinä.
    Lumet, jäät
    piikkipäät
    riippuu rauta-rypäleinä.

    Vaarallinen, julma huvi.
    Yksi yö
    tappaa, syö
    enemmän kuin koko suvi.

    Vakaa niinkuin valheen ansa.
    Ainainen
    saarto sen.
    Sulaa, palaa uudestansa.




KALLIOKIRKKO.


    Patsaat harmaat templin suulla
    aukenevan yöhön ylhään,
    alkuvirteen ajastaikain,
    jumaluuteen vuorijylhään.

    Katsoo kansaa näkemättä
    silmäkivi peikon kärkeen,
    niinkuin Luojan lepopäivä
    vuosisatain pieneen arkeen...

    Mutta sinä, arkilapsi
    armas, varo porraspuita!
    tääll' on varsin täysi määrä
    suistuneiden pyhäin luita...




KAKSI KUVAA.


    Taivaalla kyyhky valkonen,
    myrskyssä hernepalkonen.

    Merellä kuuvalo kelmeä,
    haudalla tuhannen helmeä.






4.




HOPEINEN TÄHTI.


    Hopeinen tähti
    helmassa hämärän yön.
    Armahin lähti,
    murheeni kannelta lyön.

    Pois pyhä lähti.
    Kestänkö arkeni työn?
    Hopeinen tähti
    värisee kannella yön.




KAIPAUS.


    Ijäisyys on hyvin vierryt siitä,
    kun ma viimeks kyyneleitä itkin.
    Lumet, rakeet vain on tietä tehneet
    talven-kylmää poskipäätä pitkin.

    Ijäisyys on siitä, kun mun luonain
    käynyt enkeli on kaipauksen.
    Vieraat vain on tulleet, vieraat menneet,
    pilkoin pieksittyinä alta uksen.

    Saapui enkeli jo kaipauksen,
    aukes lähteet sielun syvänteihin...
    Tahdotko, sa rakas, raskas vieras,
    että kuolen lemmen kyyneleihin?




KULJIT ENNEN --


    Kuljit ennen, neito nuori,
    vaattehissa valkehissa.
    Noettihin valkeainen
    pahan pajan palkehissa.

    Kaunihimpi kaunis mieli
    mustissakin vaattehissa
    kuin on sydän kukkakuori
    alhaisissa aattehissa.




JO NYT MINÄ RITARIN SILMÄT NÄIN --


    Jo nyt minä ritarin silmät näin.
    Tuli rintahan kuuvalo-lampi;
    on maailma paljon kauniimpi
    ja onni on armahampi.

    Minä tuijotan tummahan syvyyteen
    kuin aarniotulten paloon
    ja synkeän lähtehen sydämeen
    kuin hiisien peijaistaloon.

    Ja varjosta valtias vastaan käy
    kuin sankari vanhan Hellaan,
    ei käske hän eikä kumarra
    vaan sitoo suuruudellaan.

    Minä orjien haluja halveksin,
    en käskijää minä siedä,
    mut joka minut vapaana valloittaa,
    sen annan ma kaikkeni viedä.




MIKSI, OI ARMAS --


    Miksi, oi armas, luotani lähdet?
    Musta on yö eikä tähdet
    taivahan loista.

    Syystuuli lempemme lehtiä riipii.
    Yön sumu ympäri hiipii
    soutava soista.

    Ah, sinä armas, jää meistä toinen
    uhriksi yön; -- minä voinen
    olla se toinen.




VIERAS.


    Varrellasi vieras outo
    välkkyy musta viitta,
    kutreillasi kiiltää jäinen,
    pakkas-öinen riitta.

    Otsallasi uivat unet
    yötäs valkeammat
    untuviinsa ummistaen
    päivän palo-vammat.

    Silmässäsi vartoo vaiti
    tuonen tumma lampi.
    -- Sikskö tulit, ett' ois eron
    murhe raskahampi? --




TUMMA TUTTU.


    Tuli kerran keski-yöllä,
    kerran ainoastaan,
    mailmassa autiossa
    tumma tuttu vastaan.

    Sielu varkain värähti:
    -- sa kuka, kusta, kunne?
    Toinen virkki vierastaen:
    -- en ma sua tunne.

    Ohi astui tumma tuttu
    tummaa tietä pitkin.
    Paistoi päähän orvon tähti.
    Minä hiljaa itkin.

    Häntä siunaa, taivaan Herra,
    vaikka ohi astui:
    hällä sydän sykähti
    ja silmä kaunis kastui.

    Saatoin häntä katsein kauas
    maantien viime mutkaan.
    Tunsin tumman ystäväksi,
    vaikk' ei vastannutkaan.




HÄN OLI KUIN --


    Hän oli kuin erakon ilmestys
    ja ohitse helkkyvä hetki,
    vain yöllinen yhtehen yllätys
    ja varjojen sekunti-retki.

    Oi, terve, sa sanaton sankari!
    Jo tunsin ma sukuni kerta.
    Oli lehtolapsi hän leirien,
    mut suonissa suurten verta.




AAVE.


    Aave outo päätä painaa:
    tykkii jälleen sydän vainaa.

    Milloin hautapatsaan saikaan?
    Ah, jo silloin vanhaan aikaan.

    Missä muisto mielen nuoren?
    Alla vankan rautakuoren,

    alla järjen roudan jäisen,
    alla aidan piikkipäisen.

    Mikä nyt, kun liikkuu aave,
    ilkkuu ammoin lyöty haave?

    Seison, katson silmät veessä,
    seison niinkuin Herran eessä.

    Veri velkoo, sydän painaa.
    Ottaa oikeutensa vainaa.




MISTÄ LÖYDÄN MA SUN --


    Mistä löydän ma sun,
    kadotetun,
    askelet poloisen armaan?
    Tuliko syö
    vai laineko lyö
    vai kivikirot vankilan harmaan?

    Mistä löydän ma sun,
    kadotetun,
    lempeni taittaman tumman?
    Rinnassa jää,
    tulessa pää,
    niinkö elät surusi summan?




HÄN ON ---


    Hän on kärsimysteni kaunehin yö
    ja tuskani puhtain palo.
    Ja se palo on elämäni parhain työ
    ja se yö sen valkehin valo.

    Hän on murheeni musta ritari,
    älä, Luojani, vie häntä multa,
    suo tuskani suurena langeta vaan
    kuin laavalainehen kulta!

    Hän on surujeni sairas sankari,
    en häntä ma koskaan jätä,
    ovat minulle tuttuja tuoni ja yö
    ja heikkojen hetkien hätä.

    Hän on kaihoni aurinko-kangastus
    ja unissa-kulkijan usko,
    joka silloinkin vielä on lämmin ja sees,
    kun muilta jo sammui rusko.




HALAVAN ALLA.

(Mukaelma ranskasta.)


    Kaunis lapsi halavan varjossa huokaa,
    yöt ja päivät valkeena rukoillen...
    Laula, halava himmee, hiljaa huokaa:
    mitä sa tiedät tuskasta rakkauden?

    Purot pienet, kyynelvirtani juokaa,
    niin on aaltoinne aaluva ainainen!

    Varjot mustat, mustin viittanne suokaa
    lemmenpeitteheks iltani ikuisen!
    Laula, halava himmee, hiljaa huokaa:
    mitä sa tiedät tuskasta rakkauden?

    Vilvehet lehvät, saartukaa seppelkaarin
    ympäri nuorena kuolleen immen paarin!
    Kaikki muuttui, tummui ritarin tunto;
    ei vaan tummu lempeni ikuinen...

    Yksin luen ma rikokset rintasi taulun,
    muille sa ollos sankari maineen, laulun.
    Mitä hän sanoo? kysytkö, halava himmee!
    Mitä sa tiedät tuskasta rakkauden! --
    -- "Toista jo lemmin, vaihtakaa, armahinen!"




TULE, TULE --


    Tule, tule, tumma poika,
    tummaa neittä vastaan!
    tuikkaa, tuikkaa tummillekin
    tulet taivahasta.

    Tule, tule, tumma poika,
    tumman tytön myötä!
    kaksi yötä yhdistyy
    ja kaksi tähtivyötä.




KÄY LEMPIMÄÄN!

(Mukaelma ranskasta.)


    Käy lempimään,
    ei yöhyt siihen riitä!
    Käy haaveiloon,
    ei päivin kylliks siitä!
    Jäljettömiin hetket häviää,
    omiksemme onnen muistot jää.

    Liian lyhyt
    ruusun kukoistus,
    liian lyhyt
    pisin rakkaus,
    liian lyhyt lempeen vuosi uus,
    liian lyhyt siihen ikuisuus.




HARMAA, KALSA KATUNAINEN --


    Harmaa, kalsa katunainen
    sinusta nyt armahainen.
    Ja hän armahainen miksi?
    Minun koidon kostimiksi.

    Lempi ilkamoiva ansa.
    Kuka kesti paikallansa?
    Kantoi sydän uuden oraan,
    painui toinen puuksi soraan.





KESKELLÄ SALOA --


    Keskellä saloa
    huiskutan valoa,
    armasta etsin...
    Ah, tätä sydämeni synkkää paloa!

    Maailma on lakea,
    summaton, sakea,
    yötalo inha...
    Kuolemaani asti saanen ma hakea.




KUKKIA VAAN.


    Kukkia vaan ja kuihtumusta,
    ei mitään muuta!
    Ei syty uusia valoja meistä,
    ei aurinkoa, ei kuuta,
    ei mitään suurta.
    Kukkia vaan ja kuihtumusta,
    lentäviä lehtiä,
    ilman elämän juurta!






5.




KUMMINLAHJAT.


    Korkealla seisoi kummit ylhät;
    lankes lahjat kauniit, jylhät.

    Musta antoi murheen,
    helee heitti erheen,
    kolmas laulun lakkapäisen,
    läikkyväisen
    yllä öisen veen.
    Kaikki sydämelle hennon lapsen.

    Niinkuin tuuli hiertää merten pintaa
    suru soitti lapsen rintaa.

    Huokas laulavainen laulun alta:
    lakkaa, lakkaa,
    halki hajoo sydän!

    Painui murhe,
    päättyi erhe,
    nousi yöstä päivä.

    Pitkin päivää
    kirkas, lauluton ja kylmä rinta
    vartoo yötä niinkuin armahinta.




MATER DOLOROSA.


    Kolkko korpi, vuori.
    Alla äiti nuori.
    Sata sarvipäistä
    kaartaa yksinäistä.

    Kaunis maailman kulta,
    kylmä kirkon multa.
    Nyt on sielus vuoro!
    laulaa pirunkuoro.

    Tuska niinkuin vuori.
    Pakoon äiti nuori.
    Päälle kiviparinaan
    jättää lapsen armaan.




ETSIJÄ.


    Etsin, etsin suurta tulta
    kautta kirjavan elämän.

    Näin ma monta valkeaista,
    liekkiä lepattavaista
    ihmissielujen sysissä.
    Hetken hehkuja olivat,
    ajan aarnivalkeoita,
    niinkuin itse ihminenkin,
    punahiilien himoa
    tunti ennen tummumista.

    Etsin, etsin suurta tulta.
    Itsekö elämä oisit
    tuli suuri tummumaton,
    valkea iän-ikuinen?




VANHUS.


    Missä on polveni, sukuni suuri?
    Yksin kantona kasvan.

    Opit jo opin, yhtä en oppinut:
    mitä on unikuva elon?

    Näin minä syntymän, tuonen tulon,
    kaatuvan kasken ja kiitävän kulon
    ylitse ylpeän kansan,
    joll' oli kultaiset kirkot ja linnat,
    komeat miehet ja heleät naiset,
    pystyt, notkeat nuorukaiset
    ja neidot ripeärinnat...

    Kaikk' olen saattanut häihin ja hautaan,
    lyönyt naulan lemmityn lautaan,
    ja yhä minä yksin seison...

    Mistä he tulivat, minne he menivät,
    kaikki ne ammoin armaat?
    Sitä ei kerro tietäjän kirjat
    eikä hapseni harmaat.




ERAKKO.


    Kaikki valoasi anoo,
    Herra kitsas,
    vaan en minä.
    Langeta vaan pimee pilves,
    olen vanha luola-ilves,
    joll' on pitkä, villi viha
    joka päivän kerää kohtaan.

    Kaikki apuasi huutaa,
    Herra julma,
    vaan en minä.
    Vaikk' on mieli sairas, polo,
    kestää ylpee vaitiolo.
    Oman asees, Herra julma,
    löysin tuskan erämaissa...




TIETÄJÄ.


    Uskoin ma joskus:
    vanhuuden tunnen,
    kun mun kauttani vierivät kaikki
    elämäntunnot,
    kun mun aivoni ahdinko-hullut
    kuljettivat kulkuhietaa
    elämäntiedon,
    kun minä itse, tietäjä, tuntija,
    vaelsin varmana
    kaikkia teitä,
    ymmärrys-ylväänä hymyten
    kaikille muille...

    Nuoruuden unia!
    Nyt minä tiedän,
    koska alkavi vanhuus:
    koska kaikkien polkujen
    polkenehelle
    aukeaa äkkiä jaloissa joukon
    käymätön taival;
    huutavi nimeäs inhaa
    oman rintasi hukka,
    laulavi lintuna puussa
    omain untesi houra;
    tulevat vaatien vastaan
    taakat taakse jo jääneet,
    päätäsi vanteena kahlii
    kohtalon koura.

    Silloin alkavi vanhuus,
    koska alkavi sielun
    vaikea yksinkulku,
    kutsumus ankara sinne,
    kunne aukeaa taival
    kaikkien teiden.




KOKONPOLTTAJA.


    Vilkkaa saaren kalliolta
    kokkotuli salainen,
    vastaa varkain noidanpeili,
    liekki meren-alainen.

    Uhoo kuuma uhrisauhu
    taakse taivaanrantaman.
    Hymyy huulet vesivelhon
    meren kansan kantaman:

    Tähystornit pohjatähden,
    tehkää tarkat arviot!
    Alas, alas, ansanpannut,
    ylös neitoparviot!

    Sammuu saaren kalliolta
    kokkotuli salainen,
    sammuu kera valkeansa
    tahto taian-alainen...




HOVINARRIN ILTA-AARIA.


    Terve, terve, juhlivaiset,
    hienot herrat, kauniit naiset!
    Ylhäisehen yhdyn sukuun:
    hännät kuuluu juhlapukuun.

    Kumartakaa, armon herrat:
    tääll' on toiset toisten verrat.
    Kellä sarvi, kellä kaksi,
    siit' ei tulla huonommaksi!

    Tanssi, tanssi, kansajoukko:
    kruunattu on suurin houkko.
    Kapinoijat vieköön hiisi,
    valtio on paratiisi!

    Kulta kuolevaisten kunto,
    laki loisten omatunto...
    Juokaa, juuttaat, vähän juoneet,
    jumalat on viinin suoneet!

    Syökää, juokaa, juhlat raukee,
    huomenna jo haudat aukee!
    Kuolemattomuuden takaa
    hautapatsaan hyve vakaa.

    Hullu miettii, millä kurin
    maailma kerran lensi nurin!
    Naurakaa ja viisastelkaa,
    muuten mulle jäätte velkaa!




ABSINTISTI.


    Vain tummana taittuvan tuijotuksen
    lähetän elämän luo
    ja raotan hälinän hämärän uksen,
    kun hyllyy allani suo
    sammale-sametin kelmeä
    heijaten henkeni helmeä...
    Kuka on peljännyt joskus
    elämän pahaa,
    valuvaa vahaa,
    rannalla kaukaisen taivaan
    vihmovaa vettä...!
    Ah, sieluni juo
    viherää, viileää mettä!
    Niin hellänä ohitse solisee
    autuas vuo...




KAUPUNKI ALLANI --


    Kaupunki allani
    liekeissä pimeä,
    humina ja hurmaus
    ilman nimeä,
    tuskainen ilo,
    mustien mielten
    punapää kilo.

    Kaupunki allani
    salaisen sadun,
    lyhtykoura tontut
    käänteissä kadun...
    Vahvemmat taiat
    tahtoas pilkkaa:
    kavahda valkeaa
    piruttaren nilkkaa!




ÄITI JA POIKA.


    Ah, mun lapseni, vihdoin tulit,
    kauan maailmanrantaa kulit.

    -- Pitkä ranta, pitkä koulu,
    tunnu tuoll' ei kekri, joulu.

    -- Ah, mun lapseni, Kiesus auta,
    kädessäs on ruunun rauta!

    -- Siinä minä missä toinen,
    siell' on käden-anto moinen.

    -- Ah, mun lapseni, kenen sainkaan?
    nauruas en tunne lainkaan.

    -- Näin se nauraa, jok' ei sure,
    jot' ei paina patto, mure.

    -- Annat syödä synnin madon,
    minkälaisen saanet sadon?

    -- Vihan kirkkaan, selväpäisen,
    yli maailman yltäväisen.




VIKAPÄÄ.


    Kurkisti kuoleva kohtalon kirjaan
    Jäätyi julkean veri.
    Ijäti salpa sen tietäjän suulla,
    jonka sallimus peri.

    Kammoten väistyvi syrjähän kansa:
    vikapää mies ohi kulki!
    Ijäti kiinni sen kielen lukko,
    jonka jumalat sulki.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 55573 ***
eehmaidhcdaIeART OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 12312 ***

A KING, AND NO KING.


By Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher



Persons Represented in the Play.


Arbaces, _King_  of Iberia.

Tigranes, _King of_  Armenia.

Gobrias, _Lord Protector, and Father of_  Arbaces.

Bacurius, _another Lord_.

Mardonius.)
Bessus,  ) _Two Captains_

Ligo[n]es, _Father of_  Spaconia.

_Two Gentlemen_.

_Three Men and a Woman_.

Philip, _a servant, and two Citizens Wives_.

_A Messenger_.

_A Servant to_  Bacurius.

_Two Sword-men_.

_A Boy_.


Arane,  ) _The [Queen-Mother_.

Panthea,) _Her Daughter_.

Spaconia,) _A Lady Daughter of_  Ligones

Mandane,) _A waiting woman, and other attendants_.


       *       *       *       *       *




_Actus primus. Scena prima_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Enter_  Mardonius _and_  Bessus, _Two Captains_.

_Mar_.

  _Bessus_, the King has made a fair hand on't, he has ended the
  Wars at a blow, would my sword had a close basket hilt to hold
  Wine, and the blade would make knives, for we shall have nothing
  but eating and drinking.

_Bes_.

  We that are Commanders shall do well enough.

_Mar_.

  Faith _Bessus_, such Commanders as thou may; I had as lieve set
  thee Perdue for a pudding i'th' dark, as _Alexander_  the Great.

_Bes_.

  I love these jests exceedingly.

_Mar_.

  I think thou lov'st 'em better than quarrelling _Bessus_, I'le
  say so much i'thy behalf, and yet thou 'rt valiant enough upon a
  retreat, I think thou wouldst kill any man that stopt thee if
  thou couldst.

_Bes_.

  But was not this a brave Combate _Mardonius_?

_Mar_.

  Why, didst thou see't?

_Bes_.

  You stood wi'me.

_Mar_.

  I did so, but me thought thou wink'dst every blow they strook.

_Bes_.

  Well, I believe there are better souldiers than I, that never saw
  two Princes fight in lists.

_Mar_.

  By my troth I think so too _Bessus_, many a thousand, but
  certainly all that are worse than thou have seen as much.

_Bes_.

  'Twas bravely done of our King.

_Mar_.

  Yes, if he had not ended the wars: I'me glad thou dar'st talk of
  such dangerous businesses.

_Bes_.

  To take a Prince prisoner in the heart of's own Country in single
  combat.

_Mar_.

  See how thy blood curdles at this, I think thou couldst be
  contented to be beaten i'this passion.

_Bes_.

  Shall I tell you truly?

_Mar_.

  I.

_Bes_.

  I could willingly venture for't.

_Mar_.

  Um, no venture neither _Bessus_.

_Bes_.

  Let me not live, if I do not think 'tis a braver piece of service
  than that I'me so fam'd for.

_Mar_.

  Why, art thou fam'd for any valour?

_Bes_.

  Fam'd! I, I warrant you.

_Mar_.

  I'me e'en heartily glad on't, I have been with thee e're since
  thou cam'st to th'wars, and this is the first word that ever I
  heard on't, prethee who fames thee.

_Bes_.

  The Christian world.

_Mar_.

  'Tis heathenishly done of'em in my conscience, thou deserv'st it
  not.

_Bes_.

  Yes, I ha' don good service.

_Mar_.

  I do not know how thou mayst wait of a man in's Chamber, or thy
  agility of shifting of a Trencher, but otherwise no service good
  _Bessus_.

_Bes_.

  You saw me do the service your self.

_Mar_.

  Not so hasty sweet _Bessus_, where was it, is the place
vanish'd?

_Bes_.

  At _Bessus_  desp'rate redemption.

_Mar_.

  At _Bessus_  desp'rate redemption, where's that?

_Bes_.

  There where I redeem'd the day, the place bears my name.

_Mar_.

  Pray thee, who Christened it?

_Bes_.

  The Souldiers.

_Mar_.

  If I were not a very merrily dispos'd man, what would become of
  thee? one that had but a grain of choler in the whole composition
  of his body, would send thee of an errand to the worms for
  putting thy name upon that field: did not I beat thee there i'th'
  head o'th' Troops with a Trunchion, because thou wouldst needs
  run away with thy company, when we should charge the enemy?

_Bes_.

  True, but I did not run.

_Mar_.

  Right _Bessus_, I beat thee out on't.

_Bes_.

  But came I not up when the day was gone, and redeem'd
all?

_Mar_.

  Thou knowest, and so do I, thou meanedst to flie, and thy fear
  making thee mistake, thou ranst upon the enemy, and a hot charge
  thou gav'st, as I'le do thee right, thou art furious in running
  away, and I think, we owe thy fear for our victory; If I were the
  King, and were sure thou wouldst mistake alwaies and run away
  upon th' enemy, thou shouldst be General by this light.

_Bes_.

  You'l never leave this till I fall foul.

_Mar_.

  No more such words dear _Bessus_, for though I have ever known
  thee a coward, and therefore durst never strike thee, yet if thou
  proceedest, I will allow thee valiant, and beat thee.

_Bes_.

  Come, our King's a brave fellow.

_Mar_.

  He is so _Bessus_, I wonder how thou cam'st to know it. But if
  thou wer't a man of understanding, I would tell thee, he is
  vain-glorious, and humble, and angry, and patient, and merry and
  dull, and joyful and sorrowful in extremity in an hour: Do not
  think me thy friend for this, for if I ear'd who knew it, thou
  shouldst not hear it _Bessus_. Here he is with his prey in his
  foot.

_Enter &c. Senet Flourish_.

_Enter_  Arbaces _and_  Tigranes, _Two Kings and two Gentlemen_.

_Arb_.

  Thy sadness brave _Tigranes_  takes away
  From my full victory, am I become
  Of so small fame, that any man should grieve
  When I o'recome him? They that plac'd me here,
  Intended it an honour large enough, (though he
  For the most valiant living, but to dare oppose me single,
  Lost the day. What should afflict you, you are as free as I,
  To be my prisoner, is to be more free
  Than you were formerly, and never think
  The man I held worthy to combate me
  Shall be us'd servilely: Thy ransom is
  To take my only Sister to thy Wife.
  A heavy one _Tigranes_, for she is
  A Lady, that the neighbour Princes send
  Blanks to fetch home. I have been too unkind
  To her _Tigranes_, she but nine years old
  I left her, and ne're saw her since, your wars
  Have held me long and taught me though a youth,
  The way to victory, she was a pretty child,
  Then I was little better, but now fame
  Cries loudly on her, and my messengers
  Make me believe she is a miracle;
  She'l make you shrink, as I did, with a stroak
  But of her eye _Tigranes_.

_Tigr_.

  Is't the course of _Iberia_  to use their prisoners thus?
  Had fortune thrown my name above _Arbace_,
  I should not thus have talk'd Sir, in _Armenia_
  We hold it base, you should have kept your temper
  Till you saw home again, where 'tis the fashion
  Perhaps to brag.

_Arb_.

  Be you my witness earth, need I to brag,
  Doth not this captive Prince speak
  Me sufficiently, and all the acts
  That I have wrought upon his suffering Land;
  Should I then boast! where lies that foot of ground
  Within his whole Realm, that I have not past,
  Fighting and conquering; Far then from me
  Be ostentation. I could tell the world
  How I have laid his Kingdom desolate
  By this sole Arm prop't by divinity,
  Stript him out of his glories, and have sent
  The pride of all his youth to people graves,
  And made his Virgins languish for their Loves,
  If I would brag, should I that have the power
  To teach the Neighbour world humility,
  Mix with vain-glory?

_Mar_.

  Indeed this is none.

_Arb.

  _Tigranes_, Nay did I but take delight
  To stretch my deeds as others do, on words,
  I could amaze my hearers.

_Mar_.

So you do.

_Arb_.

  But he shall wrong his and my modesty,
  That thinks me apt to boast after any act
  Fit for a good man to do upon his foe.
  A little glory in a souldiers mouth
  Is well-becoming, be it far from vain.

_Mar_.

  'Tis pity that valour should be thus drunk.

_Arb_.

  I offer you my Sister, and you answer
  I do insult, a Lady that no suite
  Nor treasure, nor thy Crown could purchase thee,
  But that thou fought'st with me.

_Tigr_.

  Though this be worse
  Than that you spake before, it strikes me not;
  But that you think to overgrace me with
  The marriage of your Sister, troubles me.
  I would give worlds for ransoms were they mine,
  Rather than have her.

_Arb_.

  See if I insult
  That am the Conquerour, and for a ransom
  Offer rich treasure to the Conquered,
  Which he refuses, and I bear his scorn:
  It cannot be self-flattery to say,
  The Daughters of your Country set by her,
  Would see their shame, run home and blush to death,
  At their own foulness; yet she is not fair,
  Nor beautiful, those words express her not,
  They say her looks have something excellent,
  That wants a name: yet were she odious,
  Her birth deserves the Empire of the world,
  Sister to such a brother, that hath ta'ne
  Victory prisoner, and throughout the earth,
  Carries her bound, and should he let her loose,
  She durst not leave him; Nature did her wrong,
  To Print continual conquest on her cheeks,
  And make no man worthy for her to taste
  But me that am too near her, and as strangely
  She did for me, but you will think I brag.

_Mar_.

  I do I'le be sworn. Thy valour and thy passions sever'd, would
  have made two excellent fellows in their kinds: I know not
  whether I should be sorry thou art so valiant, or so passionate,
  wou'd one of 'em were away.

_Tigr_.

  Do I refuse her that I doubt her worth?
  Were she as vertuous as she would be thought,
  So perfect that no one of her own sex
  Could find a want, had she so tempting fair,
  That she could wish it off for damning souls,
  I would pay any ransom, twenty lives
  Rather than meet her married in my bed.
  Perhaps I have a love, where I have fixt
  Mine eyes not to be mov'd, and she on me,
  I am not fickle.

_Arb_.

  Is that all the cause?
  Think you, you can so knit your self in love
  To any other, that her searching sight
  Cannot dissolve it? So before you tri'd,
  You thought your self a match for me in [f]ight,
  Trust me _Tigranes_, she can do as much
  In peace, as I in war, she'l conquer too,
  You shall see if you have the power to stand
  The force of her swift looks, if you dislike,
  I'le send you home with love, and name your ransom
  Some other way, but if she be your choice,
  She frees you: To _Iberia_  you must.

_Tigr_.

  Sir, I have learn'd a prisoners sufferance,
  And will obey, but give me leave to talk
  In private with some friends before I go.

_Arb_.

  Some to await him forth, and see him safe,
  But let him freely send for whom he please,
  And none dare to disturb his conference,
  I will not have him know what bondage is,

                                           [_Exit Tigranes_.

  Till he be free from me. This Prince, _Mardonius_,
  Is full of wisdom, valour, all the graces
  Man can receive.

_Mar_.

   And yet you conquer'd him.

_Arb_.

  And yet I conquer'd him, and could have don't
  Hadst thou joyn'd with him, though thy name in Arms
  Be great; must all men that are vertuous
  Think suddenly to match themselves with me?
  I conquered him and bravely, did I not?

_Bes_.

  And please your Majesty, I was afraid at first.

_Mar_.

   When wert thou other?

_Arb_.

  Of what?

_Bes_.

  That you would not have spy'd your best advantages, for your
  Majesty in my opinion lay too high, methinks, under favour, you
  should have lain thus.

_Mar_.

  Like a Taylor at a wake.

_Bes_.

  And then, if please your Majesty to remember, at one time, by my
  troth I wisht my self wi'you.

_Mar_.

  By my troth thou wouldst ha' stunk 'em both out o'th' Lists.

_Arb_.

  What to do?

_Bes_.

  To put your Majesty in mind of an occasion; you lay thus, and
  _Tigranes_  falsified a blow at your Leg, which you by doing thus
  avoided; but if you had whip'd up your Leg thus, and reach'd him
  on the ear, you had made the Blood-Royal run down his head.

_Mar_.

  What Country Fence-school learn'st thou at?

_Arb_.

  Pish, did not I take him nobly?

_Mar_.

  Why you did, and you have talked enough on't.

_Arb_.

  Talkt enough?
  Will you confine my word? by heaven and earth,
  I were much better be a King of beasts
  Than such a people: if I had not patience
  Above a God, I should be call'd a Tyrant
  Throughout the world. They will offend to death
  Each minute: Let me hear thee speak again,
  And thou art earth again: why this is like
  _Tigranes_  speech that needs would say I brag'd.
  _Bessus_, he said I brag'd.

_Bes_.

  Ha, ha, ha.

_Arb_.

  Why dost thou laugh?
  By all the world, I'm grown ridiculous
  To my own Subjects: Tie me in a Chair
  And jest at me, but I shall make a start,
  And punish some that others may take heed
  How they are haughty; who will answer me?
  He said I boasted, speak _Mardonius_,
  Did I? He will not answer, O my temper!
  I give you thanks above, that taught my heart
  Patience, I can endure his silence; what will none
  Vouchsafe to give me answer? am I grown
  To such a poor respect, or do you mean
  To break my wind? Speak, speak, some one of you,
  Or else by heaven.

_1 Gent_.

  So please your.

_Arb_.

  Monstrous,
  I cannot be heard out, they cut me off,
  As if I were too saucy, I will live
  In woods, and talk to trees, they will allow me
  To end what I begin. The meanest Subject
  Can find a freedom to discharge his soul
  And not I, now it is a time to speak,
  I hearken.

_1 Gent_.

  May it please.

_Arb_.

  I mean not you,
  Did not I stop you once? but I am grown
  To balk, but I defie, let another speak.

_2 Gent_.

  I hope your Majesty.

_Arb_.

  Thou drawest thy words,
  That I must wait an hour, where other men
  Can hear in instants; throw your words away,
  Quick, and to purpose, I have told you this.

_Bes_.

  And please your Majesty.

_Arb_.

  Wilt thou devour me? this is such a rudeness
  As you never shew'd me, and I want
  Power to command too, else _Mardonius_
  Would speak at my request; were you my King,
  I would have answered at your word _Mardonius_,
  I pray you speak, and truely, did I boast?

_Mar_.

Truth will offend you.

_Arb_.

  You take all great care what will offend me,
  When you dare to utter such things as these.

_Mar_.

  You told _Tigranes_, you had won his Land,
  With that sole arm propt by Divinity:
  Was not that bragging, and a wrong to us,
  That daily ventured lives?

_Arb_.

  O that thy name
  Were as great, as mine, would I had paid my wealth,
  It were as great, as I might combate thee,
  I would through all the Regions habitable
  Search thee, and having found thee, wi'my Sword
  Drive thee about the world, till I had met
  Some place that yet mans curiosity
  Hath mist of; there, there would I strike thee dead:
  Forgotten of mankind, such Funeral rites
  As beasts would give thee, thou shouldst have.

_Bes_.

  The King rages extreamly, shall we slink away? He'l strike us.

_2 Gent_.

  Content.

_Arb_.

  There I would make you know 'twas this sole arm.
  I grant you were my instruments, and did
  As I commanded you, but 'twas this arm
  Mov'd you like wheels, it mov'd you as it pleas'd.
  Whither slip you now? what are you too good
  To wait on me (_puffe_,) I had need have temper
  That rule such people; I have nothing left
  At my own choice, I would I might be private:
  Mean men enjoy themselves, but 'tis our curse,
  To have a tumult that out of their loves
  Will wait on us, whether we will or no;
  Go get you gone: Why here they stand like death,
  My words move nothing.

_1 Gent_.

  Must we go?

_Bes_. I know not.

_Arb_.

  I pray you leave me Sirs, I'me proud of this,
  That you will be intreated from my sight:
  Why now the[y] leave me all: _Mardonius_.


                      [_Exeunt all but_  Arb. _and_  Mar.

_Mar_.

  Sir.

_Arb_.

  Will you leave me quite alone? me thinks
  Civility should teach you more than this,
  If I were but your friend: Stay here and wait.

_Mar_.

  Sir shall I speak?

_Arb_.

  Why, you would now think much
  To be denied, but I can scar[c]e intreat
  What I would have: do, speak.

_Mar_.

  But will you hear me out?

_Arb_.

  With me you Article to talk thus: well,
  I will hear you out.

_Mar_.

  Sir, that I have ever lov'd you, my sword hath spoken for me;
  that I do, if it be doubted, I dare call an oath, a great one to
  my witness; and were you not my King, from amongst men, I should
  have chose you out to love above the rest: nor can this challenge
  thanks, for my own sake I should have done it, because I would
  have lov'd the most deserving man, for so you are.

_Arb_.

  Alas _Mardonius_, rise you shall not kneel,
  We all are souldiers, and all venture lives:
  And where there is no difference in mens worths,
  Titles are jests, who can outvalue thee?
  _Mardonius_  thou hast lov'd me, and hast wrong,
  Thy love is not rewarded, but believe
  It shall be better, more than friend in arms,
  My Father, and my Tutor, good _Mardonius_.

_Mar_.

  Sir, you did promise you would hear me out.

_Arb_.

  And so I will; speak freely, for from thee
  Nothing can come but worthy things and true.

_Mar_.

  Though you have all this worth, you hold some qualities that do
  Eclipse your vertues.

_Arb_.

  Eclipse my vertues?

_Mar_.

  Yes, your passions, which are so manifold, that they appear even
  in this: when I commend you, you hug me for that truth: but when
  I speak your faults, you make a start, and flie the hearing but.

_Arb_.

  When you commend me? O that I should live
  To need such commendations: If my deeds
  Blew not my praise themselves about the earth,
  I were most wretched: spare your idle praise:
  If thou didst mean to flatter, and shouldst utter
  Words in my praise, that thou thoughtst impudence,
  My deeds should make 'em modest: when you praise I hug
  you? 'tis so [false], that wert thou worthy thou shouldst receive
  a death, a glorious death from me: but thou shalt understand
  thy lies, for shouldst thou praise me into Heaven, and there
  leave me inthron'd, I would despise thee though as much as
  now, which is as much as dust because I see thy envie.

_Mar_.

  However you will use me after, yet for your own promise sake,
  hear me the rest.

_Arb_.

  I will, and after call unto the winds, for they shall lend as
  large an ear as I to what you utter: speak.

_Mar_.

  Would you but leave these hasty tempers, which
  I do not say take from you all your worth, but darken 'em,
  then you will shine indeed.

_Arb_.

  Well.

_Mar_.

  Yet I would have you keep some passions, lest men should take you
  for a God, your vertues are such.

_Arb_.

  Why now you flatter.

_Mar_.

  I never understood the word, were you no King, and free from
  these moods, should I choose a companion for wit and pleasure, it
  should be you; or for honesty to enterchange my bosom with, it
  should be you; or wisdom to give me counsel, I would pick out
  you; or valour to defend my reputation, still I should find you
  out; for you are fit to fight for all the world, if it could come
  in question: Now I have spoke, consider to your self, find out a
  use; if so, then what shall fall to me is not material.

_Arb_.

  Is not material? more than ten such lives, as mine, _Mardonius_:
  it was nobly said, thou hast spoke truth, and boldly such a truth
  as might offend another. I have been too passionate and idle,
  thou shalt see a swift amendment, but I want those parts you
  praise me for: I fight for all the world? Give me a sword, and
  thou wilt go as far beyond me, as thou art beyond in years, I
  know thou dar'st and wilt; it troubles me that I should use so
  rough a phrase to thee, impute it to my folly, what thou wilt, so
  thou wilt par[d]on me: that thou and I should differ thus!

_Mar_.

Why 'tis no matter Sir.

_Arb_.

  Faith but it is, but thou dost ever take all things I do, thus
  patiently, for which I never can requite thee, but with love, and
  that thou shalt be sure of. Thou and I have not been merry
  lately: pray thee tell me where hadst thou that same jewel in
  thine ear?

_Mar_.

  Why at the taking of a Town.

_Arb_.

  A wench upon my life, a wench _Mardonius_  gave thee that jewel.

_Mar_.

  Wench! they respect not me, I'm old and rough, and every limb
  about me, but that which should, grows stiffer, I'those
  businesses I may swear I am truly honest: for I pay justly for
  what I take, and would be glad to be at a certainty.

_Arb_.

  Why, do the wenches encroach upon thee?

_Mar_.

  I by this light do they.

_Arb_.

  Didst thou sit at an old rent with 'em?

_Mar_.

  Yes faith.

_Arb_.

  And do they improve themselves?

_Mar_.

  I ten shillings to me, every new young fellow they come
  acquainted with.

_Arb_.

  How canst live on't?

_Mar_.

  Why I think I must petition to you.

_Arb_.

  Thou shalt take them up at my price.

_Enter two Gentlemen and_  Bessus.

_Mar_.

  Your price?

_Arb_.

  I at the Kings price.

_Mar_.

  That may be more than I'me worth.

_2 Gent_.

  Is he not merry now?

_1 Gent_.

  I think not.

_Bes_.

  He is, he is: we'l shew our selves.

_Arb_.

  Bessus, I thought you had been in _Iberia_  by this, I bad you
  hast; _Gobrias_  will want entertainment for me.

_Bes_.

  And please your Majesty I have a sute.

_Arb_.

  Is't not lousie _Bessus_, what is't?

_Bes_.

  I am to carry a Lady with me.

_Arb_.

  Then thou hast two sutes.

_Bes_.

  And if I can prefer her to the Lady _Pentha_  your Majesties
  Sister, to learn fashions, as her friends term it, it will be
  worth something to me.

_Arb_.

  So many nights lodgings as 'tis thither, wilt not?

_Bes_.

  I know not that Sir, but gold I shall be sure of.

_Arb_.

  Why thou shalt bid her entertain her from me, so thou wilt
  resolve me one thing.

_Bes_.

  If I can.

_Arb_.

  Faith 'tis a very disputable question, and yet I think thou canst
  decide it.

_Bes_.

  Your Majesty has a good opinion of my understanding.

_Arb_.

  I have so good an opinion of it: 'tis whether thou be valiant.

_Bes_.

  Some body has traduced me to you: do you see this sword Sir?

_Arb_.

Yes.

_Bes_.

  If I do not make my back-biters eat it to a knife within this
  week, say I am not valiant.

_Enter a Messenger_.

_Mes_.

  Health to your Majesty.

_Arb_.

  From Gobrias?

_Mes_.

  Yes Sir.

_Arb_.

  How does he, is he well?

_Mes_.

  In perfect health.

_Arb_.

  Take that for thy good news. A trustier servant to his Prince
  there lives not, than is good Gobrias.

_1 Gent_.

  The King starts back.

_Mar_.

  His blood goes back as fast.

_2 Gent_. And now it comes again.

_Mar_.

  He alters strangely.

_Arb_.

  The hand of Heaven is on me, be it far from me to struggle, if my
  secret sins have pull'd this curse upon me, lend me tears now to
  wash me white, that I may feel a child-like innocence within my
  breast; which once perform'd, O give me leave to stand as fix'd
  as constancy her self, my eyes set here unmov'd, regardless of
  the world though thousand miseries incompass me.

_Mar_.

  This is strange, Sir, how do you?

_Arb_.

  Mardonius, my mother.

_Mar_.

  Is she dead?

_Arb_.

  Alas she's not so happy, thou dost know how she hath laboured
  since my Father died to take by treason hence this loathed life,
  that would but be to serve her, I have pardoned, and pardoned,
  and by that have made her fit to practise new sins, not repent
  the old: she now had stirr'd a slave to come from thence, and
  strike me here, whom Gobrias sifting out, took and condemn'd and
  executed there, the carefulst servant: Heaven let me but live to
  pay that man; Nature is poor to me, that will not let me have as
  many deaths as are the times that he hath say'd my life, that I
  might dye 'em over all for him.

_Mar_.

  Sir let her bear her sins on her own head,
  Vex not your self.

_Arb_.

  What will the world
  Conceive of me? with what unnatural sins
  Will they suppose me loaden, when my life
  Is sought by her that gave it to the world?
  But yet he writes me comfort here, my Sister,
  He saies, is grown in beauty and in grace.
  In all the innocent vertues that become
  A tender spotless maid: she stains her cheeks
  With morning tears to purge her mothers ill,
  And 'mongst that sacred dew she mingles Prayers
  Her pure Oblations for my safe return:
  If I have lost the duty of a Son,
  If any pomp or vanity of state
  Made me forget my natural offices,
  Nay farther, if I have not every night
  Expostulated with my wandring thoughts,
  If ought unto my parent they have err'd,
  And call'd 'em back: do you direct her arm
  Unto this foul dissembling heart of mine:
  But if I have been just to her, send out
  Your power to compass me, and hold me safe
  From searching treason; I will use no means
  But prayer: for rather suffer me to see
  From mine own veins issue a deadly flood,
  Than wash my danger off with mothers blood.

_Mar_.

  I n'ere saw such suddain extremities.

                                                         [Exeunt.

_Enter_  Tigranes _and_  Spaconia.

_Tigr_.

  Why? wilt thou have me die Spaconia.
  What should I do?

_Spa_.

  Nay let me stay alone,
  And when you see _Armenia_  again,
  You shall behold a Tomb more worth than I;
  Some friend that ever lov'd me or my cause,
  Will build me something to distinguish me
  From other women, many a weeping verse
  He will lay on, and much lament those maids,
  That plac'd their loves unfortunately high,
  As I have done, where they can never reach;
  But why should you go to _Iberia_?

_Tigr_.

  Alas, that thou wilt ask me, ask the man
  That rages in a Fever why he lies
  Distempered there, when all the other youths
  Are coursing o're the Meadows with their Loves?
  Can I resist it? am I not a slave
  To him that conquer'd me?

_Spa_.

  That conquer'd thee _Tigranes_! he has won
  But half of thee, thy body, but thy mind
  May be as free as his, his will did never
  Combate thine, and take it prisoner.

_Tigr_.

  But if he by force convey my body hence,
  What helps it me or thee to be unwilling?

_Spa_.

  O _Tigranes_, I know you are to see a Lady there,
  To see, and like I fear: perhaps the hope
  Of her make[s] you forget me, ere we part,
  Be happier than you know to wish; farewel.

_Tigr_.

  _Spaconia_, stay and hear me what I say:
  In short, destruction meet me that I may
  See it, and not avoid it, when I leave
  To be thy faithful lover: part with me
  Thou shalt not, there are none that know our love,
  And I have given gold unto a Captain
  That goes unto _Iberia_  from the King,
  That he will place a Lady of our Land
  With the Kings Sister that is offered me;
  Thither shall you, and being once got in
  Perswade her by what subtil means you can
  To be as backward in her love as I.

_Spa_.

  Can you imagine that a longing maid
  When she beholds you, can be pull'd away
  With words from loving you?

_Tigr_.

  Dispraise my health, my honesty, and tell her I am jealous.

_Spa_.

  Why, I had rather lose you: can my heart
  Consent to let my tongue throw out such words,
  And I that ever yet spoke what I thought,
  Shall find it such a thing at first to lie?

_Tigr_.

  Yet do thy best.

_Enter_  Bessus.

_Bes_.

  What, is your Majesty ready?

_Tigr_.

  There is the Lady, Captain.

_Bes_.

  Sweet Lady, by your leave, I co[u]ld wish my self more full of
  Courtship for your fair sake.

_Spa_.

  Sir I shall feel no want of that.

_Bes_.

  Lady, you must hast, I have received new letters from the King
  that require more hast than I expected, he will follow me
  suddenly himself, and begins to call for your Majesty already.

_Tigr_.

  He shall not do so long.

_Bes_.

  Sweet Lady, shall I call you my Charge hereafter?

_Spa_.

  I will not take upon me to govern your tongue Sir, you shall call
  me what you please.




_Actus Secundus_.


_Enter_  Gobrias, Bacurius, Arane, Panthe, _and_  Mandane,
_ Waiting-women with Attendants_.

_Gob_.

  My Lord Bacurius, you must have regard unto the Queen, she is
  your prisoner, 'tis at your peril if she make escape.

_Bac_.

  My Lord, I know't, she is my prisoner from you committed; yet she
  is a woman, and so I keep her safe, you will not urge me to keep
  her close, I shall not shame to say I sorrow for her.

_Gob_.

  So do I my Lord; I sorrow for her, that so little grace doth
  govern her: that she should stretch her arm against her King, so
  little womanhood and natural goodness, as to think the death of
  her own Son.

_ Ara_.

  Thou knowst the reason why, dissembling as thou art, and wilt not
  speak.

_Gob_.

  There is a Lady takes not after you,
  Her Father is within her, that good man
  Whose tears weigh'd down his sins, mark how she weeps,
  How well it does become her, and if you
  Can find no disposition in your self
  To sorrow, yet by gracefulness in her
  Find out the way, and by your reason weep:
  All this she does for you, and more she needs
  When for your self you will not lose a tear,
  Think how this want of grief discredits you,
  And you will weep, because you cannot weep.

_Ara_.

  You talk to me as having got a time fit for your purpose; but you
  should be urg'd know I know you speak not what you think.

_Pan_.

  I would my heart were Stone, before my softness
  Against my mother, a more troubled thought
  No Virgin bears about; should I excuse
  My Mothers fault, I should set light a life
  In losing which, a brother and a King
  Were taken from me, if I seek to save
  That life so lov'd, I lose another life
  That gave me being, I shall lose a Mother,
  A word of such a sound in a childs ears
  That it strikes reverence through it; may the will
  Of heaven be done, and if one needs must fall,
  Take a poor Virgins life to answer all.

_ Ara_.

  But _Gobrias_  let us talk, you know this fault
  Is not in me as in another Mother.

_Gob_.

  I know it is not.

_ Ara_.

  Yet you make it so.

_Gob_.

  Why, is not all that's past beyond your help?

_ Ara_.

  I know it is.

_Gob_.

  Nay should you publish it before the world,
  Think you 'twould be believ'd?

_ Ara_.

  I know it would not.

_Gob_.

  Nay should I joyn with you, should we not both be torn and yet
  both die uncredited?

_ Ara_.

  I think we should.
_Gob_.

  Why then take you such violent courses? As for me I do but right
  in saving of the King from all your plots.

_ Ara_.

  The King?

_Gob_.

  I bad you rest with patience, and a time
  Would come for me to reconcile all to
  Your own content, but by this way you take
  Away my power, and what was done unknown,
  Was not by me but you: your urging being done
  I must preserve my own, but time may bring
  All this to light, and happily for all.

_ Ara_.

  Accursed be this over curious brain
  That gave that plot a birth, accurst this womb
  That after did conceive to my disgrace.

_Bac_.

  My Lord Protector, they say there are divers Letters come from
  _Armenia_, that _Bessus_  has done good service, and brought again
  a day, by his particular valour, receiv'd you any to that effect?

_Gob_.

  Yes, 'tis most certain.

_Bac_.

  I'm sorry for't, not that the day was won,
  But that 'twas won by him: we held him here
  A Coward, he did me wrong once, at which I laugh'd,
  And so did all the world, for nor I,
  Nor any other held him worth my sword.

_Enter_  Bessus _and_  Spaconia.

_Bes_.

  Health to my Protector; from the King
  These Letters; and to your grace Madam, these.

_Gob_.

  How does his Majesty?

_Bes_.

  As well as conquest by his own means and his valiant
  C[o]mmanders can make him; your letters will tell you all.

_Pan_.

  I will not open mine till I do know
  My Brothers health: good Captain is he well?

_Bes_.

  As the rest of us that fought are.

_Pan_.

  But how's that? is he hurt?

_Bes_.

  He's a strange souldier that gets not a knock.

_Pan_.

  I do not ask how strange that souldier is
  That gets no hurt, but whether he have one.

_Bes_.

He had divers.

_Pan_.

And is he well again?

_Bes_.

  Well again, an't please your Grace: why I was run twice through
  the body, and shot i'th' head with a cross-arrow, and yet am well
  again.

_Pan_.

  I do not care how thou do'st, is he well?

_Bes_.

  Not care how I do? Let a man out of the mightiness of his spirit,
  fructifie Foreign Countries with his blood for the good of his
  own, and thus he shall be answered: Why I may live to relieve
  with spear and shield, such a Lady as you distressed.

_Pan_.

  Why, I will care, I'me glad that thou art well, I prethee is he
  so?

_Gob_.

  The King is well and will be here to morrow.

_Pan_.

  My prayer is heard, now will I open mine.

_Gob_.

  _Bacurius_, I must ease you of your charge:
  Madam, the wonted mercy of the King,
  That overtakes your faults, has met with this,
  And struck it out, he has forgiven you freely,
  Your own will is your law, be where you please.

_ Ara_.

  I thank him.

_Gob_.

  You will be ready to wait upon his Majesty to morrow?

_ Ara_.

  I will.

                                              [_Exit_  Arane.

_Bac_.

  Madam be wise hereafter; I am glad I have lost this Office.

_Gob_.

  Good Captain _Bessus_, tell us the discourse betwixt _Tigranes_
  and our King, and how we got the victory.

_Pan_.

  I prethee do, and if my Brother were
  In any danger, let not thy tale make
  Him abide there long before thou bring him off,
  For all that while my heart will beat.

_Bes_.

  Madam let what will beat, I must tell the truth, and thus it was;
  they fought single in lists, but one to one; as for my own part,
  I was dangerously hurt but three days before, else, perhaps, we
  had been two to two, I cannot tell, some thought we had, and the
  occasion of my hurt was this, the enemy had made Trenches.

_Gob_.

  Captain, without the manner of your hurt be much material to this
  business, we'l hear't some other time.

_Pan_.

  I prethee leave it, and go on with my Brother.

_Bes_.

  I will, but 'twould be worth your hearing: To the
  Lists they came, and single-sword and gantlet was their fight.

_Pan_.

  Alas!

_Bes_.

  Without the Lists there stood some dozen Captains of either side
  mingled, all which were sworn, and one of those was I: and 'twas
  my chance to stand next a Captain o'th' enemies side, called
  _Tiribasus_; Valiant they said he was; whilst these two Kings
  were streaching themselves, this _Tiribasus_  cast something a
  scornful look on me, and ask't me who I thought would overcome: I
  smil'd and told him if he would fight with me, he should perceive
  by the event of that whose King would win: something he answered,
  and a scuffle was like to grow, when one _Zipetus_  offered to
  help him, I--

_Pan_.

  All this is of thy self, I pray thee _Bessus_  tell something of
  my Brother, did he nothing?

_Bes_.

  Why yes, I'le tell your Grace, they were not to fight till the
  word given, which for my own part, by my troth I confess I was
  not to give.

_Pan_.

See for his own part.

_Bac_.

  I fear yet this fellow's abus'd with a good report.

_Bes_.

  But I--

_Pan_.

  Still of himself.

_Bes_.

  Cri'd give the word, when as some of them say, _Tigranes_  was
  stooping, but the word was not given then, yet one _Cosroes_  of
  the enemies part, held up his finger to me, which is as much with
  us Martialists, as I will fight with you: I said not a word, nor
  made sign during the combate, but that once done.

_Pan_.

  He slips o're all the fight.

_Bes_.

  I call'd him to me, _Cosroes_  said I.

_Pan_.

  I will hear no more.

_Bes_.

  No, no, I lie.

_Bac_.

  I dare be sworn thou dost.

_Bes_.

  Captain said I, so it was.

_Pan_.

  I tell thee, I will hear no further.

_Bes_.

  No? Your Grace will wish you had.

_Pan_.

  I will not wish it, what is this the Lady
  My brother writes to me to take?

_Bes_.

  And please your Grace this is she: Charge, will you come near the
  Princess?

_Pan_.

  You'r welcome from your Country, and this land shall shew unto
  you all the kindness that I can make it; what's your name?

_Spa_.

  _Thalectris_.

_Pan_.

  Y'are very welcome, you have got a letter to put you to me, that
  has power enough to place mine enemy here; then much more you
  that are so far from being so to me that you ne're saw me.

_Bes_.

  Madam, I dare pass my word for her truth.

_Spa_.

  My truth?

_Pan_.

  Why Captain, do you think I am afraid she'l steal?

_Bes_.

  I cannot tell, servants are slippery, but I dare give my word for
  her, and for honesty, she came along with me, and many favours
  she did me by the way, but by this light none but what she might
  do with modesty, to a man of my rank.

_Pan_.

  Why Captain, here's no body thinks otherwise.

_Bes_.

  Nay, if you should, your Grace may think your pleasure; but I am
  sure I brought her from _Armenia_, and in all that way, if ever I
  touch'd any bare of her above her knee, I pray God I may sink
  where I stand.

_Spa_.

  Above my knee?

_Bes_.

  No, you know I did not, and if any man will say, I did, this
  sword shall answer; Nay, I'le defend the reputation of my charge
  whilst I live, your Grace shall understand I am secret in these
  businesses, and know how to defend a Ladies honour.

_Spa_.

  I hope your Grace knows him so well already, I shall not need to
  tell you he's vain and foolish.

_Bes_.

  I you may call me what you please, but I'le defend your good name
  against the world; and so I take my leave of your Grace, and of
  you my Lord Protector; I am likewise glad to see your Lordship
  well.

_Bac_.

  O Captain _Bessus_, I thank you, I would speak with you
  anon.

_Bes_.

  When you please, I will attend your Lordship.

_Bac_.

Madam, I'le take my leave too.

_Pan_.

  Good _Bacurius_.

                              [_Exeunt_  Bes. _and_  Bac.

_Gob_.

  Madam what writes his Majesty to you?

_Pan_.

  O my Lord, the kindest words, I'le keep 'em whilst I live, here
  in my bosom, there's no art in 'em, they lie disordered in this
  paper, just as hearty nature speaks 'em.

_Gob_.

  And to me he writes what tears of joy he shed to hear how you
  were grown in every vertues way, and yields all thanks to me, for
  that dear care which I was bound to have in training you, there
  is no Princess living that enjoys a brother of that worth.

_Pan_.

  My Lord, no maid longs more for any thing,
  And feels more heat and cold within her breast,
  Than I do now, in hopes to see him.

_Gob_.

  Yet I wonder much
  At this he writes, he brings along with him
  A husband for you, that same Captive Prince,
  And if he loves you as he makes a shew,
  He will allow you freedom in your choice.

_Pan_.

  And so he will my Lord, I warrant you, he will but offer and give
  me the power to take or leave.

_Gob_.

  Trust me, were I a Lady, I could not like that man were bargain'd
  with before I choose him.

_Pan_.

  But I am not built on such wild humours, if I find him worthy, he
  is not less because he's offer'd.

_Spa_.

  'Tis true, he is not, would he would seem less.

_Gob_.

  I think there's no Lady can affect
  Another Prince, your brother standing by;
  He doth Eclipse mens vertues so with his.

_Spa_.

  I know a Lady may, and more I fear
  Another Lady will.

_Pan_.

  Would I might see him.

_Gob_.

  Why so you shall, my businesses are great,
  I will attend you when it is his pleasure to see you.

_Pan_.

  I thank you good my Lord.

_Gob_.

  You will be ready Madam.

                                                [_Exit Gob_.

_Pan_.

  Yes.

_Spa_.

  I do beseech you Madam, send away
  Your other women, and receive from me
  A few sad words, which set against your joyes
  May make 'em shine the more.

_Pan_.

  Sirs, leave me all.

                                            [_Exeunt Women_.

_Spa_.

  I kneel a stranger here to beg a thing
  Unfit for me to ask, and you to grant,
  'Tis such another strange ill-laid request,
  As if a begger should intreat a King
  To leave his Scepter, and his Throne to him
  And take his rags to wander o're the world
  Hungry and cold.

_Pan_.

  That were a strange request.

_Spa_.

  As ill is mine.

_Pan_. Then do not utter it.

_Spa_.

  Alas 'tis of that nature, that it must
  Be utter'd, I, and granted, or I die:
  I am asham'd to speak it; but where life
  Lies at the stake, I cannot think her woman

  That will not take something unreasonably to hazard saving of it:
  I shall seem a strange Petitioner, that wish all ill to them I
  beg of, e're they give me ought; yet so I must: I would you were
  not fair, nor wise, for in your ill consists my good: if you were
  foolish, you would hear my prayer, if foul, you had not power to
  hinder me: he would not love you.

_Pan_.

  What's the meaning of it.

_Spa_.

  Nay, my request is more without the bounds
  Of reason yet: for 'tis not in the power
  Of you to do, what I would have you grant.

_Pan_.

  Why then 'tis idle, pray thee speak it out.

_Spa_.

  Your brother brings a Prince into this land,
  Of such a noble shape, so sweet a grace,
  So full of worth withal, that every maid
  That looks upon him, gives away her self
  To him for ever; and for you to have
  He brings him: and so mad is my demand
  That I desire you not to have this man,
  This excellent man, for whom you needs must die,
  If you should miss him. I do now expect
  You should laugh at me.

_Pan_.

  Trust me I could weep rather, for I have found him
  In all thy words a strange disjoynted sorrow.

_Spa_.

  'Tis by me his own desire so, that you would not love him.

_Pan_.

  His own desire! why credit me _Thalestris,_  I am no common wooer:
  if he shall wooe me, his worth may be such, that I dare not swear
  I will not love him; but if he will stay to have me wooe him, I
  will promise thee, he may keep all his graces to himself, and
  fear no ravishing from me.

_Spa_.

  'Tis yet his own desire, but when he sees your face, I fear it
  will not be; therefore I charge you as you have pity, stop these
  tender ears from his enchanting voice, close up those eyes, that
  you may neither catch a dart from him, nor he from you; I charge
  you as you hope to live in quiet; for when I am dead, for certain
  I will walk to visit him if he break promise with me: for as fast
  as Oaths without a formal Ceremony can make me, I am to him.

_Pan_.

  Then be fearless;
  For if he were a thing 'twixt God and man,
  I could gaze on him; if I knew it sin
  To love him without passion: Dry your eyes,
  I swear you shall enjoy him still for me,
  I will not hinder you; but I perceive
  You are not what you seem, rise, rise _Thalestris_,
  If your right name be so.

_Spa_.

  Indeed it is not, _Spaconia_  is my name; but I desire not to be
  known to other.

_Pan_.

  Why, by me you shall not, I will never do you wrong, what good I
  can, I will, think not my birth or education such, that I should
  injure a stranger Virgin; you are welcome hither, in company you
  wish to be commanded, but when we are alone, I shall be ready to
  be your servant.


                                                  [_Exeunt_.

_Enter three Men and a Woman_.

_1_.

  Come, come, run, run, run.

_2_.

  We shall out-go her.

_3_.

  One were better be hang'd than carry out women fidling to these
  shews.

_ Wom_.

  Is the King hard by?

_1_.

  You heard he with the Bottles said, he thought we should come too
  late: What abundance of people here is!

_ Wom_.

  But what had he in those Bottles?

_3_.

  I know not.

_2_.

  Why, Ink goodman fool.

_3_.

  Ink, what to do?

_1_.

  Why the King look you, will many times call for these
  Bottles, and break his mind to his friends.

_ Wom_.

  Let's take our places, we shall have no room else.

_2_.

  The man told us he would walk o' foot through the people.

_3_.

  I marry did he.

_1_.

  Our shops are well look't to now.

_2_.

'Slife, yonder's my Master, I think.

_1_.

  No 'tis not he.

_Enter a man with two Citizens-wives._

_1 Cit_.

  Lord how fine the fields be, what sweet living 'tis in the
  Country!

_2 Cit_.

  I poor souls, God help 'em; they live as contentedly as one of
  us.

_1 Cit_.

  My husbands Cousin would have had me gone into the Country last
  year, wert thou ever there?

_2 Cit_.

  I, poor souls, I was amongst 'em once.

_1 Cit_.

  And what kind of creatures are they, for love of God?

_2 Cit_.

  Very good people, God help 'em.

_1 Cit_.

  Wilt thou go down with me this Summer when I am brought to bed?

_2 Cit_.

  Alas, it is no place for us.

_1 Cit_.

  Why, pray thee?

_2 Cit_.

  Why you can have nothing there, there's no body cryes brooms.

_1 Cit_.

  No?

_2 Cit_.

  No truly, nor milk.

_1 Cit_.

  Nor milk, how do they?

_2 Cit_.

  They are fain to milk themselves i'th' Country.

_1 Cit_.

  Good Lord! but the people there, I think, will be very dutiful to
  one of us.

_2 Cit_.

  I God knows will they, and yet they do not greatly care for our
  husbands.

_1 Cit_.

  Do they not? Alas! I'good faith I cannot blame them: for we do
  not greatly care for them our selves. _Philip_, I pray choose us
  a place.

_ Phil_.

  There's the best forsooth.

_1 Cit_.

  By your leave good people a little.

_3_.

  What's the matter?

_ Phil_.

  I pray you my friend, do not thrust my Mistress so, she's with
  Child.

_2_.

  Let her look to her self then, has she not had showing enough
  yet? if she stay shouldring here, she may haps go home with a
  cake in her belly.

_3_.

  How now, goodman squitter-breech, why do you lean on me?

_ Phi_.

  Because I will.

_3_.

  Will you Sir sawce-box?

_1 Cit_.

  Look if one ha'not struck _Philip_, come hither _Philip_, why did
  he strike thee?

_ Phil_.

  For leaning on him.

_1 Cit_.

  Why didst thou lean on him?

_ Phil_.

  I did not think he would have struck me.

_1 Cit_.

  As God save me la thou'rt as wild as a Buck, there's no quarel
  but thou'rt at one end or other on't.

_3_.

  It's at the first end then, for he'l ne'r stay the last.

_1 Cit_.

  Well slip-string, I shall meet with you.

_3_.

  When you will.

_1 Cit_.

  I'le give a crown to meet with you.

_3_.

  At a Bawdy-house.

_1 Cit_.

  I you're full of your Roguery; but if I do meet you it shall cost
  me a fall.

_ Flourish. Enter one running_.

_4_

  The King, the King, the King. Now, now, now, now.

_ Flourish. Enter_  Arb. Tigr. _The two Kings and_  Mardonius.

_ All_.

  God preserve your Majesty.

_Arb_.

  I thank you all, now are my joyes at full, when I behold you
  safe, my loving Subjects; by you I grow, 'tis your united love
  that lifts me to this height: all the account that I can render
  you for all the love you have bestowed on me, all your expences
  to maintain my war, is but a little word, you will imagine 'tis
  slender paiment, yet 'tis such a word, as is not to be bought but
  with your bloods, 'tis Peace.

_ All_.

  God preserve your Majesty.

_Arb_.

  Now you may live securely i'your Towns,
  Your Children round about you; may sit
  Under your Vines, and make the miseries
  Of other Kingdoms a discourse for you,
  And lend them sorrows; for your selves, you may
  Safely forget there are such things as tears,
  And you may all whose good thoughts I have gain'd,
  Hold me unworthy, where I think my life
  A sacrifice too great to keep you thus
  In such a calm estate.

_ All_.

  God bless your Majesty.

_Arb_.

  See all good people, I have brought the man whose very name you
  fear'd, a captive home; behold him, 'tis _Tigranes_; in your
  heart sing songs of gladness, and deliverance.

_1 Cit_.

  Out upon him.

_2 Cit_.

  How he looks.

_3 Wom_.

  Hang him, hang him.

_Mar_.

  These are sweet people.

_Tigr_.

  Sir, you do me wrong, to render me a scorned spectacle to common
  people.

_Arb_.

  It was so far from me to mean it so: if I have ought deserv'd, my
  loving Subjects, let me beg of you, not to revile this Prince, in
  whom there dwells all worth of which the name of a man is
  capable, valour beyond compare, the terrour of his name has
  stretcht it self where ever there is sun; and yet for you I
  fought with him single, and won him too; I made his valour stoop,
  and brought that name soar'd to so unbeliev'd a height, to fall
  beneath mine: this inspir'd with all your loves, I did perform,
  and will for your content, be ever ready for a greater work.

_ All_.

  The Lord bless your Majesty.

_Tigr_.

  So he has made me amends now with a speech in commendation of
  himself: I would not be so vain-glorious.

_Arb_.

  If there be any thing in which I may
  Do good to any creature, here speak out;
  For I must leave you: and it troubles me,
  That my occasions for the good of you,
  Are such as call me from you: else, my joy
  Would be to spend my days among you all.
  You shew your loves in these large multitudes
  That come to meet me, I will pray for you,
  Heaven prosper you, that you may know old years,
  And live to see your childrens children sit
  At your boards with plenty: when there is
  A want of any thing, let it be known
  To me, and I will be a Father to you:
  God keep you all.

                    [_ Flourish. Exeunt Kings and their Train_.

_ All_.

  God bless your Majesty, God bless your Majesty.

_1_.

  Come, shall we go? all's done.

_ Wom_.

  I for God sake, I have not made a fire yet.

_2_.

  Away, away, all's done.

_3_.

  Content, farewel _Philip_.

_1 Cit_.

  Away you halter-sack you.

_2_.

  _Philip_  will not fight, he's afraid on's face.

_ Phil_.

  I marry am I afraid of my face.

_3_.

  Thou wouldst be _Philip_  if thou sawst it in a glass; it looks so
  like a Visour.

                  [_Exeunt _2_., _3_., and Woman_.

_1 Cit_.

  You'l be hang'd sirra: Come _Philip_  walk before us homewards;
  did not his Majesty say he had brought us home Pease for all our
  money?

_2 Cit_.

  Yes marry did he.

_1 Cit_.

  They're the first I heard of this year by my troth, I longed for
  some of 'em: did he not say we should have some?

_2 Cit_.

  Yes, and so we shall anon I warrant you have every one a peck
  brought home to our houses.




_Actus Tertius_.

_Enter_  Arbaces _and_  Gobrias.

_Arb_.

  My Sister take it ill?


_Gob_.

  Not very ill.
  Something unkindly she does take it Sir to have
  Her Husband chosen to her hands.

_Arb_.

  Why _Gobrias_  let her, I must have her know, my will and not her
  own must govern her: what will she marry with some slave at home?

_Gob_.

  O she is far from any stubbornness, you much mistake her, and no
  doubt will like where you would have her, but when you behold
  her, you will be loth to part with such a jewel.

_Arb_.

  To part with her? why _Gobrias_, art thou mad? she is my Sister.

_Gob_.

  Sir, I know she is: but it were pity to make poor our Land, with
  such a beauty to enrich another.

_Arb_.

  Pish will she have him?

_Gob_.

  I do hope she will not, I think she will Sir.

_Arb_.

  Were she my Father and my Mother too, and all the names for which
  we think folks friends, she should be forc't to have him when I
  know 'tis fit: I will not hear her say she's loth.

_Gob_.

  Heaven bring my purpose luckily to pass, you know 'tis just, she
  will not need constraint she loves you so.

_Arb_.

  How does she love me, speak?

_Gob_.

  She loves you more than people love their health,
  that live by labour; more than I could love a man that died
  for me, if he could live again.

_Arb_.

  She is not like her mother then.

_Gob_.

  O no, when you were in _Armenia_,
  I durst not let her know when you were hurt:
  For at the first on every little scratch,
  She kept her Chamber, wept, and could not eat,
  Till you were well, and many times the news
  Was so long coming, that before we heard
  She was as near her death, as you your health.

_Arb_.

  Alas poor soul, but yet she must be rul'd;
  I know not how I shall requite her well.
  I long to see her, have you sent for her,
  To tell her I am ready?

_Gob_.

  Sir I have.

_Enter_  1 Gent, _and_  Tigranes.

_1 Gent_.

  Sir, here is the _Armenian_  King.

_Arb_.

  He's welcome.

_1 Gent_.

  And the Queen-mother, and the Princess wait without.

_Arb_.

  Good _Gobrias_  bring 'em in.
  _Tigranes_, you will think you are arriv'd
  In a strange Land, where Mothers cast to poyson
  Their only Sons; think you you shall be safe?

_Tigr_.

  Too safe I am Sir.

_Enter_  Gobrias, Arane, Panthea, Spaconia, Bacurius,
Mardonius _and_  Bessus, _and two Gentlemen_.

_ Ara_.

  As low as this I bow to you, and would
  As low as is my grave, to shew a mind
  Thankful for all your mercies.

_Arb_.

  O stand up,
  And let me kneel, the light will be asham'd
  To see observance done to me by you.

_ Ara_.

  You are my King.

_Arb_.

  You are my Mother, rise;
  As far be all your faults from your own soul,
  As from my memory; then you shall be
  As white as innocence her self.

_ Ara_.

  I came
  Only to shew my duty, and acknowledge
  My sorrows for my sins; longer to stay
  Were but to draw eyes more attentively
  Upon my shame, that power that kept you safe
  From me, preserve you still.

_Arb_.

  Your own desires shall be your guide.

                                               [_Exit_  Arane.

_Pan_.

  Now let me die, since I have seen my Lord the King
  Return in safetie, I have seen all good that life
  Can shew me; I have ne're another wish
  For Heaven to grant, nor were it fit I should;
  For I am bound to spend my age to come,
  In giving thanks that this was granted me.

_Gob_.

  Why does not your Majesty speak?

_Arb_.

  To whom?

_Gob_.

To the Princess.

_Pan_.

  Alas Sir, I am fearful, you do look
  On me, as if I were some loathed thing
  That you were finding out a way to shun.

_Gob_.

  Sir, you should speak to her.

_Arb_.

  Ha?

_Pan_.

  I know I am unworthy, yet not ill arm'd, with which innocence
  here I will kneel, till I am one with earth, but I will gain some
  words and kindness from you.

_Tigr_.

  Will you speak Sir?

_Arb_.

  Speak, am I what I was?
  What art thou that dost creep into my breast,
  And dar'st not see my face? shew forth thy self:
  I feel a pair of fiery wings displai'd
  Hither, from hence; you shall not tarry there,
  Up, and be gone, if thou beest Love be gone:
  Or I will tear thee from my wounded breast,
  Pull thy lov'd Down away, and with thy Quill
  By this right arm drawn from thy wonted wing,
  Write to thy laughing Mother i'thy bloud,
  That you are powers bely'd, and all your darts
  Are to be blown away, by men resolv'd,
  Like dust; I know thou fear'st my words, away.

_Tigr_.

  O misery! why should he be so slow?
  There can no falshood come of loving her;
  Though I have given my faith; she is a thing
  Both to be lov'd and serv'd beyond my faith:
  I would he would present me to her quickly.

_Pan_.

  Will you not speak at all? are you so far
  From kind words? yet to save my modesty,
  That must talk till you answer, do not stand
  As you were dumb, say something, though it be
  Poyson'd with anger, that it may strike me dead.

_Mar_.

  Have you no life at all? for man-hood sake
  Let her not kneel, and talk neglected thus;
  A tree would find a tongue to answer her,
  Did she but give it such a lov'd respect.

_Arb_.

  You mean this Lady: lift her from the earth; why do you let her
  kneel so long? Alas, Madam, your beauty uses to command, and not
  to beg. What is your sute to me? it shall be granted, yet the
  time is short, and my affairs are great: but where's my Sister? I
  bade she should be brought.

_Mar_.

  What, is he mad?

_Arb.

  Gobrias,_  where is she?

_Gob_.

  Sir.

_Arb_.

  Where is she man?

_Gob._

  Who, Sir?

_Arb_.

  Who, hast thou forgot my Sister?

_Gob_.

  Your Sister, Sir?

_Arb_.

  Your Sister, Sir? some one that hath a wit, answer, where is she?

_Gob_.

  Do you not see her there?

_Arb_.

  Where?

_Gob_.

  There.

_Arb_.

  There, where?

_Mar_.

  S'light, there, are you blind?

_Arb_.

  Which do you mean, that little one?

_Gob_.

  No Sir.

_Arb_.

  No Sir? why, do you mock me? I can see
  No other here, but that petitioning Lady.

_Gob_.

  That's she.

_Arb_.

  Away.

_Gob_.

  Sir, it is she.

_Arb_.

  'Tis false.

_Gob_.

  Is it?

_Arb_.

  As hell, by Heaven, as false as hell,
  My Sister: is she dead? if it be so,
  Speak boldly to me; for I am a man,
  And dare not quarrel with Divinity;
  And do not think to cozen me with this:
  I see you all are mute and stand amaz'd,
  Fearful to answer me; it is too true,
  A decreed instant cuts off ev'ry life,
  For which to mourn, is to repine; she dy'd
  A Virgin, though more innocent than sheep,
  As clear as her own eyes, and blessedness
  Eternal waits upon her where she is:
  I know she could not make a wish to change
  Her state for new, and you shall see me bear
  My crosses like a man; we all must die,
  And she hath taught us how.

_Gob_.

  Do not mistake,
  And vex your self for nothing; for her death
  Is a long life off, I hope: 'Tis she,
  And if my speech deserve not faith, lay death
  Upon me, and my latest words shall force
  A credit from you.

_Arb_.

  Which, good Gobrias? that Lady dost thou mean?

_Gob_.

  That Lady Sir,
  She is your Sister, and she is your Sister
  That loves you so, 'tis she for whom I weep,
  To see you use her thus.

_Arb_.

  It cannot be.

_Tigr_.

  Pish, this is tedious,
  I cannot hold, I must present my self,
  And yet the sight of my _Spaconia_
  Touches me, as a sudden thunder-clap
  Does one that is about to sin.

_Arb_.

  Away,
  No more of this; here I pronounce him Traytor,
  The direct plotter of my death, that names
  Or thinks her for my Sister, 'tis a lie,
  The most malicious of the world, invented
  To mad your King; he that will say so next,
  Let him draw out his sword and sheath it here,
  It is a sin fully as pardonable:
  She is no kin to me, nor shall she be;
  If she were ever, I create her none:
  And which of you can question this? My power
  Is like the Sea, that is to be obey'd,
  And not disputed with: I have decreed her
  As far from having part of blood with me,
  As the nak'd _indians_; come and answer me,
  He that is boldest now; is that my Sister?

_Mar_.

  O this is fine.

_Bes_.

  No marry, she is not, an't please your Majesty,
  I never thought she was, she's nothing like you.

_Arb_.

  No 'tis true, she is not.

_Mar_.

  Thou shou'dst be hang'd.

_Pan_.

  Sir, I will speak but once; by the same power
  You make my blood a stranger unto yours,
  You may command me dead, and so much love
  A stranger may importune, pray you do;
  If this request appear too much to grant,
  Adopt me of some other Family,
  By your unquestion'd word; else I shall live
  Like sinfull issues that are left in streets
  By their regardless Mothers, and no name
  Will be found for me.

_Arb_.

  I will hear no more,
  Why should there be such musick in a voyce,
  And sin for me to hear it? All the world
  May take delight in this, and 'tis damnation
  For me to do so: You are fair and wise
  And vertuous I think, and he is blest
  That is so near you as my brother is;
  But you are nought to me but a disease;
  Continual torment without hope of ease;
  Such an ungodly sickness I have got,
  That he that undertakes my cure, must first
  O'rethrow Divinity, all moral Laws,
  And leave mankind as unconfin'd as beasts,
  Allowing 'em to do all actions
  As freely as they drink when they desire.
  Let me not hear you speak again; yet see
  I shall but lang[u]ish for the want of that,
  The having which, would kill me: No man here
  Offer to speak for her; for I consider
  As much as you can say; I will not toil
  My body and my mind too, rest thou there,
  Here's one within will labour for you both.

_Pan_.

  I would I were past speaking.

_Gob_.

  Fear not Madam,
  The King will alter, 'tis some sudden rage,
  And you shall see it end some other way.

_Pan_.

  Pray heaven it do.

_Tig_.

  Though she to whom I swore, be here, I cannot
  Stifle my passion longer; if my father
  Should rise again disquieted with this,
  And charge me to forbear, yet it would out.
  Madam, a stranger, and a pris'ner begs
  To be bid welcome.

_Pan_.

  You are welcome, Sir,
  I think, but if you be not, 'tis past me
  To make you so: for I am here a stranger,
  Greater than you; we know from whence you come,
  But I appear a lost thing, and by whom
  Is yet uncertain, found here i'th' Court,
  And onely suffer'd to walk up and down,
  As one not worth the owning.

_Spa_.

  O, I fear
  _Tigranes_  will be caught, he looks, me-thinks,
  As he would change his eyes with her; some help
  There is above for me, I hope.

_Tigr_.

  Why do you turn away, and weep so fast,
  And utter things that mis-become your looks,
  Can you want owning?

_Spa_.

  O 'tis certain so.

_Tigr_.

  Acknowledge your self mine.

_Arb_.

  How now?

_Tigr_.

  And then see if you want an owner.

_Arb_.

  They are talking.

_Tigr_.

  Nations shall owne you for their Queen.

_Arb_.

  _Tigranes_, art not thou my prisoner?

_Tigr_.

  I am.

_Arb_.

  And who is this?

_Tigr_.

  She is your Sister.

_Arb_.

  She is so.

_Mar_.

  Is she so again? that's well.

_Arb_.

  And then how dare you offer to change words with her?

_Tigr_.

  Dare do it! Why? you brought me hither Sir,
  To that intent.

_Arb_.

  Perhaps I told you so,
  If I had sworn it, had you so much folly
  To credit it? The least word that she speaks
  Is worth a life; rule your disordered tongue,
  Or I will temper it.

_Spa_.

  Blest be the breath.

_Tigr_.

  Temper my tongue! such incivilities
  As these, no barbarous people ever knew:
  You break the lawes of Nature, and of Nations,
  You talk to me as if I were a prisoner
  For theft: my tongue be temper'd? I must speak
  If thunder check me, and I will.

_Arb_.

  You will?

_Spa_.

  Alas my fortune.

_Tigr_.

  Do not fear his frown, dear Madam, hear me.

_Arb_.

  Fear not my frown? but that 'twere base in me
  To fight with one I know I can o'recome,
  Again thou shouldst be conquer'd by me.

_Mar_.

  He has one ransome with him already; me-thinks
  'T were good to fight double, or quit.

_Arb_.

  Away with him to prison: Now Sir, see
  If my frown be regardless; Why delay you?
  Seise him _Bacurius_, you shall know my word
  Sweeps like a wind, and all it grapples with,
  Are as the chaffe before it.

_Tigr_.

  Touch me not.

_Arb_.

  Help there.

_Tigr_.

  Away.

_1 Gent_.

  It is in vain to struggle.

_2 Gent_.

  You must be forc'd.

_Bac_.

  Sir, you must pardon us, we must obey.

_Arb_.

  Why do you dally there? drag him away
  By any thing.

_Bac_.

  Come Sir.

_Tigr_.

  Justice, thou ought'st to give me strength enough
  To shake all these off; This is tyrannie,
  _Arbaces_, sutler than the burning Bulls,
  Or that fam'd _Titans_  bed. Thou mightst as well
  Search i'th' deep of Winter through the snow
  For half starv'd people, to bring home with thee,
  To shew 'em fire, and send 'em back again,
  As use me thus.

_Arb_.

  Let him be close, _Bacurius_.

                            [_Exeunt_  Tigr. _And_  Bac.

_Spa_.

  I ne're rejoyc'd at any ill to him,
  But this imprisonment: what shall become
  Of me forsaken?

_Gob_.

  You will not let your Sister
  Depart thus discontented from you, Sir?

_Arb_.

  By no means _Gobrias_, I have done her wrong,
  And made my self believe much of my self,
  That is not in me: You did kneel to me,
  Whilest I stood stubborn and regardless by,
  And like a god incensed, gave no ear
  To all your prayers: behold, I kneel to you,
  Shew a contempt as large as was my own,
  And I will suffer it, yet at the last forgive me.

_Pan_.

  O you wrong me more in this,
  Than in your rage you did: you mock me now.

_Arb_.

  Never forgive me then, which is the worst
  Can happen to me.

_Pan_.

  If you be in earnest,
  Stand up and give me but a gentle look,
  And two kind words, and I shall be in heaven.

_Arb_.

  Rise you then to hear; I acknowledge thee
  My hope, the only jewel of my life,
  The best of Sisters, dearer than my breath,
  A happiness as high as I could think;
  And when my actions call thee otherwise,
  Perdition light upon me.

_Pan_.

  This is better
  Than if you had not frown'd, it comes to me,
  Like mercie at the block, and when I leave
  To serve you with my life, your curse be with me.

_Arb_.

  Then thus I do salute thee, and again,
  To make this knot the stronger, Paradise
  Is there: It may be you are yet in doubt,
  This third kiss blots it out, I wade in sin,
  And foolishly intice my self along;
  Take her away, see her a prisoner
  In her own chamber closely, _Gobrias_.

_Pan_.

  Alas Sir, why?

_Arb_.

  I must not stay the answer, doe it.

_Gob_.

  Good Sir.

_Arb_.

  No more, doe it I say.

_Mard_.

  This is better and better.

_Pan_.

  Yet hear me speak.

_Arb_.

  I will not hear you speak,
  Away with her, let no man think to speak
  For such a creature; for she is a witch,
  A prisoner, and a Traitor.

_Gob_.

  Madam, this office grieves me.

_Pan_.

  Nay, 'tis well the king is pleased with it.

_Arb_.

  _Bessus_, go you along too with her; I will prove
  All this that I have said, if I may live
  So long; but I am desperately sick,
  For she has given me poison in a kiss;
  She had't betwixt her lips, and with her eyes
  She witches people: go without a word.

               [_Exeunt_  Gob. Pan. Bes. _And_  Spaconia.

  Why should you that have made me stand in war
  Like fate it self, cutting what threds I pleas'd,
  Decree such an unworthy end of me,
  And all my glories? What am I, alas,
  That you oppose me? if my secret thoughts
  Have ever harbour'd swellings against you,
  They could not hurt you, and it is in you
  To give me sorrow, that will render me
  Apt to receive your mercy; rather so,
  Let it be rather so, than punish me
  With such unmanly sins: Incest is in me
  Dwelling already, and it must be holy
  That pulls it thence, where art _Mardonius_?

_Mar_.

  Here Sir.

_Arb_.

  I pray thee bear me, if thou canst,
  Am I not grown a strange weight?

_Mar_.

   As you were.

_Arb_.

  No heavier?

_Mar_.

  No Sir.

_Arb_.

  Why, my legs
  Refuse to bear my body; O _Mardonius_,
  Thou hast in field beheld me, when thou knowst
  I could have gone, though I could never run.

_Mar_.

  And so I shall again.

_Arb_.

  O no, 'tis past.

_Mar_.

  Pray you go rest your self.

_Arb_.

  Wilt thou hereafter when they talk of me,
  As thou shalt hear nothing but infamy,
  Remember some of those things?

_Mar_.

  Yes I will.

_Arb_.

  I pray thee do: for thou shalt never see me so again.

                                                  [_Exeunt_.

_Enter Bessus alone_.

_Bes_.

  They talk of fame, I have gotten it in the wars; and will afford
  any man a reasonable penny-worth: some will say, they could be
  content to have it, but that it is to be atchiev'd with danger;
  but my opinion is otherwise: for if I might stand still in
  Cannon-proof, and have fame fall upon me, I would refuse it: my
  reputation came principally by thinking to run away, which no
  body knows but _Mardonius_, and I think he conceals it to anger
  me. Before I went to the warrs, I came to the Town a young
  fellow, without means or parts to deserve friends; and my empty
  guts perswaded me to lie, and abuse people for my meat, which I
  did, and they beat me: then would I fast two days, till my
  hunger cri'd out on me, rail still, then me-thought I had a
  monstrous stomach to abuse 'em again, and did it. I, this state I
  continu'd till they hung me up by th' heels, and beat me wi'
  hasle sticks, as if they would have baked me, and have cousen'd
  some body wi'me for Venison: After this I rail'd, and eat
  quietly: for the whole Kingdom took notice of me for a baffl'd
  whipt fellow, and what I said was remembred in mirth but never in
  anger, of which I was glad; I would it were at that pass again.
  After this, heaven calls an Aunt of mine, that left two hundred
  pound in a cousins hand for me, who taking me to be a gallant
  young spirit, raised a company for me with the money and sent me
  into _Armenia_  with 'em: Away I would have run from them, but
  that I could get no company, and alone I durst not run. I was
  never at battail but once, and there I was running, but
  _Mardonius_  cudgel'd me; yet I got loose at last, but was so
  fraid, that I saw no more than my shoulders doe, but fled with my
  whole company amongst my Enemies, and overthrew 'em: Now the
  report of my valour is come over before me, and they say I was a
  raw young fellow, but now I am improv'd, a Plague on their
  eloquence, 't will cost me many a beating; And _Mardonius_  might
  help this too, if he would; for now they think to get honour on
  me, and all the men I have abus'd call me freshly worthily, as
  they call it by the way of challenge.

_Enter a Gent_.

_3 Gent_.

  Good morrow, Captain _Bessus_.

_Bes_.

  Good morrow Sir.

_3 Gent_.

  I come to speak with you.

_Bes_.

  You're very welcome.

_3 Gent_.

  From one that holds himself wrong'd by you some
  three years since: your worth he says is fam'd, and he doth
  nothing doubt but you will do him right, as beseems a souldier.

_Bes_.

  A pox on 'em, so they cry all.

_3 Gent_.

  And a slight note I have about me for you, for the delivery of
  which you must excuse me; it is an office that friendship calls
  upon me to do, and no way offensive to you; since I desire but
  right on both sides.

_Bes_.

  'Tis a challenge Sir, is it not?

_3 Gent_.

  'Tis an inviting to the field.

_Bes_.

  An inviting? O Sir your Mercy, what a Complement he delivers it
  with? he might as agreeable to my nature present me poison with
  such a speech: um um um reputation, um um um call you to account,
  um um um forc'd to this, um um um with my Sword, um um um like a
  Gentleman, um um um dear to me, um um um satisfaction: 'Tis very
  well Sir, I do accept it, but he must await an answer this
  thirteen weeks.

_3 Gent_.

  Why Sir, he would be glad to wipe off his stain as soon as he
  could.

_Bes_.

  Sir upon my credit I am already ingag'd to two hundred, and
  twelve, all which must have their stains wip'd off, if that be
  the word, before him.

_3 Gent_.

  Sir, if you be truly ingag'd but to one, he shall stay a
  competent time.

_Bes_.

  Upon my faith Sir, to two hundred and twelve, and I have a spent
  body, too much bruis'd in battel, so that I cannot fight, I must
  be plain, above three combats a day: All the kindness I can shew
  him, is to set him resolvedly in my rowle, the two hundred and
  thirteenth man, which is something, for I tell you, I think there
  will be more after him, than before him, I think so; pray you
  commend me to him, and tell him this.

_3 Gent_.

  I will Sir, good morrow to you.

                                             [_Exit 3 Gent_.

_Bes_.

  Good morrow good Sir. Certainly my safest way were to print my
  self a coward, with a discovery how I came by my credit, and clap
  it upon every post; I have received above thirty challenges
  within this two hours, marry all but the first I put off with
  ingagement, and by good fortune, the first is no madder of
  fighting than I, so that that's referred, the place where it must
  be ended, is four days journey off, and our arbitratours are
  these: He has chosen a Gentleman in travel, and I have a special
  friend with a quartain ague, like to hold him this five years,
  for mine: and when his man comes home, we are to expect my
  friends health: If they would finde me challenges thus thick, as
  long as I liv'd, I would have no other living; I can make seven
  shillings a day o'th' paper to the Grocers: yet I learn nothing
  by all these but a little skill in comparing of stiles. I do
  finde evidently, that there is some one Scrivener in this Town,
  that has a great hand in writing of Challenges, for they are all
  of a cut, and six of 'em in a hand; and they all end, my
  reputation is dear to me, and I must require satisfaction: Who's
  there? more paper I hope, no, 'tis my Lord _Bacurius_, I fear all
  is not well betwixt us.

_Enter_  Bacurius.

_Bac_.

  Now Captain _Bessus_, I come about a frivolous matter, caus'd by
  as idle a report: you know you were a coward.

_Bes_.

  Very right.

_Bac_.

  And wronged me.

_Bes_.

  True my Lord.

_Bac_.

  But now people will call you valiant, desertlesly I think, yet
  for their satisfaction, I will have you fight with me.

_Bes_.

  O my good Lord, my deep Engagements.

_Bac_.

  Tell not me of your Engagements, Captain _Bessus_, it is not to
  be put off with an excuse: for my own part, I am none of the
  multitude that believe your conversion from Coward.

_Bes_.

  My Lord, I seek not Quarrels, and this belongs not to me, I am
  not to maintain it.

_Bac_.

  Who then pray?

_Bes_.

  _Bessus_  the Coward wrong'd you.

_Bac_.

  Right.

_Bes_.

  And shall _Bessus_  the Valiant, maintain what _Bessus_  the Coward
  did?

_Bac_.

  I pray thee leave these cheating tricks, I swear thou shalt fight
  with me, or thou shall be beaten extreamly, and kick'd.

_Bes_.

  Since you provoke me thus far, my Lord, I will fight with you,
  and by my Sword it shall cost me twenty pound, but I will have my
  Leg well a week sooner purposely.

_Bac_.

  Your Leg? Why, what ailes your Leg? i'le do a cure on you, stand
  up.

_Bes_.

  My Lord, this is not Noble in you.

_Bac_.

  What dost thou with such a phrase in thy mouth? I will kick thee
  out of all good words before I leave thee.

_Bes_.

  My Lord, I take this as a punishment for the offence I did when I
  was a Coward.

_Bac_.

  When thou wert? Confess thy self a Coward still, or by this
  light, I'le beat thee into Spunge.

_Bes_.

  Why I am one.

_Bac_.

  Are you so Sir? And why do you wear a Sword then?
  Come unbuckle.

_Bes_.

  My Lord.

_Bac_.

  Unbuckle I say, and give it me, or as I live, thy head will ake
  extreamly.

_Bes_.

  It is a pretty Hilt, and if your Lordship take an affection to
  it, with all my heart I present it to you for a New-years-gift.

_Bac_.

  I thank you very heartily, sweet Captain, farewel.

_Bes_.

  One word more, I beseech your Lordship to render me my knife
  again.

_Bac_.

  Marry by all means Captain; cherish your self with it, and eat
  hard, good Captain; we cannot tell whether we shall have any more
  such: Adue dear Captain.

                                                [_Exit_  Bac.

_Bes_.

  I will make better use of this, than of my Sword: A base spirit
  has this vantage of a brave one, it keeps alwayes at a stay,
  nothing brings it down, not beating. I remember I promis'd the
  King in a great Audience, that I would make my back-biters eat my
  sword to a knife; how to get another sword I know not, nor know
  any means left for me to maintain my credit, but impudence:
  therefore I will out-swear him and all his followers, that this
  is all that's left uneaten of my sword.

                                             [_Exit_  Bessus.

_Enter_  Mardonius.

_Mar_.

  I'le move the King, he is most strangely alter'd; I guess the
  cause I fear too right, Heaven has some secret end in't, and 'tis
  a scourge no question justly laid upon him: he has followed me
  through twenty Rooms; and ever when I stay to wait his command,
  he blushes like a Girl, and looks upon me, as if modesty kept in
  his business: so turns away from me, but if I go on, he follows
  me again.

_Enter_  Arbaces.

  See, here he is. I do not use this, yet I know not how, I cannot
  chuse but weep to see him; his very Enemies I think, whose wounds
  have bred his fame, if they should see him now, would find tears
  i'their eyes.

_Arb_.

  I cannot utter it, why should I keep
  A breast to harbour thoughts? I dare not speak.
  Darkness is in my bosom, and there lie
  A thousand thoughts that cannot brook the light:
  How wilt thou vex 'em when this deed is done,
  Conscience, that art afraid to let me name it?

_Mar_.

  How do you Sir?

_Arb_.

  Why very well _Mardonius_, how dost thou do?

_Mar_.

  Better than you I fear.

_Arb_.

  I hope thou art; for to be plain with thee,
  Thou art in Hell else, secret scorching flames
  That far transcend earthly material fires
  Are crept into me, and there is no cure.
  Is it not strange _Mardonius_, there's no cure?

_Mar_.

  Sir, either I mistake, or there is something hid
  That you would utter to me.

_Arb_.

  So there is, but yet I cannot do it.

_Mar_.

  Out with it Sir, if it be dangerous, I will not shrink to do you
  service, I shall not esteem my life a weightier matter than
  indeed it is, I know it is subject to more chances than it has
  hours, and I were better lose it in my Kings cause, than with an
  ague, or a fall, or sleeping, to a Thief; as all these are
  probable enough: let me but know what I shall do for you.

_Arb_.

  It will not out: were you with _Gobrias_,
  And bad him give my Sister all content
  The place affords, and give her leave to send
  And speak to whom she please?

_Mar_.

  Yes Sir, I was.

_Arb_.

  And did you to _Bacurius_  say as much
  About _Tigranes_?

_Mar_.

  Yes.

_Arb_.

  That's all my business.

_Mar_.

  O say not so,
  You had an answer of this before;
  Besides I think this business might
  Be utter'd more carelesly.

_Arb_.

  Come thou shalt have it out, I do beseech thee
  By all the love thou hast profest to me,
  To see my Sister from me.

_Mar_.

  Well, and what?

_Arb_.

  That's all.

_Mar_.

  That's strange, I shall say nothing to her?

_Arb_.

  Not a word;
  But if thou lovest me, find some subtil way
  To make her understand by signs.

_Mar_.

  But what shall I make her understand?

_Arb_.

  O _Mardonius_, for that I must be pardon'd.

_Mar_.

  You may, but I can only see her then.

_Arb_.

  'Tis true;
  Bear her this Ring then, and
  One more advice, thou shall speak to her:
  Tell her I do love My kindred all: wilt thou?

_Mar_.

  Is there no more?

_Arb_.

  O yes and her the best;
  Better than any Brother loves his Sister: That's all.

_Mar_.

  Methinks this need not have been delivered with such a caution;
  I'le do it.

_Arb_.

  There is more yet,
  Wilt thou be faith[f]ul to me?

_Mar_.

  Sir, if I take upon me to deliver it, after I hear it, I'le pass
  through fire to do it.

_Arb_.

  I love her better than a Brother ought;
  Dost thou conceive me?

_Mar_.

  I hope you do not Sir.

_Arb_.

  No, thou art dull, kneel down before her,
  And ne'r rise again, till she will love me.

_Mar_.

  Why, I think she does.

_Arb_.

  But better than she does, another way;
  As wives love Husbands.

_Mar_.

  Why, I think there are few Wives that love their
  Husbands better than she does you.

_Arb_.

  Thou wilt not understand me: is it fit
  This should be uttered plainly? take it then
  Naked as it is: I would desire her love
  Lasciviously, lewdly, incestuously,
  To do a sin that needs must damn us both,
  And thee too: dost thou understand me now?

_Mar_.

  Yes, there's your Ring again; what have I done
  Dishonestly in my whole life, name it,
  That you should put so base a business to me?

_Arb_.

  Didst thou not tell me thou wouldst do it?

_Mar_.

  Yes; if I undertook it, but if all
  My hairs were lives, I would not be engag'd
  In such a case to save my last life.

_Arb_.

  O guilt! ha how poor and weak a thing art thou!
  This man that is my servant, whom my breath
  Might blow upon the world, might beat me here
  Having this cause, whil'st I prest down with sin
  Could not resist him: hear _Mardonius_,
  It was a motion mis-beseeming man,
  And I am sorry for it.

_Mar_.

  Heaven grant you may be so: you must understand, nothing that you
  can utter, can remove my love and service from my Prince. But
  otherwise, I think I shall not love you more. For you are sinful,
  and if you do this crime, you ought to have no Laws. For after
  this, it will be great injustice in you to punish any offender
  for any crime. For my self I find my heart too big: I feel I have
  not patience to look on whilst you run these forbidden courses.
  Means I have none but your favour, and I am rather glad that I
  shall lose 'em both together, than keep 'em with such conditions;
  I shall find a dwelling amongst some people, where though our
  Garments perhaps be courser, we shall be richer far within, and
  harbour no such vices in 'em: the Gods preserve you, and mend.

_Arb_.

  _Mardonius_, stay _Mardonius_, for though
  My present state requires nothing but knaves
  To be about me, such as are prepar'd
  For every wicked act, yet who does know
  But that my loathed Fate may turn about,
  And I have use for honest men again?
  I hope I may, I prethee leave me not.

_Enter_  Bessus.

_Bes_.

  Where is the King?

_Mar_.

  There.

_Bes_.

  An't please your Majesty, there's the knife.

_Arb_.

  What knife?

_Bes_.

   The Sword is eaten.

_Mar_.

  Away you fool, the King is serious,
  And cannot now admit your vanities.

_Bes_.

  Vanities! I'me no honest man, if my enemies have not brought it
  to this, what, do you think I lie?

_Arb_.

  No, no, 'tis well _Bessus_, 'tis very well I'm glad on't.

_Mar_.

  If your enemies brought it to this, your enemies are Cutlers,
  come leave the King.

_Bes_.

   Why, may not valour approach him?

_Mar_.

  Yes, but he has affairs, depart, or I shall be something
  unmannerly with you.

_Arb_.

  No, let him stay _Mardonius_, let him stay,
  I have occasion with him very weighty,
  And I can spare you now.

_Mar_.

  Sir?

_Arb_.

  Why I can spare you now.

_Bes_.

  _Mardonius_  give way to these State affairs.

_Mar_.

  Indeed you are fitter for this present purpose.

                                                [_Exit_  Mar.

_Arb_.

  _Bessus_, I should imploy thee, wilt thou do't?

_Bes_.

  Do't for you? by this Air I will do any thing without exception,
  be it a good, bad, or indifferent thing.

_Arb_.

  Do not swear.

_Bes_.

  By this light but I will, any thing whatsoever.

_Arb_.

  But I shall name the thing,
  Thy Conscience will not suffer thee to do.

_Bes_.

  I would fain hear that thing.

_Arb_.

  Why I would have thee get my Sister for me?
  Thou understandst me, in a wicked manner.

_Bes_.

  O you would have a bout with her?
  I'le do't, I'le do't, I'faith.

_Arb_.

  Wilt thou, do'st thou make no more on't? Bes. More? no, why is
  there any thing else? if there be, it shall be done too.

_Arb_.

  Hast thou no greater sense of such a sin?
  Thou art too wicked for my company,
  Though I have hell within me, thou may'st yet
  Corrupt me further: pray thee answer me,
  How do I shew to thee after this motion?

_Bes_.

  Why your Majesty looks as well in my opinion, as ever you did
  since you were born.

_Arb_.

  But thou appear'st to me after thy grant,
  The ugliest, loathed detestable thing
  That I ever met with. Thou hast eyes
  Like the flames of _Sulphur_, which me thinks do dart
  Infection on me, and thou hast a mouth
  Enough to take me in where there do stand
  Four rows of Iron Teeth.

_Bes_.

  I feel no such thing, but 'tis no matter how I look, Pie do my
  business as well as they that look better, and when this is
  dispatch'd, if you have a mind to your Mother, tell me, and you
  shall see I'le set it hard.

_Arb_.

  My Mother! Heaven forgive me to hear this,
  I am inspir'd with horrour: now I hate thee
  Worse than my sin, which if I could come by
  Should suffer death Eternal ne're to rise
  In any breast again. Know I will die
  Languishing mad, as I resolve, I shall,
  E're I will deal by such an instrument:
  Thou art too sinful to imploy in this;
  Out of the World, away.

_Bes_.

  What do you mean, Sir?

_Arb_.

  Hung round with Curses, take thy fearful flight
  Into the Desarts, where 'mongst all the Monsters
  If thou find'st one so beastly as thy self,
  Thou shalt be held as innocent.

_Bes_.

  Good Sir.

_Arb_.

  If there were no such instruments as thou,
  We Kings could never act such wicked deeds:
  Seek out a man that mocks Divinity,
  That breaks each precept both of God and man,
  And natures too, and does it without lust,
  Meerly because it is a law, and good,
  And live with him: for him thou canst not spoil.
  Away I say, I will not do this sin.

                                             [_Exit_  Bessus.

  I'le press it here, till it do break my breast,
  It heaves to get out, but thou art a sin,
  And spight of torture I will keep thee in.




_ACTUS QUARTUS_.


_Enter_  Gobrias, Panthea, _and_  Spaconia.

_Gob_.

  Have you written Madam?

_Pan_.

  Yes, good _Gobrias_.

_Gob_.

  And with a kindness, and such winning words
  As may provoke him, at one instant feel
  His double fault, your wrong, and his own rashness?

_Pan_.

  I have sent words enough, if words may win him
  From his displeasure; and such words I hope,
  As shall gain much upon his goodness, _Gobrias_.
  Yet fearing they are many, and a womans,
  A poor belief may follow, I have woven
  As many truths within 'em to speak for me,
  That if he be but gracious, and receive 'em--

_Gob_.

  Good Lady be not fearful, though he should not
  Give you your present end in this, believe it,
  You shall feel, if your vertue can induce you
  To labour on't, this tempest which I know,
  Is but a poor proof 'gainst your patience:
  All those contents, your spirit will arrive at,
  Newer and sweeter to you; your Royal brother,
  When he shall once collect himself, and see
  How far he has been asunder from himself;
  What a meer stranger to his golden temper:
  Must from those roots of vertue, never dying,
  Though somewhat stopt with humour, shoot again
  Into a thousand glories, bearing his fair branches
  High as our hopes can look at, straight as justice,
  Loaden with ripe contents; he loves you dearly,
  I know it, and I hope I need not farther
  Win you to understand it.

_Pan_.

  I believe it.
  But howsoever, I am sure I love him dearly:
  So dearly, that if any thing I write
  For my enlarging should beget his anger,
  Heaven be a witness with me and my faith,
  I had rather live intomb'd here.

_Gob_.

   You shall not feel a worse stroke than your grief,
  I am sorry 'tis so sharp, I kiss your hand,
  And this night will deliver this true story,
  With this hand to your Brother.

_ Pan._

  Peace go with you, you are a good man.

                                                [_Exit_  Gob.

  My _Spaconia_, why are you ever sad thus?

_Spa_.

  O dear Lady.

_Pan_.

  Prethee discover not a way to sadness,
  Nearer than I have in me, our two sorrows
  Work like two eager Hawks, who shall get highest;
  How shall I lessen thine? for mine I fear
  Is easier known than cur'd.

_Spa_.

  Heaven comfort both,
  And give you happy ends, however I
  Fall in my stubborn fortunes.

_Pan_.

  This but teaches
  How to be more familiar with our sorrows,
  That are too much our masters: good _Spaconia_
  How shall I do you service?

_Spa_.

  Noblest Lady,
  You make me more a slave still to your goodness,
  And only live to purchase thanks to pay you,
  For that is all the business of my life: now
  I will be bold, since you will have it so,
  To ask a noble favour of you.

_Pan_.

  Speak it, 'tis yours, for from so sweet a vertue,
  No ill demand has issue.

_Spa_.

  Then ever vertuous, let me beg your will
  In helping me to see the Prince _Tigranes_,
  With whom I am equal prisoner, if not more.

_Pan_.

  Reserve me to a greater end _Spaconia_;
  _Bacurius_  cannot want so much good manners
  As to deny your gentle visitation,
  Though you came only with your own command.

_Spa_.

  I know they will deny me gracious Madam,
  Being a stranger, and so little fam'd,
  So utter empty of those excellencies
  That tame Authority; but in you sweet Lady,
  All these are natural; beside, a power
  Deriv'd immediate from your Royal brother,
  Whose least word in you may command the Kingdom.

_Pan_.

  More than my word _Spaconia_, you shall carry,
  For fear it fail you.

_Spa_.

  Dare you trust a Token?
  Madam I fear I am grown too bold a begger.

_Pan_.

  You are a pretty one, and trust me Lady
  It joyes me, I shall do a good to you,
  Though to my self I never shall be happy:
  Here, take this Ring, and from me as a Token
  Deliver it; I think they will not stay you:
  So all your own desires go with you Lady.

_Spa_.

  And sweet peace to your Grace.

_Pan_.

  Pray Heaven I find it.

                                                  [_Exeunt_.

_Enter_  Tigranes, _in prison_.

_Tigr_.

  Fool that I am, I have undone my self,
  And with my own hand turn'd my fortune round,
  That was a fair one: I have childishly
  Plaid with my hope so long, till I have broke it,
  And now too late I mourn for't; O _Spaconia_!
  Thou hast found an even way to thy revenge now,
  Why didst thou follow me like a faint shadow,
  To wither my desires? But wretched fool,
  Why did I plant thee 'twixt the Sun and me,
  To make me freeze thus? Why did I prefer her
  To the fair Princess? O thou fool, thou fool,
  Thou family of fools, live like a slave still,
  And in thee bear thine own hell and thy torment,
  Thou hast deserv'd: Couldst thou find no Lady
  But she that has thy hopes to put her to,
  And hazard all thy peace? None to abuse,
  But she that lov'd thee ever? poor _Spaconia_,
  And so much lov'd thee, that in honesty
  And honour thou art bound to meet her vertues:
  She that forgot the greatness of her grief
  And miseries, that must follow such mad passions,
  Endless and wild as women; she that for thee
  And with thee left her liberty, her name,
  And Country, you have paid me equal, Heavens,
  And sent my own rod to correct me with;
  A woman: for inconstancy I'le suffer,
  Lay it on justice, till my soul melt in me
  For my unmanly, beastly, sudden doting
  Upon a new face: after all my oaths
  Many and strange ones,
  I feel my old fire flame again and burn
  So strong and violent, that should I see her
  Again, the grief and that would kill me.

_Enter_  Bacurius _And_  Spaconia.

_Bac_.

  Lady, your token I acknowledge, you may pass;
  There is the King.

_Spa_.

  I thank your Lordship for it.

                                                [_Exit_  Bac.

_Tigr_.

  She comes, she comes, shame hide me ever from her,
  Would I were buried, or so far remov'd
  Light might not find me out, I dare not see her.

_Spa_.

  Nay never hide your self; or were you hid
  Where earth hides all her riches, near her Center;
  My wrongs without more day would light me to you:
  I must speak e're I die; were all your greatness
  Doubled upon you, y'are a perjur'd man,
  And only mighty in your wickedness
  Of wronging women. Thou art false, false Prince;
  I live to see it, poor _Spaconia_  lives
  To tell thee thou art false; and then no more;
  She lives to tell thee thou art more unconstant,
  Than all ill women ever were together.
  Thy faith is firm as raging over-flowes,
  That no bank can command; as lasting
  As boyes gay bubbles, blown i'th' Air and broken:
  The wind is fixt to thee: and sooner shall
  The beaten Mariner with his shrill whistle
  Calm the loud murmur of the troubled main,
  And strike it smooth again; than thy soul fall
  To have peace in love with any: Thou art all
  That all good men must hate; and if thy story
  Shall tell succeeding ages what thou wert,
  O let it spare me in it, lest true lovers
  In pity of my wrong, burn thy black Legend,
  And with their curses, shake thy sleeping ashes.

_Tigr_.

  Oh! oh!

_Spa_.

  The destinies, I hope, have pointed out
  Our ends, that thou maist die for love,
  Though not for me; for this assure thy self,
  The Princess hates thee deadly, and will sooner
  Be won to marry with a Bull, and safer
  Than such a beast as thou art: I have struck,
  I fear, too deep; beshrow me for't; Sir,
  This sorrow works me like a cunning friendship,
  Into the same piece with it; 'tis asham'd,
  Alas, I have been too rugged: Dear my Lord,
  I am sorry I have spoken any thing,
  Indeed I am, that may add more restraint
  To that too much you have: good Sir, be pleas'd
  To think it was a fault of love, not malice;
  And do as I will do, forgive it Prince.
  I do, and can forgive the greatest sins
  To me you can repent of; pray believe.

_Tigr_.

  O my _Spaconia_! O thou vertuous woman!

_Spa_.

  Nay, more, the King Sir.

_Enter_  Arbaces, Bacurius, Mardonius.

_Arb_.

  Have you been carefull of our noble Prisoner,
  That he want nothing fitting for his greatness?

_Bac_.

  I hope his grace will quit me for my care Sir.

_Arb_.

  'Tis well, royal _Tigranes_, health.

_Tigr_.

  More than the strictness of this place can give Sir,
  I offer back again to great _Arbaces_.

_Arb_.

  We thank you worthy Prince, and pray excuse us,
  We have not seen you since your being here,
  I hope your noble usage has been equall
  With your own person: your imprisonment,
  If it be any, I dare say is easie,
  And shall not last t[w]o dayes.

_Tigr_.

  I thank you;
  My usage here has been the same it was,
  Worthy a royal Conqueror. For my restraint,
  It came unkindly, because much unlook'd for;
  But I must bear it.

_Arb_.

  What Lady's that? _Bacurius_?

_Bac_.

  One of the Princess women, Sir.

_Arb_.

  I fear'd it, why comes she hither?

_Bac_.

  To speak with the Prince _Tigranes_.

_Arb_.

  From whom, _Bacurius_?

_Bac_.

  From the Princess, Sir.

_Arb_.

  I knew I had seen her.

_Mar_.

  His fit begins to take him now again,
  'Tis a strange Feaver, and 'twill shake us all anon, I fear,
  Would he were well cur'd of this raging folly:

  Give me the warrs, where men are mad, and may talk what they
  list, and held the bravest fellows; This pelting prating peace is
  good for nothing: drinking's a vertue to't.

_Arb_.

  I see there's truth in no man, nor obedience,
  But for his own ends, why did you let her in?

_Bac_.

  It was your own command to barr none from him,
  Besides, the Princess sent her ring Sir, for my warrant.

_Arb_.

  A token to _Tigranes_, did she not?
  Sir tell truth.

_Bac_.

  I do not use to lie Sir,
  'Tis no way I eat or live by, and I think,
  This is no token Sir.

_Mar_.

  This combat has undone him: if he had been well beaten, he had
  been temperate; I shall never see him handsome again, till he
  have a Horse-mans staffe yok'd thorow his shoulders, or an arm
  broken with a bullet.

_Arb_.

  I am trifled with.

_Bac_.

  Sir?

_Arb_.

  I know it, as I know thee to be false.

_Mar_.

  Now the clap comes.

_Bac_.

  You never knew me so, Sir I dare speak it,
  And durst a worse man tell me, though my better--

_Mar_.

  'Tis well said, by my soul.

_Arb_.

  Sirra, you answer as you had no life.

_Bac_.

  That I fear Sir to lose nobly.

_Arb_.

  I say Sir, once again.

_Bac_.

  You may say what yo[u] please, Sir,
  Would I might do so.

_Arb_.

  I will, Sir, and say openly, this woman carries letters,
  By my life I know she carries letters, this woman does it.

_Mar_.

  Would _Bessus_  were here to take her aside and search her, He
  would quickly tell you what she carried Sir.

_Arb_.

  I have found it out, this woman carries letters.

_Mar_.

  If this hold, 'twill be an ill world for Bawdes, Chamber-maids
  and Post-boyes, I thank heaven I have none I but his letters
  patents, things of his own enditing.

_Arb_.

  Prince, this cunning cannot do't.

_Tigr_.

  Doe, What Sir? I reach you not.

_Arb_.

  It shall not serve your turn, Prince.

_Tigr_.

  Serve my turn Sir?

_Arb_.

  I Sir, it shall not serve your turn.

_Tigr_.

  Be plainer, good Sir.

_Arb_.

  This woman shall carry no more letters back to your
  Love _Panthea_, by Heaven she shall not, I say she shall not.

_Mar_.

  This would make a Saint swear like a souldier.

_Tigr_.

  This beats me more, King, than the blowes you gave me.

_Arb_.

  Take'em away both, and together let them prisoners be, strictly
  and closely kept, or Sirra, your life shall answer it, and let
  no body speak with'em hereafter.

_Tigr_.

  Well, I am subject to you,
  And must indure these passions:
  This is the imprisonment I have look'd for always.
  And the dearer place I would choose.

                                   [_Exeunt_  Tigr. Spa. Bac.

_Mar_.

  Sir, you have done well now.

_Arb_.

  Dare you reprove it?

_Mar_.

  No.

_Arb_.

  You must be crossing me.

_Mar_.

  I have no letters Sir to anger you,
  But a dry sonnet of my Corporals
  To an old Suttlers wife, and that I'll burn, Sir.
  'Tis like to prove a fine age for the Ignorant.

_Arb_.

  How darst thou so often forfeit thy life?
  Thou know'st 'tis in my power to take it.

_Mar_.

  Yes, and I know you wo'not, or if you doe, you'll miss it
  quickly.

_Arb_.

  Why?

_Mar_.

  Who shall tell you of these childish follies
  When I am dead? who shall put to his power
  To draw those vertues out of a flood of humors,
  When they are drown'd, and make'em shine again?
  No, cut my head off:
  Then you may talk, and be believed, and grow worse,
  And have your too self-glorious temper rot
  Into a deep sleep, and the Kingdom with you,
  Till forraign swords be in your throats, and slaughter
  Be every where about you like your flatterers.
  Do, kill me.

_Arb_.

  Prethee be tamer, good _Mardonius,_
  Thou know'st I love thee, nay I honour thee,
  Believe it good old Souldier, I am thine;
  But I am rack'd clean from my self, bear with me,
  Woot thou bear with me my _Mardonius?_

_Enter_  Gobrias.

_Mar_.

  There comes a good man, love him too, he's temperate,
  You may live to have need of such a vertue,
  Rage is not still in fashion.

_Arb_.

  Welcome good _Gobrias_.

_Gob_.

  My service and this letter to your Grace.

_Arb_.

  From whom?

_Gob_.

  From the rich Mine of vertue and beauty,
  Your mournfull Sister.

_Arb_.

She is in prison, _Gobrias,_  is she not?

_Gob_.

  She is Sir, till your pleasure to enlarge her,
  Which on my knees I beg. Oh 'tis not fit,
  That all the sweetness of the world in one,
  The youth and vertue that would tame wild Tygers,
  And wilder people, that have known no manners,
  Should live thus cloistred up; for your loves sake,
  If there be any in that noble heart,
  To her a wretched Lady, and forlorn,
  Or for her love to you, which is as much
  As nature and obedience ever gave,
  Have pity on her beauties.

_Arb_.

  Pray thee stand up; 'Tis true, she is too fair,
  And all these commendations but her own,
  Would thou had'st never so commended her,
  Or I nere liv'd to have heard it _Gobrias;_
  If thou but know'st the wrong her beautie does her,
  Thou wouldst in pity of her be a lyar,
  Thy ignorance has drawn me wretched man,
  Whither my self nor thou canst well tell: O my fate!
  I think she loves me, but I fear another
  Is deeper in her heart: How thinkst thou _Gobrias_?

_Gob_.

  I do beseech your Grace believe it not,
  For let me perish if it be not false. Good Sir, read her Letter.

_Mar_.

  This Love, or what a devil it is I know not, begets more mischief
  than a Wake. I had rather be well beaten, starv'd, or lowsie,
  than live within the Air on't. He that had seen this brave fellow
  Charge through a grove of Pikes but t'other day, and look upon
  him now, will ne'r believe his eyes again: if he continue thus
  but two days more, a Taylor may beat him with one hand tied
  behind him.

_Arb_.

  Alas, she would be at liberty.
  And there be a thousand reasons _Gobrias,_
  Thousands that will deny't:
  Which if she knew, she would contentedly
  Be where she is: and bless her vertues for it,
  And me, though she were closer, she would, _Gobrias,_
  Good man indeed she would.

_Gob_.

  Then good Sir, for her satisfaction,
  Send for her and with reason make her know
  Why she must live thus from you.

_Arb_.

  I will; go bring her to me.

                                              [_Exeunt all_.

_Enter_  Bessus, _And two Sword-men, and a Boy_.

_Bes_.

  Y'are very welcome both; some stools boy,
  And reach a Table; Gentlemen o'th' Sword,
  Pray sit without more complement; be gone child.
  I have been curious in the searching of you,
  Because I understand you wise and valiant persons.

_1_.

  We understand our selves Sir.

_Bes_.

  Nay Gentlemen, and dear friends o'th' Sword,
  No complement I pray, but to the cause
  I hang upon, which in few, is my honour.

_2_.

  You cannot hang too much Sir, for your honour,
  But to your cause.

_Bes_.

  Be wise, and speak truth, my first doubt is,
  My beating by my Prince.

_1_.

  Stay there a little Sir, do you doubt a beating?
  Or have you had a beating by your Prince?

_Bes_.

  Gentlemen o'th' Sword, my Prince has beaten me.

_2_.

  Brother, what think you of this case?

_1_.

  If he has beaten him, the case is clear.

_2_.

  If he have beaten him, I grant the case;
  But how? we cannot be too subtil in this business,
  I say, but how?

_Bes_.

  Even with his Royal hand.

_1_.

  Was it a blow of love, or indignation?

_Bes_.

  'Twas twenty blows of indignation, Gentlemen,
  Besides two blows o'th face.

_2_.

  Those blows o'th' face have made a new cause on't,
  The rest were but an horrible rudeness.

_1_.

  Two blows o'th' face, and given by a worse man, I must confess,
  as the Sword-men say, had turn'd the business: Mark me brother,
  by a worse man; but being by his Prince, had they been ten, and
  those ten drawn teeth, besides the hazard of his nose for ever;
  all this had been but favours: this is my flat opinion, which
  I'le die in.

_2_.

  The King may do much Captain, believe it; for had he crackt your
  Scull through, like a bottle, or broke a Rib or two with tossing
  of you, yet you had lost no honour: This is strange you may
  imagine, but this is truth now Captain.

_Bes_.

  I will be glad to embrace it Gentlemen;
  But how far may he strike me?

_1_.

  There is another: a new cause rising from the time and distance,
  in which I will deliver my opinion: he may strike, beat, or cause
  to be beaten: for these are natural to man: your Prince, I say,
  may beat you, so far forth as his dominion reacheth, that's for
  the distance; the time, ten miles a day, I take it.

_2_.

  Brother, you err, 'tis fifteen miles a day,
  His stage is ten, his beatings are fifteen.

_Bes_.

  'Tis the longest, but we subjects must--

_1_.

  Be subject to it; you are wise and vertuous.

_Bes_.

  Obedience ever makes that noble use on't,
  To which I dedicate my beaten body;
  I must trouble you a little further, Gentlemen o'th' Sword.

_2_.

  No trouble at all to us Sir, if we may
  Profit your understanding, we are bound
  By vertue of our calling to utter our opinions,
  Shortly, and discreetly.

_Bes_.

  My sorest business is, I have been kick'd.

_2_.

  How far Sir?

_Bes_.

  Not to flatter my self in it, all over, my sword forc'd but not
  lost; for discreetly I rendred it to save that imputation.

_1_.

  It shew'd discretion, the best part of valour.

_2_.

  Brother, this is a pretty cause, pray ponder on't;
  Our friend here has been kick'd.

_1_.

  He has so, brother.

_2_.

  Sorely he saies: Now, had he set down here
  Upon the meer kick, 't had been Cowardly.

_1_.

  I think it had been Cowardly indeed.

_2_.

  But our friend has redeem'd it in delivering
  His sword without compulsion; and that man
  That took it of him, I pronounce a weak one,
  And his kicks nullities.
  He should have kick'd him after the delivering
  Which is the confirmation of a Coward.

_1_.

  Brother, I take it, you mistake the question;
  For, say that I were kick'd.

_2_.

  I must not say so;
  Nor I must not hear it spoke by the tongue of man.
  You kick'd, dear brother! you're merry.

_1_.

  But put the case I were kick'd?

_2_.

  Let them put it that are things weary of their lives, and know
  not honour; put the case you were kick'd?

_1_.

  I do not say I was kickt.

_2_.

  Nor no silly creature that wears his head without a Case, his
  soul in a Skin-coat: You kickt dear brother?

_Bes_.

  Nay Gentlemen, let us do what we shall do,
  Truly and honest[l]y; good Sirs to the question.

_1_.

  Why then I say, suppose your Boy kick't, Captain?

_2_.

  The Boy may be suppos'd is liable.

_1_.

  A foolish forward zeal Sir, in my friend;
  But to the Boy, suppose the Boy were kickt.

_Bes_.

  I do suppose it.

_1_.

  Has your Boy a sword?

_Bes_.

  Surely no; I pray suppose a sword too.

_1_.

  I do suppose it; you grant your Boy was kick't then.

_2_.

  By no means Captain, let it be supposed still; the word grant,
  makes not for us.

_1_.

  I say this must be granted.

_2_

  This must be granted brother?

_1_.

  I, this must be granted.

_2_.

  Still this must?

_1_.

  I say this must be granted.

_2_.

  I, give me the must again, brother, you palter.

_1_.

  I will not hear you, wasp.

_2_.

  Brother, I say you palter, the must three times together; I wear
  as sharp Steel as another man, and my Fox bites as deep, musted,
  my dear brother. But to the cause again.

_Bes_.

  Nay look you Gentlemen.

_2_.

  In a word, I ha' done.

_1_.

  A tall man but intemperate, 'tis great pity;
  Once more suppose the Boy kick'd.

_2_.

  Forward.

_1_.

  And being thorowly kick'd, laughs at the kicker.

_2_

  So much for us; proceed.

_1_.

  And in this beaten scorn, as I may call it,
  Delivers up his weapon; where lies the error?

_Bes_.

  It lies i'th' beating Sir, I found it four dayes since.

_2_.

  The error, and a sore one as I take it,
  Lies in the thing kicking.

_Bes_.

  I understand that well, 'tis so indeed Sir.

_1_.

  That is according to the man that did it.

_2_.

  There springs a new branch, whose was the foot?

_Bes_.

  A Lords.

_1_.

  The cause is mighty, but had it been two Lords,
  And both had kick'd you, if you laugh, 'tis clear.

_Bes_.

  I did laugh,
  But how will that help me, Gentlemen?

_2_.

  Yes, it shall help you if you laught aloud.

_Bes_.

  As loud as a kick'd man could laugh, I laught Sir.

_1_.

  My reason now, the valiant man is known
  By suffering and contemning; you have
  Enough of both, and you are valiant.

_2_.

  If he be sure he has been kick'd enough:
  For that brave sufferance you speak of brother,
  Consists not in a beating and away,
  But in a cudgell'd body, from eighteen
  To eight and thirty; in a head rebuk'd
  With pots of all size, degrees, stools, and bed-staves,
  This showes a valiant man.

_Bes_.

  Then I am valiant, as valiant as the proudest,
  For these are all familiar things to me;
  Familiar as my sleep, or want of money,
  All my whole body's but one bruise with beating,
  I think I have been cudgell'd with all nations,
  And almost all Religions.

_2_.

  Embrace him brother, this man is valiant,
  I know it by my self, he's valiant.

_1_.

  Captain, thou art a valiant Gentleman,
  To bide upon, a very valiant man.

_Bes_.

  My equall friends o'th'Sword, I must request your hands to this.

_2_.

  'Tis fit it should be.

_Bes_.

  Boy, get me some wine, and pen and Ink within:
  Am I clear, Gentlemen?

_1_.

  Sir, the world has taken notice what we have done,
  Make much of your body, for I'll pawn my steel,
  Men will be coyer of their legs hereafter.

_Bes_.

  I must request you goe along and testife to the Lord _Bacurius_,
  whose foot has struck me, how you find my cause.

_2_.

  We will, and tell that Lord he must be rul'd,
  Or there are those abroad, will rule his Lordship.

                                                  [_Exeunt_.

_Enter_ Arbaces _at one door, and_  Gob. _and_ Panthea _at
another_.

_Gob_.

  Sir, here's the Princess.

_Arb_.

  Leave us then alone,
  For the main cause of her imprisonment
  Must not be heard by any but her self.

                                                [_Exit_  Gob.

  You're welcome Sister, and would to heaven
  I could so bid you by another name:
  If you above love not such sins as these,
  Circle my heart with thoughts as cold as snow
  To quench these rising flames that harbour here.

_ [P]an_.

  Sir, does it please you I should speak?

_Arb_.

  Please me?
  I, more than all the art of musick can,
  Thy speech doth please me, for it ever sounds,
  As thou brought'st joyfull unexpected news;
  And yet it is not fit thou shouldst be heard.
  I pray thee think so.

_Pan_.

   Be it so, I will.
  Am I the first that ever had a wrong
  So far from being fit to have redress,
  That 'twas unfit to hear it? I will back
  To prison, rather than disquiet you,
  And wait till it be fit.

_Arb_.

  No, do not goe;
  For I will hear thee with a serious thought:
  I have collected all that's man about me
  Together strongly, and I am resolv'd
  To hear thee largely, but I do beseech thee,
  Do not come nearer to me, for there is
  Something in that, that will undoe us both.

_Pan_.

  Alas Sir, am I venome?

_Arb_.

  Yes, to me;
  Though of thy self I think thee to be
  In equall degree of heat or cold,
  As nature can make: yet as unsound men
  Convert the sweetest and the nourishing'st meats
  Into diseases; so shall I distemper'd,
  Do thee, I pray thee draw no nearer to me.

_Pan_.

  Sir, this is that I would: I am of late
  Shut from the world, and why it should be thus,
  Is all I wish to know.

_Arb_.

  Why credit me _Panthea_,
  Credit me that am thy brother,
  Thy loving brother, that there is a cause
  Sufficient, yet unfit for thee to know,
  That might undoe thee everlastingly,
  Only to hear, wilt thou but credit this?
  By Heaven 'tis true, believe it if thou canst.

_Pan_.

  Children and fools are ever credulous,
  And I am both, I think, for I believe;
  If you dissemble, be it on your head;
  I'le back unto my prison: yet me-thinks
  I might be kept in some place where you are;
  For in my self, I find I know not what
  To call it, but it is a great desire
  To see you often.

_Arb_.

  Fie, you come in a step, what do you mean?
  Dear sister, do not so: Alas _Panthea_,
  Where I am would you be? Why that's the cause
  You are imprison'd, that you may not be
  Where I am.

_Pan_.

Then I must indure it Sir, Heaven keep you.

_Arb_.

  Nay, you shall hear the case in short _Panthea_,
  And when thou hear'st it, thou wilt blush for me,
  And hang thy head down like a Violet
  Full of the mornings dew: There is a way
  To gain thy freedome, but 'tis such a one
  As puts thee in worse bondage, and I know,
  Thou wouldst encounter fire, and make a proof
  Whether the gods have care of innocence,
  Rather than follow it: Know that I have lost,
  The only difference betwixt man and beast,
  My reason.

_Pan_.

  Heaven forbid.

_Arb_.

  Nay 'tis gone;
  And I am left as far without a bound,
  As the wild Ocean, that obeys the winds;
  Each sodain passion throwes me where it lists,
  And overwhelms all that oppose my will:
  I have beheld thee with a lustfull eye;
  My heart is set on wickedness to act
  Such sins with thee, as I have been afraid
  To think of, if thou dar'st consent to this,
  Which I beseech thee do not, thou maist gain
  Thy liberty, and yield me a content;
  If not, thy dwelling must be dark and close,
  Where I may never see thee; For heaven knows
  That laid this punishment upon my pride,
  Thy sight at some time will enforce my madness
  To make a start e'ne to thy ravishing;
  Now spit upon me, and call all reproaches
  Thou canst devise together, and at once
  Hurle'em against me: for I am a sickness
  As killing as the plague, ready to seize thee.

_Pan_.

  Far be it from me to revile the King:
  But it is true, that I shall rather choose
  To search out death, that else would search out me,
  And in a grave sleep with my innocence,
  Than welcome such a sin: It is my fate,
  To these cross accidents I was ordain'd,
  And must have patience; and but that my eyes
  Have more of woman in 'em than my heart,
  I would not weep: Peace enter you again.

_Arb_.

  Farwell, and good _Panthea_  pray for me,
  Thy prayers are pure, that I may find a death
  However soon before my passions grow
  That they forget what I desire is sin;
  For thither they are tending: if that happen,
  Then I shall force thee tho' thou wert a Virgin
  By vow to Heaven, and shall pull a heap
  Of strange yet uninvented sin upon me.

_Pan_.

  Sir, I will pray for you, yet you shall know
  It is a sullen fate that governs us,
  For I could wish as heartily as you
  I were no sister to you, I should then
  Imbrace your lawfull love, sooner than health.

_Arb_.

  Couldst thou affect me then?

_Pan_.

  So perfectly,
  That as it is, I ne're shall sway my heart,
  To like another.

_Arb_.

  Then I curse my birth,
  Must this be added to my miseries
  That thou art willing too? is there no stop
  To our full happiness, but these meer sounds
  Brother and Sister?

_Pan_.

  There is nothing else,
  But these alas will separate us more
  Than twenty worlds betwixt us.

_Arb_.

  I have liv'd
  To conquer men and now am overthrown
  Only by words Brother and Sister: where
  Have those words dwelling? I will find 'em out,
  And utterly destroy 'em; but they are
  Not to be grasp'd: let 'em be men or beasts,
  And I will cut 'em from the Earth, or Towns,
  And I will raze 'em, and the[n] blow 'em up:
  Let 'em be Seas, and I will drink 'em off,
  And yet have unquencht fire left in my breast:
  Let 'em be any thing but meerly voice.

_Pan_.

  But 'tis not in the power of any force,
  Or policy to conquer them.

_Arb_.

  _Panthea_, What shall we do?
  Shall we stand firmly here, and gaze our eyes out?

_Pan_.

  Would I could do so,
  But I shall weep out mine.

_Arb_.

  Accursed man,
  Thou bought'st thy reason at too dear a rate,
  For thou hast all thy actions bounded in
  With curious rules, when every beast is free:
  What is there that acknowledges a kindred
  But wretched man? Who ever saw the Bull
  Fearfully leave the Heifer that he lik'd
  Because they had one Dam?

_Pan_.

  Sir, I disturb you and my self too;
  'Twere better I were gone.

_Arb_.

  I will not be so foolish as I was,
  Stay, we will love just as becomes our births,
  No otherwise: Brothers and Sisters may
  Walk hand in hand together; so will we,
  Come nearer: is there any hurt in this?

_Pan_.

  I hope not.

_Arb_.

  Faith there is none at all:
  And tell me truly now, is there not one
  You love above me?

_Pan_.

  No by Heaven.

_Arb_.

  Why yet you sent unto _Tigranes_, Sister.

_Pan_.

  True, but for another: for the truth--

_Arb_.

  No more,
  I'le credit thee, thou canst not lie,
  Thou art all truth.

_Pan_.

  But is there nothing else,
  That we may do, but only walk? methinks
  Brothers and Sisters lawfully may kiss.

_Arb_.

  And so they may _Panthea_, so will we,
  And kiss again too; we were too scrupulous,
  And foolish, but we will be so no more.

_Pan_.

  If you have any mercy, let me go
  To prison, to my death, to any thing:
  I feel a sin growing upon my blood,
  Worse than all these, hotter than yours.

_Arb_.

  That is impossible, what shou'd we do?

_Pan_.

  Flie Sir, for Heavens sake.

_Arb_.

  So we must away,
  Sin grows upon us more by this delay.

                                    [_Exeunt several wayes_.





_Actus Quintus_.


_Enter_  Mardonius _And_  Lygones.

_Mar_.

  Sir, the King has seen your Commission, and believes it, and
  freely by this warrant gives you power to visit Prince Tigranes,
  your Noble Master.

_Lygr_.

  I thank his Grace and kiss his hand.

_Mar_.

  But is the main of all your business ended in this?

_Lyg_.

I have another, but a worse, I am asham'd, it is a business.

_Mar_.

  You serve a worthy person, and a stranger I am sure you are; you
  may imploy me if you please without your purse, such Offices
  should ever be their own rewards.

_Lyg_.

  I am