ks on the
floor around the bin rattled as though a strong wind had entered.

"But she's one in a million, Mr. Doolittle," protested Solomon, after a
pause, and his tone had grown cheerful.

"Yes, I reckon it's a million. Thar ain't mo' than one in a million of
that rare sort," responded old Adam, falling to work with a zest.

"Was that ar young possum she spoke of the one yo' dawg Bess treed day
befo' yesterday, William?" inquired Jim Halloween, whose hopes were
centred upon the reward of his labours.

"Naw! that was an old un," replied William. "But thar never was a better
possum dawg than that Bess of ours. I declar, she's got so much sense
that she'll tree anything that grins at her, whether it's nigger or
possum. Ain't that so, old gal?" he inquired of the spotted hound on a
bed of husks at his side. "It wan't no longer than last week that she
kept that little nigger of Uncle Boaz's up a persimmon tree for mo'n an
hour."

"Thar's some niggers that look so much like possums when they git up in
persimmon branches that it takes a sharp eye to tell the difference,"
observed Tim Mallory.

"Well, I'm partial to possum," remarked old Adam. "When all's said, thar
ain't a better meat to the taste as long as it's plump an' juicy. Will
you hand on that jug of cider, Tim? It's wonderful the way corn shuckin'
manages to parch the throat an' whet the appetite."

The miller, who had declined Betsey's feast of possum, went out as soon
as he had finished his pipe, and turned into the sunken road that led
to Solomon Hatch's. In the little "best room," which was opened only for
"courtings" or funerals, he found Judy seated under a dim lamp with a
basket of darning in her lap.

"I was over at Mrs. Mullen's this morning," she explained, "an' she told
me her eyesight was failing, so I offered to do her darnin'."

Slipping a small round gourd into the toe of a man's black sock, she
examined it attentively, with her needle poised in the lamplight. Then
bending her head slightly sideways, she surveyed her stitches from
another angle, while she smoothed the darn with short caressing strokes
over the gourd. He thought how capable and helpful she was, and from the
cheerful energy with which she plied her needle, he judged that it gave
her pleasure merely to be of use. What he did not suspect was that her
wedding garments had been thrust aside as of less importance than Mrs.
Mullen's basket of darning. She was just the girl for a farmer's wife,
he told himself as he watched her--plain and sensible, the kind that
would make a good mother and a good manager. And all the time a voice in
the back of his brain was repeating distinctly. "They say it will end in
a marriage--they say it will end in a marriage." But this voice seemed
to come from a distance, and to have no connection either with his
thought or with his life. It was independent of his will, and while it
was speaking, he went on calmly thinking of Judy's children and of how
well and properly she would bring them up.

"I went over again to look at the steer to-day," he said, after a
moment. "There's a Jersey cow, too, I think of buying."

She nodded, pausing in her work, yet keeping her gaze fixed on the point
of her needle. If he had looked at her darning, he would have seen that
it was woven of exquisite and elaborate stitches--such stitches as went
into ecclesiastical embroideries in the Middle Ages.

"They're the best kind for butter," she observed, and carefully ran her
needle crosswise in and out of the threads.

Conversation was always desultory between them, and when it flagged, as
it did now, they could sit for hours in the composed and unembarrassed
silence of persons who meet upon the firm basis of mutual assistance
in practical matters. Their relation was founded upon the simple law of
racial continuance, which is as indifferent to the individual as it is
to the abstract, apotheosis of passion.

"I'm going to Applegate to-morrow to order a new mill-stone," he said
at last, when he rose. "Is there anything you would like me to get for
you?"

She reflected a moment. "I need a quarter of a yard of braid to finish
the green dress I am making. Could you match it?"

"I'll try if you'll give me a sample."

Laying her work aside for the first time, she hunted amid a number of
coloured spools in her basket, and brought to light a bit of silver
braid, which she handed to him.

"Was Mr. Mullen at your house to-day, Abel?" she asked suddenly, turning
her face from the lamp.

"Yes, he comes to see Blossom now, but she doesn't appear to care for
him. I thought she did once, didn't you?"

"Yes, I thought she did, but that was when he was in love with Molly,
wasn't it?"

For an instant he gazed at the bit of braid, as though his soul were
intent upon unravelling the intricate pattern.

"I wonder whether it is that we get a thing when we stop wanting it or
that we merely stop wanting it when we get it?" he demanded passionately
of fate.

But Judy had no mind for dubious philosophies. The thing she wanted she
knew she should never get and she knew as well that, in all likelihood,
she should never stop wanting it. Only a passionate soul in a
commonplace body could have squandered itself with such superb
prodigality.

"I don't know," she answered wearily, "I've never noticed much either
what people get or what they want."

"Well, Blossom wanted Mr. Mullen once and now he wants Blossom. I wish
mother didn't have so poor an opinion of him."

She flushed and looked up quickly, for in her heart she felt that she
hated Sarah Revercomb. A disgust for her coming marriage swept over her.
Then she told herself stubbornly that everybody married sooner or later,
and that anyway her stepmother would never forgive her if she broke off
with Abel.

"She doesn't even go to his church. I don't see what right she has to
find fault with him," she said.

"That's her way, you know. You can't make her over. She pretends he
doesn't know his Scripture and when he comes to see Blossom, she asks
him all sorts of ridiculous questions just to embarrass him. Yesterday
she told him she couldn't call to mind the difference in cubits between
the length and the breadth of Solomon's temple, and would he please save
her the trouble of going to the Bible to find out?"

"Does she want him to stop coming?" inquired Judy, breathlessly.

"I don't know what she wants, but I wish Blossom would marry him, don't
you?"

"Don't I?" she repeated, and her basket of spools fell to the floor,
where they scattered on the square rag carpet of log-cabin pattern. As
they were gathering them up, their heads touched by accident, and he
kissed her gravely. For a moment she thought, while she gazed into his
brilliant eyes, "Abel is really very handsome, after all." Then folding
her work carefully, she stuck her needle through the darn and placed
the basket on a shelf between a bible with gilt clasps and a wreath of
pressed flowers under a glass case. "He couldn't have got anybody to
fill in those holes better," she said to herself, and the reflection was
not without a balm for her aching heart.

At dawn next morning Abel passed again, driving in the direction of
the Applegate road. The day was breaking clear and still, and over the
autumnal pageantry in the abandoned fields, innumerable silver cobwebs
shone iridescent in the sunrise. Squirrels were already awake, busily
harvesting, and here and there a rabbit bobbed up from beneath a shelter
of sassafras. Overhead the leaves on a giant chestnut tree hung as
heavily as though they were cut out of copper, and beyond a sharp twist
in the corduroy road, a branch of sweet gum curved like a bent flame
on the edge of the twilight dimness of the forest. The scarlet of the
leaves reminded him of the colour of Molly's jacket, and immediately
the voice somewhere in his brain repeated, "They say it will end in
marriage." The words awoke in him a violent and unreasonable resentment.
He could think of his own marriage quite calmly, as something that did
not bear directly upon his ideal of Molly; but the conception of her as
Gay's wife, struck a blow at the image he had enskied and then schooled
himself into worshipping from a distance. He was willing to relinquish
her as too fair and flitting for mortal embraces, but the thought that
another man should possess that elusive loveliness was like the thrust
of hot iron into his wound. That Molly loved Gay he could not believe.
That she was willing to marry him without loving him, was a suggestion
which appeared to him little short of an insult. True, he did not love
Judy to whom he was to be married to-morrow, but that was a case so
entirely and utterly different that there could be no comparison! He was
doing it because he was sorry for Judy and it was the only way he could
help her. Besides, had not Molly urged such a step upon him repeatedly
as the fulfillment of his obvious destiny?

The reasons were all there. He had them labelled and assorted in his
mind, ready for instant reference should they be required. Sleepless
nights had gone to the preparation of them, and yet--and yet--in his
heart he knew, beyond contradiction, that he was wedding Judy because
his pity had once made a fool of him. He had acted from the loftiest
motives when he had asked her to marry him, and twenty-four hours later
he would have given ten years of his life to have been able to eliminate
those lofty motives from his character. To go back on her was, of
course, out of the question. In the history of Old Church no man--with
the exception of two drunkards and old Mr. Jonathan Gay--had ever
gone back on a woman. With girls it was different, since they, being
sentimentally above the proneness to error as well as practically below
the liability for maintenance, might play fast and loose wherever
their fleeting fancy alighted. But in the case of his unhappy sex an
honourable inclination once yielded to, was established forever. His
sacrifice was sanctioned by custom. There was no escape since it was
tradition that held him by the throat.

His business in Applegate, which included a careful matching of Judy's
braid, took up the entire morning; and it was dinner time before he
turned back to the little inn, known as Raleigh's Tavern, at which the
farmers usually stopped for meals. Here, after washing his hands in a
basin on the back porch, he hastily smoothed his hair, and passed into
the small paved court in front of the tavern. As he approached the
doorway, the figure of a young woman in a black dress, which he felt
instinctively did not "belong" to Applegate, came down the short steps,
and paused an instant to caress a large dog that was lying in the
sunshine near the entrance. The next minute, while he fell back, hat in
hand, behind a pile of boxes in the yard, he heard his name called in
a familiar voice, and lifting his eyes found himself face to face with
Molly.

"Abel, aren't you going to speak to me?" she asked, and moving a step
toward him, held out both hands with an impulsive gesture.

As his hand met hers, he withdrew it quickly as though he were stung by
the touch of her soft fingers. Every nerve in his body leaped suddenly
to life, and the moment was so vivid while he faced her, that he
felt half convinced that all the long months since their parting had
dissolved in shadows. The border line between the dream and actuality
was obliterated. It seemed to him not only impossible, but absurd that
he should ever have believed himself engaged to Judy Hatch--that he
should be going to marry her to-morrow! All that side of his life had
no closer relation to his real self than it had to the self of old Adam
Doolittle. While he had planned it he had been a corpse not a living
man, but at the sound of Molly's voice, at the clasp of her fingers,
at the touching, expectant brightness in her eyes, the resurrection had
happened. Judy was a corpse preparing to wed a corpse that had become
alive--and the mating of death with life was abhorrent to him in his
illumination.

"We are on our way to Richmond," explained Molly, very gently, "and we
are waiting to change trains. Oh, Abel, I have wanted so much to see
you!"

It was the old Molly, in truth--Molly in her softest, in her most
dangerous, in her divinest mood. While he gazed at her he could make
no answer because an emotion that was half self-reproach, half furious
longing, choked back his words, and had he opened his lips it would have
been to utter some foolish inarticulate arraignment of destiny. In the
confusion of his senses, he did not notice that she had altered, but the
next day he remembered that her face looked smaller and more delicate,
like a tinted egg-shell he had once seen, and that her eyes in
consequence were wondrously, were almost startlingly, large. All that he
was conscious of when he turned and rushed from her after that one look,
was that the old agony of his loss had resurged afresh in his heart.



CHAPTER IV


HIS DAY OF FREEDOM


He crossed the courtyard, and turned mechanically into a street which
led in the opposite direction from the road to Old Church. A crowd of
men, gathered in the doorway of the post-office, called to him to join
them, and he answered in a voice that sounded remote and cheerful in his
own ears.

"If you want to whip the bosses in these parts there's a man for you,"
he heard one of them remark, and knew that they were discussing his
political chances. Quickening his steps, he walked rapidly to the end
of the street, passed the scattered negro hovels, surrounded by blighted
sunflowers, and turned into a road which ran between fields of dusty
stubble into a stretch of brown and desolate country.

Suddenly, as though a screw had loosened in his brain, he felt his
passion slip the control of his will and beat down, one by one, the
orderly procession of reasons that had risen against it. A sense of
exhilaration, of joy so fierce that it was akin to pain, took possession
of him. "I won't go back!" he said defiantly, "I won't go back!" And
with the words his longing for Molly was swallowed up in the tumultuous
consciousness of his release. It was as if he had burst his bonds by a
single effort of strength, and was stretching his cramped limbs in the
open. The idea of escape from captivity was so strong, that he looked
neither to right or left of him, but kept his gaze fixed on the road
straight ahead, as a man does who saves his energy for the final break
from his pursuers. At the moment he would have bartered his soul in
exchange for the unholy, the nameless rapture of the vagabond and the
gipsy, of all the neglected and the despised of civilization. Duty,
love, ambition--all these were nothing beside the perfect, the
incommunicable passion of the open road!

It is a mood that comes once to every man--to some men more
frequently--a mood in which the prehistoric memory of the soul is
stirred, and an intolerable longing arises for the ancient nomadic
freedom of the race; when the senses surfeited by civilization cry out
for the strong meat of the jungle--for the scent of the raw, dark earth
and for the gleam of the yellow moonlight on the wet, rustling leaves.
This longing may come but once in adolescence, or many times until
the frost of age has withered the senses. It may come amid the showery
warmth and the roving fragrance of an April day, or beside the shining,
brown, leaf-strewn brooks of November. But let it come to a man when
it will, and that man renounces, in spite of himself, his little leaden
gods of prosperity, and in his heart, beneath the woven garment of
custom, he exchanges his birthright of respectability for a mess of
Romany pottage. Under the luminous sweep and rush of this vision, Abel
laughed suddenly at the thought of his marriage to Judy. Obstacles which
had appeared insurmountable at sunrise, showed now as unsubstantial and
evanescent as shadows.

"I won't go back!" he repeated exultantly, "I won't go back!"

"You're talkin' to yo'self, mister," said a voice at his side, and
looking down he saw a small barefooted boy, in overalls, with a bag of
striped purple calico hanging from one shoulder.

"You've been talkin' to yo'self all along the road," the boy repeated
with zest.

"Have I? What are you up to?"

"I've been chinquapinin'. Ma, she thinks I'm at school, but I ain't."
He looked up wickedly, bubbling over with the shameless joys of truancy.
"Thar's a lot of chinquapin bushes over yonder in Cobblestone's wood an'
they're chock full of nuts."

"And they're in your bag now, I suppose?"

"I've got a peck of 'em, an' I'm goin' to make me a chain as long
as--that. It'll be a watch chain, an' I've made a watch out of a walnut.
It can't keep time, of course," he added, "'cep'n for that it's really a
sho' nough watch." His small freckled face, overhung by a mat of carroty
hair, was wreathed in a contagious, an intoxicating smile--the smile of
one who has bought happiness at the price of duty, and whose enjoyment
is sweetened by the secret knowledge that he has successfully eluded the
Stern Daughter of the Voice of God. Instinctively, Abel was aware that
the savour was not in the chinquapins, but in the disobedience, and his
heart warmed to the boy with the freckled face.

"Are you going home now?" he asked.

"You bet I ain't. I've got my snack ma fixed for me." He unrolled a
brown paper package and revealed two thin slices of bread with a fishing
hook stuck in one corner. "Thar's apple-butter between 'em," he added,
rolling his tongue, and a minute later, "Ma'd whip me jest the same,
an' I'd ruther be whipped for a whole day than for a half. Besides," he
burst out as though the mental image convulsed him with delight, "if I
went home I'd have to help her tote the water for the washin'."

"But what are you going to do with yourself?"

"I'm goin' huntin' with a gravel shooter, an' I'm goin' fishin' with a
willow pole, an' I'm goin' to find all the old hare traps, an' I'm goin'
to see 'em make hog's meat over at Bryarly's an' I'm goin' to the cider
pressin' down here at Cobblestone's. She ain't goin' to ketch me till
I've had my day!" he concluded with a whoop of ecstasy. Startled by the
sound, a rabbit sprang from a clump of sassafras, and the boy was over
the fence, on a rush of happy bare feet, in pursuit of it.

The road curved abruptly into a short wood, filled with dwarfed holly
trees, which were sown thickly with a shower of scarlet berries--and
while Abel walked through it, his visions thronged beside him like the
painted and artificial troupe of a carnival. He saw Molly coming to him,
separating him from Judy, surrendering her warm flesh and blood to his
arms. "I won't go back!" he said, still defiantly, "I'll love Molly if
I pay for it to the last day I live." With a terrible exultation he felt
that he was willing to pay for it--to pay any price, even the price of
his honour. His passion rushed like flame through his blood, scorching,
blackening, devouring.

Beyond the wood, the winding ash-coloured road dipped into a hollow, and
when he reached the brow of the low hill ahead, a west wind, which had
risen suddenly from the river, caught up with his footsteps and raced on
like a wild thing at his side. He could hear it sighing plaintively in
the bared trees he had left, or driving the hurtled leaves like a flock
of frightened partridges over the sumach and sassafras, and then lashing
itself into a frenzy as it chased over a level of broomsedge. Always
it sang of freedom--of the savage desire and thirst for freedom--of the
ineffable, the supreme ecstasy of freedom! And always while he listened
to it, while he felt the dead leaves stinging his flesh, he told
himself passionately that he "would not go back--that he would not marry
to-morrow!"

For hours he stalked with the wind. Then, turning out of the road, he
flung himself down on the broomsedge and lay for other hours gazing over
the autumn landscape to the softly luminous band on the far horizon.
Somewhere in a darkened corner of his brain there was the resolve that
he would not return until, like the freckled faced, barefooted boy, he
had "had his day."

At nine o'clock that night he entered an inn in the town of Briarwood,
twenty miles north of Applegate, and sitting down at one of the tables,
ordered something to eat. His limbs ached, not from the walk in the
wind, but from the passion that had whipped his body like a destroying
fire. He felt still the burning throb of the sore that it had left.
Apart from this dull agony he could feel nothing--he could desire
nothing--he could remember nothing. Everything was over except the
instinct that told him that he was empty and must be fed.

While he sat there, with his aching forehead bowed in his hands, there
came a light touch on his shoulder, and looking up he saw the Reverend
Orlando Mullen, standing at his side like an embodiment of all the
things from which he had fled. For an instant he could only stare
blindly back at him. Then something which had opened in his soul, closed
softly, as if it were a shell of custom, and he knew that he was again
a prisoner. With the sight of that conventional figure, the scattered
instincts of habit and of respectability--of all the qualities for which
the race stood and against which the individual had rebelled--all these
rallied anew to the battlefield from which they had been routed by his
insurgent emotions.

"I suppose you're waiting, like myself, for the nine-forty-five train?"

"Yes, I'm waiting for the train."

"Business brought you so far away?"

"Yes, business brought me." Lifting his glass of beer, he drained it
slowly under Mr. Mullen's friendly and curious eyes.

"It looks as if we should have a perfect day for the wedding," remarked
the rector, after a pause. "Like you, I was called off on an urgent
matter, but fortunately, it only means losing a little sleep."

Then the whistle of the train blew, and ten minutes later, Abel followed
the young clergyman into the single coach and sat down in a vacant seat
at his side.

It was two o'clock when at last he drove into the back gate at the mill,
and unhitching his mare, turned her out into the pasture. As he crossed
the road to the house, he lifted his eyes mechanically to the sky, and
saw that the stars shone soft and near as if they were watching over a
night of love.



CHAPTER V


THE SHAPING OF MOLLY


Leaning back in the uncomfortable plush-covered chair in the train to
Richmond, Molly watched the flat landscape glide past, while she thought
a little wistfully of the morning she had made this same trip dressed
in one of Mrs. Gay's gowns. On her knees Mrs. Gay's canary, extinguished
beneath the black silk cover to his cage, uttered from time to time a
feeble pipe of inquiry, and on the rack above her head Mrs. Gay's tea
basket rattled loudly in a sudden lurch of the train. Since the hour in
which she had left the overseer's cottage and moved into the "big house"
at Jordan's Journey, the appealing little lady had been the dominant
influence in her life--an influence so soft and yet so overpowering that
she had at times a sensation of being smothered in scented swansdown.
For several months after leaving Old Church her education had absorbed
her energies, and she had found time merely to gasp occasionally in
the oppressive sweetness of the atmosphere which Mrs. Gay's personality
diffused. Everything was strange then, and her desire for strangeness,
for unfamiliar impressions, had amounted to a passion. She had been very
anxious, too, very much afraid lest she should make a mistake. When she
had entered the hotel dining-room in New York she had felt as if she
were walking on ploughed ground, and the red velvet carpet had seemed
to rise and sink under her feet. That first night had been exquisite
torture to her, and so, she surmised through some intuitive
understanding, had it been to Kesiah. For weeks after that time
of embarrassment, she had watched herself carefully--watched every
instant--and in the end she had triumphed. With her growing ease,
her old impulsiveness had returned to her, and with the wonderful
adaptability of the Southern woman, she had soon ceased to feel a sense
of discomfort in her changed surroundings. The instinct of class she had
never had, and this lack of social reverence had helped her not a
little in her ascent of the ladder. It is difficult to suffer from a
distinction which one does not admit--and her perfect unconsciousness of
inferiority to Mrs. Gay had placed her, without her being aware of it,
in the position of an equal.

With her hands clasped on the cage of the canary, she gazed thoughtfully
at Kesiah, who was sitting a little in front of her, with her eyeglasses
on her nose and the daily paper opened before her. Gay was to meet them
in Richmond, and as Molly remembered this now, she realized that her
feeling about their meeting had changed during the last few hours. She
liked Gay--she responded to his physical charm, to the indefinable air
of adventure which hangs sometimes about men who have lived hard without
wasting their surplus vitality--but in spite of the strong attraction he
possessed for her, she knew that in her heart she had never thoroughly
believed in him. Unconsciously to herself she had measured his stature
against Abel's and he had come short of her standard.

"Molly," asked Mrs. Gay, turning her head suddenly, "did you write
Jonathan to expect us by this train?"

"Yes, Aunt Angela, he knows we are coming. Shall I lower the shade? Is
the sunlight too strong on you?"

"A little," murmured Mrs. Gay in a tone of resigned sweetness and the
conversation was over.

At the sound of Molly's voice an old lady, travelling South with a
trained nurse, turned in her chair, and looked at the girl as she might
have looked at a fruit for which she longed, but which she had been
forbidden to touch. Her face, under an elaborate bonnet trimmed with
artificial purple wistaria, was withered and crossed with lines, and her
poor old hands were so knotted from gout that she could hardly lift the
tea-cup from the small table which had been fastened in front of her.
Yet for one instant, as she gazed on Molly's girlish freshness, her
youth stirred feebly somewhere in the dregs of her memory, and her eyes
grew deprecating and piteous, as though her soul were saying, "I know I
have missed it, but it isn't my fault---"

The tea-cup trembled in her hand, and her old lips fumbled pathetically
for her bit of toast, while across from her, with only the narrow aisle
of the car between, youth incarnate sat weaving its separate dream of a
universe.

"Yes, two hours earlier," ran Molly's thoughts, "I looked forward to
the meeting with Jonathan, and now, in so short a time, I have grown to
dread it." She tried to think of his pleasant, well-coloured face, of
his whimsical, caressing smile, but in the niche where his image should
have stood, she saw Abel in his country clothes, with his red-brown
throat rising out of his blue shirt and his brilliant eyes under the
dark hair on his forehead. Then suddenly memory played her a ridiculous
trick, for she remembered that his hair grew in a close clipped circular
wave, like the hair which has been bound by a fillet on the head of a
child.

"I wonder why he wouldn't speak to me?" she thought, with a pang. "I
wonder if he has really got over caring?" She had always thought of
Abel as a possession more absolutely her own than even Mr. Jonathan's
provision. When she had said so passionately that she wanted to be free,
she had not meant that at any minute she chose, Abel would not be ready
and willing to fly back into bondage. That Abel, after all these years,
should actually have ceased to care for her--should have refused even to
speak to her! It was absurd--it was vindictive--it was unchristian!
She had half a mind to get Mr. Mullen to talk to him. Then her heart
throbbed when she remembered the touch of his hand, the look in his
eyes, the thirst of his lips seeking hers. That was only six months
ago--such a very little while--and now he had rushed away from the sight
of her! She thought of their parting, when she had said that she wanted
to see the world, and he had offered at once to release her. Since then
she had seen the world until she was tired of it. At times she had been
terribly homesick for Old Church, and she had never been happy except
when Gay had taken her to see pictures or into wonderful parks. Always
the thought had lain hidden in her mind that some day, when she could
stand it no longer, she would go back and wear her red jacket and run
free in the fields with Abel again. Her very selfishness had seemed
natural to her because Abel had always been there, like the air and the
sky and the broomsedge; he was a part of the scene, and she found it
impossible to detach him from his surroundings.

At the station in Richmond, Gay met them, and for the first few minutes
his mother absorbed his attention. Molly had not seen him for six
weeks, and she noticed that he had grown fleshier and that this lent an
additional heaviness to his shaven chin. Even his charming smile
could not disguise the slight coarseness of feature, with which he was
beginning already to pay for his pleasures. By the time he was forty, he
would be quite stout and "lumpy," she thought.

There was much excitement about collecting Mrs. Gay's packages, and the
drive to the hotel was filled with anxious inquiries from Kesiah, who
was always nervous and fussy when she travelled.

"Molly, did you see my umbrella put in?"

"Yes, Aunt Kesiah, it is here in the corner by Jonathan."

"I forgot to notice Angela's medicine case. Did you see that it wasn't
overlooked?"

"Yes, Patsey has it."

Then came a solicitous exhibition of filial affection on the part
of Gay, and at last, to Molly's relief, they arrived at the new,
brilliantly lighted hotel, and were led through stifling corridors,
carpeted in red, to their rooms on the second floor in the front of the
building. As she passed over the velvet carpets, Molly had again the
sensation that she was walking over ploughed ground; and when she had
escaped from Mrs. Gay's sitting-room, on the pretext of dressing
for dinner, she threw open the window, and leaned out of the close
atmosphere into the freshness of the November evening. This was what she
had once looked upon as pleasure--or at least as exciting amusement--to
move continually from one hot and over furnished hotel to another, to
fuss about missing packages, to see crowds of strange faces passing
before her, all fat and overfed and all, somehow, looking exactly alike.

A wave of homesickness for the white roads and the golden broomsedge
of Old Church swept over her. She wanted the open fields, and more than
all, far more than all, she wanted Abel! It was her fault--she had made
her choice--no one else was to blame for it. And, then, though she had
made her choice and no one else was to blame for it, she felt that she
almost hated old Mr. Jonathan, as she still called him in her thoughts,
because he had left her his money. At the bottom of her heart, there
was the perfectly unreasonable suspicion that he had arranged the whole
thing out of spite.

In the sitting-room, meanwhile, which Kesiah's bedroom separated from
Molly's, Mrs. Gay was lying on a couch beside a table on which stood a
cut-glass bowl of purple orchids sent to her by her son. She was looking
a little pale, but this pallor was not unbecoming since it enhanced the
expression of appealing melancholy in her eyes. To look at her was to
recognize that life had crushed her, and yet that her soul exhaled an
intense sweetness in the midst of its suffering.

Jonathan had just gone down to buy the evening papers; in the next room
she could hear Kesiah at the unpacking; so she was left for a moment
alone with her imagination. The fatigue of the trip had affected her
nerves, and she sank, while she lay there in her travelling gown,
which she had not yet removed, into one of those spells of spiritual
discontent which followed inevitably any unusual physical discomfort.
She thought, not resentfully but sadly, that Kesiah managed to grow even
more obstinate with years, that Jonathan must have tired of her or he
would never have forgotten the list of medicines she had sent him, that
Molly took Kesiah away from the sickroom entirely too often. From these
reflections she drifted naturally into an emotion of self pity, and
the thought occurred to her, as it did invariably in such hours of
depression, that her world had never been large enough for the full
exercise and appreciation of her highest qualities. If she had only
lived in a richer century amid more congenial surroundings! Who could
tell what her usefulness might have been had not destiny continually
thwarted her aspirations? Before the idea of this thwarted usefulness,
which was always vaguely associated with the moral regeneration of
distinguished historic sinners of the opposite sex, like Lord Byron
or Alfred de Musset, she began to feel that she had been not only
neglected, but wasted in the atmosphere in which she had been placed.

Jonathan's entrance, with the evening papers in his hand, broke the
thread of her reverie, and as he sat down in a chair by her side, she
wondered if he had inherited her "nature" and if he, also, cherished in
his soul the same spiritual yearnings? Her wonder was, however, entirely
unnecessary, for Jonathan had very little imagination, and would never
have wasted his time yearning over a sinner whom he had never seen.

"I stopped a minute to get into my evening clothes," he said, in the
cheerful voice of one who is a stranger to aspirations of soul. "I
thought Molly would be dressed by this time. She is usually so quick."

"Yes, she is usually very quick," replied Mrs. Gay gently, while
she gathered all the forces of her character, which were slightly
disorganized by her recent indulgence in pensive musings, to do battle
against an idea which she had striven repeatedly of late to banish from
her thoughts. "I wish, dear Jonathan," she added, "that you would speak
a few words to Molly. You have such influence with her, and I am sure I
don't wonder."

"I'll speak them with pleasure, mother. Just drop me a hint as to what
they are to be about."

"She's a sweet, unselfish girl, we all know that, but there are
times, dear, especially when strangers are present, when she appears a
little--well, a little crude--you know what I mean?"

"I fancy I know, but I don't see just what we are to do about it. You
might as well attempt to reshape Molly's nose as her character. Let's
admit that both might be improved and then give up the job. She's got
charm--there's no doubt of that. I believe even if she were plain she'd
be almost as attractive. Why, I've seen her when she was very nearly
plain sometimes, and she hasn't been a whit less fascinating than when
she's looking her prettiest. It's the infinite variety and all that, you
know. Her soul does it, I suppose."

"Yes, she must have charm," replied Mrs. Gay, ignoring what he had said
about "soul" because she felt a vague dislike to hearing a word applied
indiscriminately to others which had become, as it were, associated with
herself. "I can't analyze it, however, for she hasn't a single really
perfect feature except her eyes."

"But such eyes! In the sunlight they are nearer the colour of a
humming-birds wing than anything I know of."

"I suppose they are rather unusual, but, after all a fine pair of eyes
can't make exactly a--well, a lady, Jonathan."

"The deuce!" he ejaculated, and then added quickly, "What has she done
now, mother?"

One of Mrs. Gay's first principles of diplomacy was that an unpleasant
fact treated as non-existent, was deprived in a measure of its power
for evil. By the application of this principle, she had extinguished her
brother-in-law's passion for Janet Merryweather, and she hoped that it
would prove equally effective in blighting her son's incipient fancy for
Molly. She looked upon Jonathan's infatuation as a mere sinister shadow
as yet, but she was shrewd enough to suspect that the shadow would be
converted into substance at the first hint of her recognition that
it was impending. Indirect influence alone remained to her, and she
surmised that her ultimate triumph would depend upon the perfection of
her indirectness. When it came to the game of strategy, Jonathan, being
of an open nature, was no match for his mother. He was inclined
by temperament to accept things at their face value--particularly
women--and not to worry about them unless they interfered with his
appetite. When he lost his desire for his meals, then he began, somewhat
to his surprise, to consider them seriously.

"Of course I feel just as you do about it," remarked Mrs. Gay, after a
weighty silence. "I'm fond of her and I see her good points--but there's
something about her--I suppose it's the strain of Merryweather blood,
or the fact of her being born in such unfortunate circumstances--" Her
manner grew severer. "But--whatever the cause, it shows itself in a kind
of social defiance that would always keep her from being just--oh, well,
you know---"

"She's bright enough, mother, she's quick enough, and she's pretty
enough, isn't she?"

"She would be, Jonathan, if her defiance did not come from pure
wilfulness. But she says and does the most unconventional things simply
for the pleasure of shocking people. It isn't that she doesn't know,
it's that she doesn't care."

"But she'll get to care--all women do, if you give them time." His tone
implied that the whole sex was comprised in an elementary branch of
psychology which he had mastered with the help of a few simple rules of
analogy.

"Well, she may, dear, but I doubt it. She is as absolutely without class
instinct as an anarchist, I believe. When she lived in the overseer's
cottage she never looked up and now that she has come out of it, she
never looks down. We've told her repeatedly that she mustn't talk to
strangers about that part of her life, but it isn't the least bit of
use. Only a few days ago I heard her telling Judge Grayson that nobody
appeared to do any 'courting' in New York."

To her amazement he burst into a laugh.

"By Jove, I suppose she misses it," he returned, "but what about that
fellow she picked up in the North who hung around her last summer?"

"Oh, there have been plenty of them hanging about her. Molly is the
kind, you know, that will have lovers wherever you put her." There was
a faint condescension in her voice, for she herself preferred adorers to
lovers.

"But she hasn't seemed to care about them," he said. "I believe she has
grown tired of flirting."

"I'm sure she doesn't flirt with them, and I think it's all because she
is pining for somebody she left at Old Church--the miller or the rector
or somebody we've never even heard of."

"What's that?" he started a little, and she saw at once that, although
she had used her most delicate weapon, he had flinched from the first
touch of the blade. "I'm positive she hadn't a real fancy for anybody
down there," he added, as he relapsed into his attitude of indifference.

"I know she says so, Jonathan, but there are other ways of telling."

"Oh, there's no truth in that--it's all nonsense," he said irritably.

Then a door creaked in the hall, there was a rustle of silken skirts
on the carpet, and Molly, having dried her tears, came in, pliant,
blushing, and eager to please them both.



CHAPTER VI


IN WHICH HEARTS GO ASTRAY


She was enchantingly pretty, there was no doubt of that, thought Gay
as he watched her at dinner. He had rarely seen a face so radiant in
expression, and she had lost, he noticed, the touch of provincialism in
her voice and manner. To-night, for the first time, he felt that there
was a fawn-like shyness about her, as if her soul had flown startled
before his approach. Of her meeting with Abel in Applegate he knew
nothing, and while he discerned instinctively the softness and the
richness of her mood, it was but reasonable that he should attribute it
to a different and, as it happened, to a mistaken cause. He liked that
faint shadow of her lashes on her vivid cheeks, and while he drank his
coffee and cracked his nuts, he told himself, half humorously, that the
ideal love, after all, was a perpetual virgin in perpetual flight. As
he rose from the table, he remembered Blossom, and the pile of her
half-read letters in his travelling bag. "She's a dear good girl, and
just because I've got myself into a mess, I've no idea of behaving like
a cad to her," he thought.

That was downstairs in the hotel dining-room, and an hour later, when he
faced Molly alone in the little sitting-room, he repeated the phrase to
himself with an additional emphasis--for when the woman before him in
flesh and blood looked up at him with entreating eyes, like a child
begging a favour, the woman in his memory faded quickly into remoteness.

"What's the matter, little girl?" he asked.

"Oh, Jonathan, I must go back to Old Church--to-morrow!" she said.

"Why in thunder do you want to do that?"

"There's something I must see about. I can't wait. I never can wait when
I want anything."

"So I have observed. This something is so important, by the way, that
you haven't thought of it for six months?"

"Well, I've thought of it--sometimes," she admitted.

"Can't you tell me what it is, Molly?"

She shook her head. Her face was pink and her eyes shone; whatever it
was, it had obviously enriched her beauty.

"Tell me, little girl," he repeated and leaned closer. There had always
been something comfortable and warm in his nearness to her, and under
the influence of it, she felt tempted to cry out, "I want to go back to
find out if Abel still loves me! I am an idiot, I know, but I feel that
I shall die if I discover that he has got over caring. This suspense
is more than I can bear, yet I never knew until I felt it, how much he
means to me."

This was what she wanted to say, but instead of uttering it, she merely
murmured:

"I can't, Jonathan, you would never understand." Her whole being was
vibrant to-night with the desire for love, yet, in spite of his wide
experience with the passion, she knew that he would not comprehend what
she meant by the word. It wasn't his kind of love in the least that she
wanted; it differed from his as the light of the sun differs from the
blaze of a prairie fire. "It's just a feeling," she added, helplessly.
"You don't have feelings, I suppose?"

"Don't I?" he echoed. "Oh, Molly, if you only knew how many!"

"While they last--but they don't last, you know, they have their
seasons. That's the curse of them, or the charm. If they only lasted
earth would be paradise or hell, wouldn't it?"

But generalizations had no further attraction for her. Her mind was one
great wonder, and she felt that she could hardly keep alive until she
could stand face to face with Abel and read the truth in his eyes.

"All the same I want to go," she repeated obstinately.

Suspicion seized him, and his mouth grew a little hard under his short
moustache.

"Molly," he asked, "have you been thinking again about the miller?"

"How absurd! What put that into your head?" she retorted indignantly.

The idea, innocent as it was, appeared to incense her. What a little
firebrand she looked, and how hot her eyes glowed when she was angry!

"Well, I'm glad you haven't--because, you know, really it wouldn't do,"
he answered.

"What wouldn't do?"

"Your marrying a Revercomb--it wouldn't do in the least."

"Why wouldn't it?"

"You can see that for yourself, can't you? You've come entirely out of
that life and you couldn't go back to it."

"I don't see why I couldn't if I wanted to?" she threw out at him with
sudden violence.

Clearly, as his mother had said, she was lacking in reverence, yet he
couldn't agree that she would never become exactly a lady. Not with that
high-bred poise of the head and those small, exquisite hands!

"Well, in the first place, I don't believe you'd ever want to," he
said calmly, "and in the second place, if you ever did such a thing, my
little weather-vane, you'd regret it in ten minutes."

"If I did it, I don't believe I'd ever regret it," was her amazing
rejoinder.

Stupefied yet dauntless, he returned to the charge.

"You're talking sheer nonsense, you silly girl, and you know it," he
said. "If you were to go back to Old Church to marry the miller, you'd
be sorry before you got up to the altar."

"I'm not going back there to marry him," she persisted stubbornly, "but
I don't' believe if I were to do it, I'd ever regret it."

"You think you'd be satisfied to give up ten thousand a year and settle
down to raising chickens for a living?"

"I like raising chickens."

"And you'd expect that pursuit to make up to you for all you would
sacrifice--for the world and people and freedom to go and come as you
please?"

"I don't care about the world," she replied, sticking, he told himself,
as obstinately as a mule to her point, "and people seem to me just the
same everywhere."

"The same?" he repeated, "do you actually mean that you can't see any
difference?"

"No difference that matters. It's all in the clothes and the sillier
things they talk about. Why, I'd rather hear old Adam Doolittle talk
than that stupid Judge Grayson, who dined with us the other night, and
never mentioned anything but stocks. If I've got to hear about a single
subject I'd rather it would be crops than stocks--they seem more human,
somehow."

"By Jove!" he exclaimed, under his breath, "what's got into you
to-night, Molly? I honestly believe you've begun to idealize the miller
now you've been away from him. He's a handsome fellow; you don't see
his physical match in a day, I'm willing to admit, but if you went back
again you'd be surprised to find how--well, how rustic he would appear
to you."

The colour rushed to her face, and her eyes burned hot under the sudden
droop of her lashes.

"He's better than any one I've seen anywhere," she replied, "he's
bigger, he's stronger, he's kinder. I'm not good enough to marry him,
and I know it."

For an instant he looked at her in the pained surprise of one who had
never indulged in verbal excesses. Then he said, coldly; "So you're
working yourself into a sentiment over young Revercomb. My dear child,
if you only knew how unspeakably silly it is. Nothing could be more
absurd than to throw away an income of ten thousand dollars a year in
order to marry a poor man." The idea of her committing such folly was
intensely distressing to him. His judgment was now in the ascendant,
and like most men, while under the cool and firm control of the rational
part of his nature, he was incapable of recalling with any sympathy
the times when he had followed the lead of those qualities which rise
superior to reason.

"I don't care how poor he is," said Molly passionately, for her rational
part was plainly not in the ascendant. "Nobody ever thought about his
being so poor until your uncle left me all that horrid money. He was
honestly born and I wasn't, yet he didn't care. He was big and splendid
and I was little and mean, that was the matter!"

"By George, you're in love with him!" he exclaimed, and beneath the
coldness of his manner, his heart suffered an incomprehensible pang.
Undoubtedly he had permitted himself to drift into a feeling for
Molly, which, had he been wise, he would have strangled speedily in the
beginning. The obstacles which had appeared to make for his safety, had,
he realized now, merely afforded shelter to the flame until it had grown
strong enough to overleap them. While he stood there, with his angry
gaze on her flushing and paling beauty, he had the helpless sensation of
a man who returns at sunrise to find a forest fire raging where he had
left a few sticks smouldering at midnight.

"I'm not in love with anybody--you've no right to say so," she returned,
"but I'll not have him abused. It's not true, it's not just, it's not
generous."

This was too much for his forbearance, though he told himself that,
after all, there was no "getting at" Molly from the surface, and that
this outburst might conceal a fancy for himself quite as well as for
the miller. The last idea, while it tantalized him, was not without a
pleasant sting for his senses.

"You're a goose, Molly, and I've half a mind to shake you soundly,"
he said. "Since there's no other way to cure you of this foolish
infatuation, I'll take you down to Old Church to-morrow and let you see
with your own eyes. You've forgotten how things look there, that's my
opinion."

"Oh, Jonathan," she said, and grew dangerously sweet, while all her soft
flushing body leaned toward him. "You are a perfect dear, aren't you?"

"I rather think I am, since you put the question. Molly, will you kiss
me?"

She drew back at once, a little deprecating, because she was honestly
sorry, since he was so silly as to want to kiss her, that she couldn't
oblige him. For her own part, she felt, she wouldn't have cared, but
she remembered Abel's anger because of the kiss by the brook, and
the thought hardened her heart. It was foolish of men to make so much
importance of kisses.

"I'm sorry, but I can't. Don't ask me, Jonathan--all the same you are a
darling!"

Then before he could detain her, she had slipped away from him through
Kesiah's door, which she closed after her.

"Aunt Kesiah," he heard her exclaim joyously, "Jonathan is going to take
me to Old Church to spend to-morrow!"

Kesiah, in an ugly grey dressing-gown, tied at the waist with a black
cord, was drying Mrs. Gay's sheets before the radiator. At Molly's
entrance, she turned, and said warningly, "Patsey is rubbing Angela
after her bath. What was that about Old Church, dear?"

"Jonathan has promised to take me down there to-morrow."

"To spend the day? Well, I suppose we may trust you with him." From her
manner one might have inferred that the idea of not trusting anybody
with Jonathan would have been a joke.

She went on calmly shaking out Mrs. Gay's sheets before the radiator, as
if the conversation were over, while behind her on the pale green wall,
her shadow loomed distinct, grotesque, and sexless. But Molly was in
the mood when the need to talk--to let oneself go--is so great that the
choice of a listener is little more than an accident. She had discovered
at last--discovered in that illuminating moment in Applegate--the
meaning of the homesickness, of the restlessness, of the despondency of
the last few months. Before she could understand what Abel had meant to
her, she had been obliged to draw away from him, to measure him from a
distance, to put the lucid revealing silence between them. It was like
looking at a mountain, when one must fall back to the right angle of
view, must gain the proper perspective, before one can judge of the
space it fills on the horizon. What she needed was merely to see Abel
in relation to other things in her life, to learn how immeasurably he
towered above them. Her blood rushed through her veins with a burning
sweetness, and while she stood there watching Kesiah, the wonder and
the intoxication of magic was upon her. She had passed within the
Enchanter's circle, and her soul was dancing to the music of flutes.

"Aunt Kesiah," she asked suddenly, and her voice thrilled, "were you
ever in love?"

Kesiah looked up from the sheets with the expression of a person who has
been interrupted in the serious business of life by the fluttering of
a humming-bird. It required an effort for her to recede from the
comfortable habit of thought she had attained to the point of view from
which the aspirations of the soul had appeared of more importance than
the satisfactions of the body. Only for a few weeks in the spring did
she relapse periodically into such a condition of mind.

"Never," she answered.

"Did you never feel that you cared about anybody--in that way?"

"Never."

It was incredible! It was appalling! But it really had happened! Love,
which filled the world, was not the beginning and the end, as it ought
to be, of every mortal existence. Subtract it from the universe and
there was nothing left but a void, yet in this void, life seemed to
move and feed and have its being just as if it were really alive. People
indeed--even women--would go on, like Kesiah, for almost sixty years,
and not share, for an instant, the divine impulse of creation. They
could exist quite comfortably on three meals a day without ever
suspecting the terrible emptiness that there was inside of them.
They could even wring a stale satisfaction out of this imitation
existence--this play of make-believe being alive. And around them all
the time there was the wonder and the glory of the universe!

Then Kesiah turned suddenly from the radiator, and there was an
expression in her face which reminded Molly of the old lady with the
bonnet trimmed with artificial purple wistaria she had seen on the
train--an expression of useless knowledge and regret, as though she
realized that she had missed the essential thing and that it was life,
after all, that had been to blame for it. For a minute only the look
lasted, for Kesiah's was a closed soul, and the smallest revelation of
herself was like the agony of travail.

"If you don't mind, dear, will you carry these sheets to Patsey for
Angela's bed," she said.

At the time Gay had been only half in earnest when he promised to take
Molly to Old Church, and he presented himself at breakfast next morning
with the unspoken hope in his heart that she had changed her mind during
the night. When she met him with her hat on, he inquired facetiously if
she contemplated a journey, and proceeded to make light of her response
that the carriage was ordered to take them to the station.

"But we'll starve if we go there," he urged, "the servants are
scattered, and the luncheon I got last time was a subject for bad
language."

"I'll cook you one, Jonathan. I can cook beautifully," she said.

The idea amused him. After all they could easily get back to dinner.

"I wonder if you know that you are a nuisance, Molly?" he asked,
smiling, and she saw that she had won. Winning was just as easy with
Jonathan as it had been with Reuben or with Abel.

It was a brilliant day, in the midst of a brief spell of Indian
summer. When they left the train and drove along the corduroy road from
Applegate, the forest on either side of them was gorgeous in gold and
copper. Straight ahead, at the end of the long vista, they could see a
bit of cloudless sky beyond the low outlines of a field; and both sky
and field were wrapped in a faint purplish haze. The few belated yellow
butterflies, floating over the moist places in the road, seemed to drift
pensively in the autumnal stillness.

On the long drive hardly a word was spoken, for Gay was occupied with
the cigar he had not had time to smoke after breakfast, and Molly was
thinking that but for Reuben's death, she would never have accepted Mr.
Jonathan's legacy and parted from Abel.

"All this happened because I went along the Haunt's Walk and not across
the east meadow that April afternoon," she thought, "but for that,
Jonathan would not have kissed me and Abel and I should not have
quarrelled." It was such a little thing--only the eighth of a mile which
had decided her future. She might just as easily have turned aside if
she had only suspected. But life was like that--you never suspected
until things had happened, and the little decisions, made in the midst
of your ignorance, committed you to your destiny.

The horses came out of the wood, plodding over the sandy soil, which
marked the beginning of the open country. Across the fields toward
Bottom's Ordinary, scattered groups of people were walking in twos and
threes, showing like disfiguring patches in the midst of the golden
rod and the life-everlasting. Old Adam, hobbling up the path, while
the horses stopped to drink at the well, touched his hat as he steadied
himself with the aid of his big knotted stick.

"It's a fine sight to see you back among us," he said. "If you'd come a
couple of hours earlier you'd have been in time for the wedding?"

"What wedding?" asked Gay in a clear voice, but moved by some intuitive
knowledge of what the answer would be, he did not look at Molly.

"Why, Solomon Hatch's daughter, Judy, to be sure. She's just married
the miller." For a minute he stopped, coughed, spat and then added: "Mr.
Mullen tied 'em up tight all by heart, without so much as glancin' at
the book. Ah, that young parson may have his faults, an' be unsound on
the doctrine of baptism, but he can lay on matrimony with as pious an
air as if he was conductin' a funeral."

He fell back as Gay nodded pleasantly, and the wheels grated over
the rocky ground by the well. With a slow flick on the long whip, the
carriage crossed the three roads and rolled rapidly into the turnpike.
And while she gazed straight ahead into the flat distance, Molly was
thinking, "All this has happened because I went down the Haunt's Walk
that April afternoon and not over the east meadow."



CHAPTER VII


A NEW BEGINNING TO AN OLD TRAGEDY


The wedding was over. Mr. Mullen had read the service in his melodious
voice, gazing straight over the Prayer-book as though he saw a vision in
the sunbeam above Judy's head. On that solitary occasion his soul, which
revolted from what he described in secret as the "Methodistical low
church atmosphere" of his parish, had adorned the simple word with the
facial solemnity that accompanies an elaborate ritual.

From the front pew, Sarah Revercomb, in full widow's weeds, had glared
stonily at the Reverend Orlando, as if she suspected him of some
sinister intention to tamper with the ceremony. At her side, Solomon
Hatch's little pointed beard might have been seen rising and falling
as it followed the rhythmic sound of the clergyman's voice. When the
service was over, and the congregation filed out into the leaf-strewn
paths of the churchyard, it was generally decided that Mr. Mullen's
delivery had never been surpassed in the memory of the several
denominations.

"'Twas when he came to makin' Abel say 'with all my worldly goods' that
he looked his grandest," commented old Adam, as he started for Solomon's
cottage between Sarah and Mrs. Hatch. "But, them are solemn words an'
he was wise to give a man pause for thought. Thar ain't a mo' inspirin'
sentence in the whole Prayer-book than that."

"Well, marriage ain't all promisin'," observed Sarah, "thar's a deal to
it besides, an' they're both likely to find it out befo' they're much
older."

Old Adam, who never contradicted a woman unless he was married to her,
agreed to this with some unintelligible mutters through his toothless
gums, while Mrs. Hatch remarked with effusive amiability that "it's a
sad sight to see a daughter go, even though she's a stepchild. It's
a comfort to think," she added immediately, "that Judy's got a
God-fearin', pious husband an' one with no nonsense about him for all
his good looks."

"I ain't so sure about the nonsense," retorted Sarah, "Abel's got to be
managed like all men folk, an' he ain't so different from the rest of
'em, unless it is that he's mo' set."

She harboured a carefully concealed opinion that Abel was "stooping" to
marry Judy, for the Hatches were particularly thriftless and had never
succeeded in paying a long standing mortgage. Besides, they were in the
habit of using their parlour commonly on week days, and Mrs. Hatch had
once been seen at church in a calico dress--though, it was true, she had
slipped out of the side door before the service was over. Added to these
things, Sarah had observed of late that Judy showed an inclination to
shirk her duties, and had a dangerous habit of "mooning" while she was
at the wash tub.

"Well, I like a man that's set, myself," rejoined Mrs. Hatch, as
effusive as ever. "I used to say thar never was anybody so set as my
first husband till I got my second."

"I ain't had so wide an experience as you," replied Sarah, as if
she were condescending to an acknowledged lapse in virtue. "Thar's a
difference between marryin' for the sake of matrimony, which is right
an' proper accordin' to Scripture, an' marryin' for the sake of a man,
which is a sign of weakness in a woman."

"You ain't a friend to the feelin's of natur, ma'am," remarked old Adam,
with respect.

"No, thar never was much natur in me," responded Sarah, lifting her
bombazine skirt with both hands as she stepped over a puddle. Her
floating crape veil, bought ten years after her husband's death, with
the money made from her turkeys, represented the single extravagance
as well as the solitary ambition of her life. Even as a child she had
longed ardently to wear crape, and this secret aspiration, which had
smouldered in the early poverty-stricken years of her marriage, had
burst suddenly into flame when she found herself a widow. During the
burial service over her husband, while she had sat bowed in musty
black cotton, which had been loaned her by a neighbour, she had vowed
earnestly that she would wear weeds yet for Abner before she died. Ten
years of scraping and saving were devoted to this sacred resolve, and
now, twenty years after the death of Abner Revercomb, she was wearing
a crape veil for him to his son's wedding. As she walked, so strong a
smell of camphor floated from her garments, that old Adam sneezed twice,
and then muttered hurriedly that "'twas the very season for chills."
Something of her secret pride in her garb of mourning had entered into
him while he limped beside her on his rheumatic old legs.

Instead of stopping with the others for the wedding feast at the
Solomon's cottage, Sarah pleaded a sudden palpitation of the heart, and
hurried home to put the house in order before the arrival of the bride.
Already she had prepared the best chamber and set the supper table with
her blue and white china, but as she walked quietly home from church
at the side of old Adam, she had remembered, with a sensation of panic,
that she had forgotten to make up the the feather bed, which she
rolled over for an airing. Not a speck of dust was left on the floor
or windows, and a little later, while she began spreading the sheets,
without waiting to remove her bonnet, she thought proudly that Judy
probably never stayed in so entirely respectable a chamber in her life.
Even the pitcher and basin were elaborately ornamented with peonies,
the colour of the sampler in crewel work over the washstand; and on the
bureau, between two crocheted mats of an intricate pattern, there was a
pincushion in the shape of a monstrous tomato.

Yes, it was all ready for them, she reflected, while she stood in the
doorway and surveyed the results of her handiwork. "Thar's something
wantin'," she observed presently to herself. "I never could feel that
a weddin' or a funeral was finished without a calla lily somewhere
around." Going downstairs to the kitchen, she clipped the last forced
blossoms of an unusual size from her "prize" plant, and brought them
back in a small glass vase to decorate Judy's bureau. "Now it's just
like it was when I was married," she thought, "an' it's just as it
will be when Abel's sons are bringin' home their brides." There was no
sentiment in her thoughts, for she regarded sentiment as a mere morbid
stimulant to the kind of emotion she considered both dangerous and
useless. Even the look on Abel's face, which she had been forced to
recognize as that of despair, seemed to her, on the whole, a safer
expression than one of a too-exultant joy. She was not afraid of
despair--its manifestations were familiar to her, and she had usually
found them amenable to the laws of propriety. But she felt vaguely that
happiness in some mysterious way was related to sin, and the shameless
ecstasy with which Abel had announced his engagement to Molly had
branded his emotion as positively immoral in her sight. "No decent
feelin' is goin' to make anybody's face shine like a brass plate," she
had said to herself.

After straightening the crocheted mats for the last time, she went
downstairs to the kitchen to describe the wedding to the two old
people, who, chained to their chairs by rheumatism, were on the point of
bursting with curiosity.

"An' you didn't bring me so much as a bite of cake," whimpered
grandmother, seeing her empty hands. "Here I've been settin' all day in
this cheer with my mouth waterin' for that weddin' cake."

"I'm just as sure as I can be that Mrs. Hatch is goin' to send you some
made by Blossom," replied Sarah soothingly.

"Ah, to think of Abel bein' at his own weddin' an' we settin' here,"
piped grandfather. "'Twas a hasty business, but we Revercombs were
al'ays the folk to swallow our puddin' while 'twas smokin' an' then cry
out that we didn't know 'twas hot. I never knew one of us that didn't
have to larn he was a fool befo' he could come at any wisdom."

"Well, I ain't got anything particular against the girl," said Sarah,
"but it's my bounden belief that she'll turn out a slattern. Thar's
something moonstruck about her--you can tell it by that shiftin'
skeered-rabbit look in her eyes. She's just the sort to sweep all the
trash under the bed an' think she's cleaned the room."

"It's amazin', the small sense men have in sech matters," remarked
grandfather. "Thar's a feelin' among us, I don't know whar it comes
from, that the little and squinched-up women generally run to virtue."

"Oh, I ain't sayin' she's not a good girl accordin' to her lights,"
returned Sarah, "an', after all, it ain't a man but his mother that
suffers from a slattern. Well, I must go an' lay off my weeds befo' it's
time for 'em to get here. Don't you fret, ma, Mrs. Hatch is surely goin'
to send you something."

Inspired by this prophecy, grandmother began immediately to show signs
of reviving hope, and a little later, when the sound of wheels was heard
on the road, she was seized with an anticipation so violent that she
fluttered like a withered leaf in the wind. Then the wheels stopped at
the gate, and Blossom and Mr. Mullen entered, bearing a small basket,
which contained disordered remains of the wedding feast.

"Whar's Abel?" inquired Sarah, bowing stiffly to the young clergyman.

"We passed them in the road. My horse for once outstripped his mare,"
replied Mr. Mullen, who felt a crawling sensation in the back of his
neck whenever Sarah was present, as if he were called upon to face in
her single person an entire parsimonious vestry. "I had the pleasure of
driving your granddaughter home, and now I must be going back to bring
mother. It was a delightful occasion, Mrs. Revercomb, and you are to be
congratulated on the charming addition to your family." He hadn't
meant to use the word "charming"--he had intended to say "estimable"
instead--but Sarah embarrassed him by her expression, and it slipped out
before he was aware of it. Her manner annoyed him excessively. It was as
bad as looking up suddenly in the midst of one of the finest paragraphs
in his sermon and meeting a supercilious look on a face in his
congregation.

"Humph!" observed Sarah shortly, and when he had gone, she emitted the
sound again, half to herself, half to her audience, "humph!"

"What's the matter, grandma?" inquired Blossom listlessly, "you don't
look as if you were pleased."

"Oh, I'm pleased," replied Sarah curtly. "I'm pleased. Did you notice
how yellow Abel was lookin' at the weddin'? What he needs is a good dose
of castor oil. I've seen him like that befo', an' I know."

"Oh, grandma! how can you? who ever heard of anybody taking castor oil
on their wedding day?"

"Well, thar's a lot of 'em that would better," rejoined Sarah in her
tart manner. The perfection of Mr. Mullen's behaviour in church combined
with her forgetfulness to make up the feather bed had destroyed her day,
and her irritation expressed itself as usual in a moral revolt from her
surroundings. "To think of makin' all this fuss about that pop-eyed Judy
Hatch," she thought, and a minute later she said aloud, "Thar they are
now; Blossom, you take Judy upstairs to her room an' I'll see after
Abel. It ain't any use contradictin' me. He's in for a bilious spell
just as sure as you are born." She spoke irritably, for her anxiety
about Abel's liver covered a deeper disquietude, and she was battling
with all the obstinacy of the Hawtreys against the acknowledgment that
the ailment she was preparing to dose with drugs was a simple malady
of the soul. In her moral universe, sin and virtue were two separate
entities, as easily distinguished on the surface as any other phenomena.
That a mere feeling, not produced by a disordered liver, could make a
man wear that drawn and desperate look in his face, appeared to her both
unnatural and reprehensible.

But Abel did not appear, though Sarah awaited his entrance with a
bottle in her hand. As soon as he had turned his mare out to pasture, he
crossed the road to the mill, and stopping beside the motionless wheel,
watched the excited swallows fly back and forth overhead. He knew how a
man felt who was given a life sentence in prison for an act committed in
a moment of madness. Why he had ever asked Judy to marry him--why he
had gone on calmly approaching the day of his wedding--he could no more
explain than he could explain the motives which impelled him to the
absurdities in a nightmare. It was all a part of the terrible and yet
useful perversity of life--of the perversity that enables a human being
to pass from inconsistency to inconsistency without pausing in his
course to reflect on his folly.

In front of him was the vivid green rise in the meadow, which showed
like a burst of spring in the midst of the November landscape. Beyond
it, the pines were etched in sharp outlines on the bright blue sky,
where a buzzard was sailing slowly in search of food. The weather was so
perfect that the colours of the fields and the sky borrowed the intense
and unreal look of objects seen in a crystal.

"Well, it's over and done," said Abel to himself; "it's over and done
and I'm glad of it." It seemed to him while he spoke that it was his
life, not his marriage, to which he alluded--that he had taken the
final, the irremediable step, and there was nothing to come afterwards.
The uncertainty and the suspense were at an end, for the clanging of the
prison doors behind him was still in his ears. To-morrow would be
like yesterday, the next year would be like the last. Forgetting his
political ambition, he told himself passionately that there was nothing
ahead of him--nothing to look forward to. Vaguely he realized that
inconsistent and irreconcilable as his actions appeared, they had been,
in fact, held together by a single, connecting thread, that one dominant
feeling had inspired all of his motives. If he had never loved Molly,
he saw clearly now, he should never have rushed into his marriage with
Judy. Pity had driven him first in the direction of love--he remembered
the pang that had racked his heart at the story of the forsaken
Janet--and pity again had urged him to the supreme folly of his
marriage. All his life he had been led astray by a temptation for drink.

"Poor Judy," he said aloud after a minute, "she deserves to be happy and
I'm going to try with all the strength that is in me to make her so."

And then there rose before him, as if it moved in answer to his resolve,
a memory of the past so vivid that it seemed to exist not only in his
thoughts, but in the radiant autumn fields at which he was looking. All
the old passionate sweetness, as sharp as pain, appeared to float there
in the Indian summer before him. Rapture or agony? He could not tell,
but he knew that he had lost it forever.

Turning away, he recrossed the log, and stood for a moment, hesitating,
with his hand on the gate. A decrepit figure, hobbling with bent head
through a golden cloud of dust, signed to him to stop, and while he
waited, he made out the person of old Adam, slightly the worse, he
gathered, for the wedding feast.

"I tarried thar till the last, hopin' to have still another taste of
toddy," remarked the aged merrymaker. "When a man has turned ninety he
might as well cease to take thought for his morals, an' let the natchel
bent of 'em have a chance."

It was plain that his last glass had been too much for him, and that,
for the first time in his temperate career, he was rapidly approaching a
condition of alcoholic ecstasy.

"You'd better go home and take a nap," said Abel kindly. "You can't very
well get lost between here and your house, or I'd go with you."

"It warn't the weddin' glass that was too much for me," replied the
old man at the point of tears, "'twas the one I had arterwards at the
or'nary. Not wishin' to depart from an old custom on account of a rare
festival, I stopped at Mrs. Bottom's just as young Mr. Jonathan an'
Reuben Merryweather's gal drove up from Applegate. Ah, sech a sight as
she was--all in shot silk that rustled when you looked at it--an' as
pretty as a pictur."

"So they've come back?" asked Abel, almost in a whisper.

"Yes, they've come back, an' a sad comin' it was for her, as I could see
in her face. 'What are you wearin' yo' Sunday best for, Mr. Doolittle?'
asked Mr. Jonathan, spry as a cricket. 'It's a fine weddin' I've been
to, Mr. Jonathan,' I answered, 'an' I've seen two lovin' hearts beatin'
as one befo' Mr. Mullen at the altar.' Then Reuben Merryweather's gal
called out right quickly, 'Whose weddin', old Adam?' an' when I replied,
'Abel Revercomb's,' as I was bound to, her face went as white as a han't
right thar befo' me---"

"You'd better go home or you won't be in any condition to walk there,"
said Abel angrily. "It's down right indecent to see a man of your age
rocking about in the road."

Turning quickly in his tracks, he went over the log again and on to the
loneliness of the meadows beyond.

"And she went as white as a haunt," he muttered under his breath.



CHAPTER VIII


A GREAT PASSION IN A HUMBLE PLACE


Time does not stand still even for the unhappily married. A man may
have wedded the wrong woman, but he comes down to his breakfast and goes
about his work as punctually as if he had wedded the right one. To Abel,
with the thought of Molly throbbing like a fever in his brain, it was
still possible to grind his grist and to subtract carefully the eighth
part as a toll--while Judy, hushed in day dreams, went on making
butter in a habit of absent-minded tranquillity. Life seldom deals in
cataclysmic situations--at least on the surface. Living side by side
in a married intimacy for months, Abel and Judy were still strangers to
each other. Their bodies touched while their souls were crucified at an
immeasurable distance.

To Sarah, who embraced Christian theology while she practised
religiously the doctrine of the physical basis of life, there had seemed
no cause for disturbance, until Judy entered the kitchen on a stormy
evening in June, and turned a pair of inflamed eyes on the face of her
mother-in-law. The young woman wore her wedding dress, now nearly seven
months old, and clasped in her hand a neatly bound prayer-book which had
been the gift of the Reverend Orlando. For more than six months she had
suffered silently under Sarah's eyes, which saw only outward and visible
afflictions. Now, at the first sign of quivering flesh, the older woman
was at once on the alert.

"Whar you goin', Judy?" she inquired. "You ain't thinkin' about
traipsin' out of doors on a night like this, are you?"

"Archie promised to take me to the Bible class, an' he hasn't come
back," replied Judy, while her face worked convulsively. "I've waited
for him since half past seven."

"If that don't beat all!" exclaimed Sarah. "Why, it's thunderin' like
Jedgment Day. Can't you hear it?"

"But I promised Mr. Mullen I wouldn't let anything prevent me," returned
Judy, growing sullen. "Archie said he'd be back here without fail, an' I
know he's stayed to supper over at the Halloweens'."

"Isn't it foolish to wear your best hat out in the rain?" asked Blossom,
not without surprise, for her sister-in-law had developed into something
of a slattern.

"I reckon hats are made to be worn," retorted Judy. As a rule her temper
was placid enough, but Archie's defection, after she had given him
her best neck-tie for the purpose of binding him to his promise, had
overstrained the tension of her nerves. "Where's Abner? He used to go
regular."

"He's gone upstairs so tired that he can barely hist his foot," replied
Sarah. "You'd better let that Bible class alone this evening, Judy. Yo'
salvation ain't dependin' on it, I reckon."

But in Judy's colourless body there dwelt, unknown to Nature, which has
no sense of the ridiculous, the soul of a Cleopatra. At the moment she
would cheerfully have died of an asp sooner than relinquish the study
of Exodus under the eyes of the rector. In the arid stretch of her
existence a great passion had flamed, and like most great passions, it
was ruthless, destroying, and utterly selfish. She had made butter
all day with the hope of that Bible class in her mind, and she was
determined that, whatever it cost the Revercombs, she should have her
reward this evening in the commendation of the young clergyman. That
mere thunder and lightning should keep her from his side appeared to her
little less than absurd. She knew that he had received a call within
the week, and she would have walked unshod over burning ploughshares in
order to hear him say that he had declined it.

"I've got to go," she insisted stubbornly. "If there isn't anybody to go
with me, I'll go alone."

"Why, if you're so bent on it I'll take you myself," said Abel, looking
up from the barrel of his gun, which he was cleaning. His manner to Judy
was invariably kind and even solicitous, to a degree which caused Sarah
to tell herself at times that "it wasn't natural an' wasn't goin' to
last." As long as men would behave themselves quietly, and go about
their business with the unfailing regularity of the orthodox,
she preferred, on the whole, that they should avoid any unusual
demonstration of virtue. An extreme of conduct whether good or bad made
her uneasy. She didn't like, as she put it in her mind, "anything out of
the way." Once when Abel, nettled by some whim of Judy's, had retorted
with a slight show of annoyance, his mother had experienced a positive
sensation of relief, while she said to herself with a kind of triumph
that "the old Adam was thar still."

"You've got that hackin' cough, Abel an' you oughtn't to go out in this
storm," remarked Sarah, with an uneasiness she could not conceal.

"Oh, it won't hurt me. I'm a pine knot. Are you ready, Judy?"

"It's such a little way," said Judy, still sullen under her
mother-in-law's disapproval. When Abel coughed once, while he was
getting into his rubber coat, she glanced at him angrily. Why couldn't
he have waited at least until he got out of doors? Instead of gratitude
she bore him a dull resentment for having married her, and when she
looked back on her hard life in her father's house, she beheld it
through that rosy veil of idealism in which the imaginative temperament
envelops the past or the future at the cost of the present. Then she had
had time, at least, to dream and to dawdle! During the seven months of
her marriage, she had learned that for the brooding soul there is no
anodyne so soothing as neglect, no comfort so grateful as freedom to be
unhappy.

When the door closed behind them Sarah looked at Blossom with an
eloquent expression. "Well, I never!" she exclaimed, and wrung the
dough from her hands into the tray over which she was standing. "Well I
never!"

"I don't believe it's right for Abel to give in to Judy as he does,"
said Blossom.

"I never saw a Revercomb that warn't a fool about something," answered
Sarah. "It don't matter so much what 'tis about, but it's obliged to be
about something."

Blossom sighed and bent lower over the seam she was running. She had
long since ceased to draw any consolation from her secret marriage, and
her wedding ring (bought weeks after the ceremony by Gay) caused her
pain rather than pleasure when it pressed into her bosom, where it hung
suspended by a blue ribbon from her neck. Her strong Saxon instinct for
chastity--for the integrity of feminine virtue--sometimes awoke in her,
and then she would think exultingly, "At least I am married!" But even
this amazing triumph of morality--of the spirit of Sarah Revercomb over
the spirit of the elder Jonathan Gay--showed pallid and bloodless
beside the evanescent passion to which she had been sacrificed. Destiny,
working through her temperament, had marked her for victory, but it had
been only one of those brief victories which herald defeats. The
forces of law and order--the sound racial instincts which make for the
preservation of society--these had won in the event, though they had
been, after all, powerless to change the ultimate issue. The spirit of
old Jonathan, as well as the spirit of Sarah, was immortal. The racial
battle between the soldier of fortune and the militant Calvinist was not
yet fought to a finish.

"I believe Abel would give Judy the clothes on his back if he thought
she wanted them," said Blossom, in the effort to turn her musings away
from her own troubles.

"It ain't natural," rejoined Sarah stubbornly. "It's a man's natur to be
mean about money matters whar his wife is concerned, an' when he begins
to be different it's a sign that thar's a screw loose somewhar inside of
him. My Abner was sech a spendthrift that he'd throw away a day's market
prices down at the or'nary, but he used to expect the money from a
parcel of turkeys to keep me in clothes and medicines and doctor's
bills, to say nothin' of household linen an' groceries for the whole
year round."

Blossom sighed softly, "I don't suppose there ever was a man who could
see that a woman needed anything except presents now and then," she
said, "unless it's Abel. Do you know, grandma, I sometimes think he's so
kind to Judy because he knows he doesn't love her."

"Well, I reckon, if thar's got to be a choice between love and kindness,
I'd hold on to kindness," retorted Sarah.

It was ten o'clock before Abel and Judy returned, and from the hurried
and agitated manner of their entrance, it was plain that the Bible class
had not altogether appeased Judy's temper.

"She's worn out, that's the matter," explained Abel, while they stopped
to dry themselves in the kitchen.

"You go straight upstairs to bed, Judy," said Sarah, "an' I'll send you
up a cup of gruel by Abel. You oughtn't to have gone streakin' out in
this rain, an' it's natural that it should have upset you."

"It wasn't the rain," replied Judy, and the instant afterwards, she
burst into tears and ran out of the room before they could stop her.

"I declar', I never saw anybody carry on so in my life," observed Sarah.

Abel glanced at her with a perplexed and anxious frown on his brow. "You
ought to be patient with her condition," he said. His own patience
was inexhaustible, and its root, as Blossom had suspected, lay in his
remorseful indifference. With Molly he had not been patient, but he had
loved her.

"Don't talk to me about patience," rejoined Sarah, "haven't I had nine
an' lost six?"

She was entirely without the sentiment which her son felt regarding the
physical function of motherhood, for like the majority of sentiments, it
had worn thin when it had been stretched over a continual repetition of
facts. To Abel the mystery was still shrouded in a veil of sympathy,
and was hardly to be thought of without tenderness. But his solicitude
merely nettled Sarah. Nobody had ever "carried on" over her when she had
had her nine.

"Have you said anything sharp to her to-day, mother?" he inquired
suspiciously, after a minute.

"You know I ain't, Abel. She left a dirty glass in the dairy an' I never
so much as mentioned it. Did Mr. Mullen complain of her leavin' off
mission work?"

"Why, of course not. He talked to us only a few minutes and he seemed
absent-minded. He's had a good call somewhere in the North, and he told
us that he had prayed over it unceasingly and he believed that the Lord
was directing him to larger fields."

"Did Judy hear that?"

"Yes, he told us both."

Sarah was stirring the gruel, and she appeared so absorbed in her task
that the remark she let fall a minute later bore presumably no relation
to the conversation.

"I sometimes think men ain't got any mo' sense than an unborn babe!" she
observed.

Taking the cup from her hands, Abel went up the little staircase to the
bedroom, where Judy stood before the bureau, with a long black-headed
hat pin in her hand. She had evidently not begun to undress, for her hat
was still on her head, and under the heavy shadow of the brim her eyes
looked back at her husband with an accusing and hostile expression.

"Drink this, Judy, while it is hot," he said kindly, placing the cup on
the bureau.

"I don't want it," she answered, and her voice sounded as if she were
ready to burst again into tears.

"Are you sick?"

"No."

"I'm going to sleep in the attic. Call me if you want anything."

Without replying she took off her hat and placed it on the top shelf
in the wardrobe. Had he beaten her she felt that she could almost have
loved him, but the primitive sex instinct in her was outraged by his
gentleness.

"Has anybody hurt your feelings?" asked Abel, turning suddenly on his
way to the door.

"No."

"Then, for God's sake, what is it?" he demanded, at his wit's end. "You
look as if you'd lost the last friend you had on earth."

At this she broke into hard dry sobs which rattled in her throat before
they escaped. A spasm of self-pity worked convulsively in her bosom,
and, turning away, she buried her face in her arms, while the long,
agonized tremors shook her slender figure. Looking at her, he remembered
bitterly that he had married Judy in order to make her happy. By the
sacrifice of his own inclinations he had achieved this disastrous
result. If he had tried to do evil instead of good, he could hardly have
wrought more irreparable mischief--and with the thought, pity, which had
led him astray, winged off, like an ironic sprite, and left his heart
empty of comfort.

"God knows I am sorry for you, Judy," he said in the effort to reinforce
his compassion.

But Judy, though she was avid of sympathy, did not crave an expression
of it from her husband--for her temperament was of the morbid kind
that is happiest when it is most miserable. Her heart had fed upon the
sustenance of her brain until the abnormal enlargement of that single
organ had prepared her for inevitable suffering at the hands of men--if
not from actual unkindness, yet from an amiable neglect which could
cut even more deeply. She turned in the direction of sentiment as
instinctively as a plant turns toward light, and the Reverend Orlando
Mullen had had predecessors in her affections who had been hardly so
much as aware of her existence.

As Abel went out of the door, her accusing eyes followed him while she
thought, with sentimental regret, of the many things she had given up
when she married--of Mrs. Mullen's ironing day, of the rector's darning,
of the red flannel petticoats she had no longer time to make for the
Hottentots. It was over one of these flannel petticoats that Mr. Mullen
had first turned to her with his earnest and sympathetic look, as though
he were probing her soul. At the moment she had felt that his casual
words held a hidden meaning, and to this day, though she had pondered
them in sleepless nights ever since, she was still undecided.

"I don't believe he knew how much I cared," she said, as she started
mechanically to take out her hairpins.



CHAPTER IX


A MEETING IN THE PASTURE


As Judy did not appear next morning, her breakfast was carried up to
her by Sarah, who allowed her own cakes to become leathery while she
arranged the tray. Her feet were still on the staircase, when Blossom
turned to Abel and said in a furtive and anxious voice:

"Mrs. Bottom told me yesterday the Gays were coming back to Jordan's
Journey. Have you heard anything about it?"

"No, I haven't heard," he answered indifferently, though his pulses
throbbed at the words. Rising from the table an instant later, he went
out into the yard, where the sunshine filtered softly through June
foliage. By the porch a damask rose-bush was in bloom, and the fragrance
followed him along the path between the borders of portulaca. At the
gate he found a young robin too weak to fly, and lifting it carefully,
he returned it to the nest in a pear-tree. Like all young and helpless
things, it aroused in him a tenderness which, in some strange way, was
akin to pain.

On the crooked sycamore the young leaves fluttered with shirred edges,
and beyond the mill and the fallow field, the slender green ribbons of
the corn were unfolding. As he gazed at the pines on the horizon, he
remembered the day he had swung his axe in joy under their branches, and
it seemed to him, while he looked back upon it, that the hour belonged
to the distant memories of his boyhood.

"It's over now, and I'm not going to whine about it," he said aloud to
his hound. "A plain fool is bad enough, Moses, my boy, but a whining
fool is the meanest thing God ever made in man or dog. Because I've lost
the thing I wanted most, I've no mind to wallow in the dust--but, oh,
Molly, Molly!"

She came to him again, not fair and flitting, but ardent and tender,
with her parted red mouth raised to his, and the light and darkness
trembling on her face like faint shadows in the wind. And this vision
of her, which was so vivid that it shook his heart with a pang of agony,
seemed saying to him in words which were not his--which were not words
at all, but some subtler communion of sense--"I am to be loved, but
never possessed, for, like the essence of desire, I elude forever the
conditions of mortality."

A week later, while the thought of her burned like fire in his brain, he
met her face to face in the path which led from the blazed pine over the
pasture to Jordan's Journey. Had he seen her in time, he would have fled
from the meeting, but she appeared without warning as he turned from the
turnpike to the bars. Almost before he was aware of it, he was within
touch of her and looking into her eyes. She wore her black dress still,
and the air of elegance, of strangeness, was even more obvious than when
he had met her at Applegate the day before his marriage. Her face had
lost a little of its bloom, and there was a look in it which he had
never seen there before--a look which was wistful and yet expectant, as
though, like old Reuben, she was hoping against knowledge and in despite
of disappointment.

"Molly!" he cried, and stopped short, longing to touch her hand and
yet with something, which was like conscience in the shape of Judy,
restraining him.

"Abel, how little you've changed!" she said.

"Haven't I? Well, you're yourself, too, and yet you're different."

"Different? I suppose you mean I'm wearing better clothes?"

He smiled for the first time. "I wasn't thinking about your clothes.
They never seemed to matter."

What he had meant, though he dared not utter the thought aloud, was that
she had grown softer and gentler, and was less the Molly of the flashing
charm and the defiant challenge.

"Yes, I've changed in a way, of course," she admitted presently, "I feel
grown up now, and I never felt so before. Life was all play to me until
grandfather died."

"And it isn't now?"

"Not entirely--I'm still growing."

Her hand rested on the bars beside which she was standing, and the
fragrant festoons of wild grape blooming beside the post, brushed softly
against her bosom. There was a quietness, a suggestion of restraint in
her attitude which he had never seen in the old Molly.

"The day you went away you told me you wanted to live," he said.

"I remember. I couldn't have done differently. I had to find out things
for myself. Of course, life is all just the same everywhere, but then
I didn't know it. I used to think that one had only to travel a certain
distance and one would pass the boundary of the commonplace and come
into the country of adventure. It was silly, of course, but you see
I didn't know any better. It was the fret of youth, I suppose, though
people never seem to think that women ever feel it--or, perhaps, as Mrs.
Bottom used to say, it was only the Gay blood working off."

"I don't like to hear you talk of the Gay blood in you," he said
quickly.

His voice betrayed him, and looking up, she asked quietly, "How is Judy,
Abel?"

"She's not well. It seems she suffers with her nerves."

"I'm coming to see her. Judy and I were always friends, you know."

"Yes, I know. You were a friend to every woman."

"And I am still. I've grown to love Aunt Kesiah, and I believe I'm the
only person who sees just how fine she is."

"Your grandfather saw, I think. Do you remember he used to say life was
always ready to teach us things, but that some of us were so mortal slow
we never learned till we died?"

Her eyes were starry as she looked away from him over the meadow. "Abel,
I miss him so," she said after a minute.

"I know, Molly, I know."

"Nothing makes up for him. All the rest seems so distant and unhuman.
Nothing is so real to me as the memory of him sitting in his chair on
the porch with Spot at his feet."

For a minute he did not reply, and when he spoke at last, it was only to
say:

"I wonder if a single human being could ever understand you, Molly?"

"I don't understand myself. I don't even try."

"You've had everything you could want for a year--been everywhere--seen
everything--yet, I believe, you'd give it all up to be back in the
cottage over there with Reuben and his hound?"

"Why shouldn't I?" she answered passionately, "that was what I loved."

"I suppose you're right," he said a little sadly, "that was always what
you loved."

She turned her head away, but he saw the delicate flush pass from her
cheek to her throat.

"I mean I am faithful to the things that really matter," she answered.

"And the things that do not really matter are men?" he asked with a
humour in which there was a touch of grimness.

"Perhaps you're right about some of them, at least," she answered,
smiling at a memory. "I was full of animal spirits--of the joy of
energy, and there was no other outlet. A girl sows her mental wild oats,
if she has any mind, just as a boy does. But what people never seem
to realize is that women go on and change just as men do. They seem to
think that a girl stands perfectly still, that what she is at twenty,
she remains to the end of her life. Of course that's absurd. After the
first shock of real experience that old make-believe side of things
lost all attraction for me. I could no more go back to flirting with Mr.
Mullen or with Jim Halloween than I could sit down in the road and make
mud pies for an amusement. How is Mr. Mullen, by the way?" she inquired
in a less serious tone.

"Just the same. He's had a call."

"And old Adam? Is he still living?"

"He can't walk any longer, but his mind is perfectly clear. Sometimes
his son puts his chair into an oxcart and brings him over to the
ordinary. He's still the best talker about here, and he frets if he is
left by himself."

For a moment they were silent again. Old Adam, having fulfilled his
purpose, was dismissed into space. Molly watched Abel's eyes turn to the
pines on the horizon, and in the midst of the June meadow, there was a
look in them that reminded her of the autumnal sadness of nature. She
had seen this look in Reuben's face when he gazed wistfully at the
blossoming apple boughs in the spring, and the thought came to her
that just this attitude of soul--this steadfast courage in the face of
circumstance--was the thing that life was meant to teach them both
at the end. If Abel's energy was now less effervescent, she realized
instinctively that it had become more assured. Life or marriage--or,
perhaps, both together had "tamed" him, as Reuben had prophesied, and
the rough edges of his character had worn smooth in the process.

A butterfly, marked gorgeously in blue and orange, alighted on the bar
by her hand, and when it fluttered off again, drunken with summer, her
gaze followed it into the meadow, where the music of innumerable bees
filled the sunshine.

"And you, Abel?" she asked, turning presently, "what of yourself?"

He smiled at her before answering; and with the smile, she felt again
the old physical joy in his presence--in his splendid animal vitality,
in the red-brown colour of his flesh, in the glow of his dark eyes,
which smiled down into hers. No other man had ever made this appeal to
her senses. She had struggled sometimes like a bird in a net against the
memory of it, yet it had held her, in spite of her will, even when she
was farthest away from him. The gentleness from which Judy revolted,
brought Molly's heart back to him with a longing to comfort.

"Well, I'm learning," he answered, still smiling.

"And you are happy?"

He made a gesture of assent, while he looked over her head at the
butterfly--which had found its mate and was soaring heavenward in a
flight of ecstasy. The same loyalty which had prevented his touching her
hand when they met, rebelled now against an implied reflection on Judy.

"I am glad," she said, "you deserve it."

She had given her eyes to him almost unconsciously, and their look was
like a cord which drew them slowly to each other. His pulses hammered
in his ears, yet he heard around him still the mellow murmuring of bees,
and saw the butterflies whirling deliriously together. All the forces
which had held him under restraint stretched suddenly, while he met her
eyes, like bands that were breaking. Before the solitary primal fact
of his love for her, the fog of tradition with which civilization
has enveloped the simple relation of man and woman, evaporated in the
sunlight. The harsh outlines of the future were veiled, and he saw only
the present, crowned, radiant, and sweet to the senses as the garlands
of wild grape around which the golden bees hung in a cloud. For an
instant only the vision held him; then the rush of desire faded
slowly, and some unconquerable instinct, of which he had been almost
unconscious, asserted its supremacy in his brain. The ghosts of dead
ancestors who had adhered to law at the cost of happiness; the iron
skeleton of an outgrown and yet indelibly implanted creed; the tenacity
of the racial structure against which his individual impulses had
rebelled--these things, or one of these things, proved in the end
stronger than the appeal of his passion. He longed with all his strength
to hold her in his arms--every nerve in his body ached for her--yet he
knew that because of this unconquerable instinct he was powerless to
follow his longing.

"I don't think I deserve much, Molly," he said quietly.

She hesitated still, looking away from him in the direction of her path,
which led over the meadow.

"Abel, be good to Judy," she said, without turning.

"I will, Molly, I promise you."

He moved a step toward the turnpike, stopped, and looked back.

"I can't do much for you, Molly," he said, "but if you ever need anybody
to die for you, remember I'm ready."

"I'll remember," she answered, with a smile, but her eyes were misty
when she passed the blazed pine and turned into the little path.



CHAPTER X


TANGLED THREADS


In front of Molly, the path, deep in silvery orchard grass, wound
through the pasture to the witch-hazel thicket at Jordan's Journey; and
when she entered the shelter of the trees, Gay came, whistling, toward
her from the direction of the Poplar Spring. He walked rapidly, and
his face wore an anxious and harassed expression, for he was making the
unpleasant discovery that even stolen sweets may become cloying to a
surfeited palate. His passion had run its inevitable course of desire,
fulfilment, and exhaustion. So closely had it followed the changing
seasons, that it seemed, in a larger and more impersonal aspect, as much
a product of the soil as did the flame-coloured lilies that bloomed
in the Haunt's Walk. The summer had returned, and a hardier growth had
sprung up from the ground enriched by the decay of the autumn. He was
conscious of a distinct relief because the torment of his earlier love
for Blossom was over. There was no regret in his mind for the poignant
sweetness of the days before he had married her--for the restlessness,
the expectancy, the hushed waitings, the enervating suspense--nor even
for those brief hours of fulfilment, when that same haunting suspense
had seemed to add the sharpest edge to his enjoyment. He did not suffer
to-day if she were a few minutes late at the meeting; and he disliked
suffering so much that the sense of approaching bliss had never
compensated for the pang of it. Her failures now merely made his
manufactured excuses the easier. Once, when she had not been able to
come, he had experienced a revulsion of feeling; like the sudden lifting
of a long strain of anxiety. She still pressed for an acknowledgment
of their marriage, while his refusal was still based on a very real
solicitude for his mother. Only in the last six months had his feeling
for Molly entered into the situation; but like all swift and unguarded
emotions, it absorbed the colour in his thoughts, while it left both the
past and the future in the cover of darkness.

"I wish you wouldn't wander off alone like this, Molly," he began as he
joined her.

"Oh, it's perfectly safe, Jonathan--everybody knows me for miles
around."

"But it would make mother nervous if she were to hear of it. She has
never allowed Aunt Kesiah to go off the lawn by herself."

"Poor Aunt Kesiah," said Molly softly.

He glanced at her sharply. "Why do you say that?" he asked, "she has
always seemed to me to have everything she wanted. If she hadn't had
mother to occupy her time, what under heaven would have become of her?"

"I wonder?" she returned; "but has it ever occurred to you that Aunt
Kesiah and I are not exactly alike, Jonathan?"

"Well, rather. What are you driving at?"

Her answering smile, instead of softening the effect of her words,
appeared to call attention to the width of the gulf that separated
Kesiah's generation from her own. The edge of sweetness to her look
tempered but did not blunt the keeness with which it pierced. This
quality of independent decision had always attracted him, and as he
watched her walking under the hanging garland of the wild grape, he
told himself in desperation that she was the only woman he had ever seen
whose infinite variety he could not exhaust. The mere recollection of
the others wearied him. Almost imperceptibly he was beginning to feel
a distaste for the side of life which had once offered so rich an
allurement to his senses. The idea that this might be love, after all,
had occurred to him more than once during the past six months, and he
met the suggestion with the invariable cynical retort that "he hadn't it
in him." Yet only ten minutes before, he had watched Molly coming to him
over the jewelled landscape, and the heavens had opened. Once more the
unattainable had appeared to him wrapped in the myriad-coloured veil of
his young illusions.

"Molly," he said almost in spite of himself, "what would have happened
to us if we had met five or six years ago?"

"Nothing, probably."

"Well, I'm not so sure--not if you like me half as well as I like you.
You understand, don't you, that I got myself tied up--entangled before
I knew you--but, by Jove, if I were free I'd make you think twice about
me."

"There's no use talking about what might have been, is there?"

The hint of his "entanglement," she had accepted quite simply as a
veiled allusion to an incident in his life abroad. Her interest in it
would have been keener had she been less indifferent to him as a lover,
but while she walked by his side, smiling in response to his words, she
was thinking breathlessly, like one hushed in suspense, "If Abel had
only been like that a year ago, I should not have left him." That the
qualities she had always missed in the miller had developed only through
the loss of her, she refused to admit. A swift, an almost miraculous
change had passed over her, and all the warm blood in her body seemed
to rush back to her heart, giving it the abundance of life. The world
appeared to her in a clearer and fresher light, as though a perpetual
dawn were hanging above it; and this light shone into the secret
chambers of her mind as well as over the meadows and into the shadowy
places of the Haunt's Walk. "Yes, if he had been like that I should
never have left him and all this would not have happened," she thought
again; "and if I had been like this would he ever have quarrelled with
me?" she asked herself the instant afterwards.

And Gay, walking at her side, but separated by a mental universe, was
thinking resentfully, "The deuce of it is that it might just as well
never have happened! If I'd only been a little less of a fool--If I'd
only not walked my horse across the pasture that October afternoon--If
I'd only had sense enough to see what was coming--If I'd only--oh, hang
it!"

"I'd be a better man to-day if I'd known you sooner, Molly," he said
presently. "A man couldn't tire of you because you're never the same
thing two days in succession."

"Doesn't a man tire of change?"

"I don't--it's the most blessed thing in life. I wonder why you've given
up flirting?"

"Perhaps because there isn't anybody to flirt with."

"I like that. Am I not continually at your service?"

"But I don't like your kind of flirting, somehow."

"What you want, I suppose, is a perpetual supply of Mullens. Have you
seen him, by the way?"

"He called on Aunt Angela this morning and read a chapter from the
Bible. I heard it all the way downstairs on the porch."

"And the miller?"

She was walking beside a clump of lilies, and the colour of the flowers
flamed in her face.

"I saw him for a few minutes this morning."

"How has his marriage turned out?"

"I haven't heard. Like all the others, I suppose."

"Well he's as fine a looking animal as one often encounters. His wife is
that thin, drawn out, anaemic girl I saw at Piping Tree, isn't she? Such
men always seem to marry such women."

"I never thought Judy unattractive. She's really interesting if you take
the trouble to dig deep enough."

"I suppose Revercomb dug, but it isn't as a rule a man's habit to go
around with a spade when he's in want of a wife."

With an impetuous movement, he bent closer to her:

"Look here, Molly, don't you think you might kiss me?"

"I told you the first time I ever saw you that I didn't care for
kissing."

"Well, even if you don't care, can't you occasionally be generous?
You've got a colour in your cheeks like red flowers."

"Oh, have I?"

"The trouble is, I've gone and fallen in love with you and it's turning
my head."

"I don't think it will hurt you, Jonathan."

She broke away from him before he could detain her, and while a protest
was still on his lips, ran up the walk and under the grape arbour into
the back door of the house.

Left to himself, Gay wheeled about and passed into the side-garden,
where he found Kesiah snipping off withered roses with a pair of pruning
shears.

At his approach, she paused in her task and stood waiting for him, with
the expression of interested, if automatic, attention, which appeared on
her face, as in answer to some secret spring, whenever she was invited
to perform the delicate part of a listener. She had attained at last
that battered yet smiling acquiescence in the will of Providence which
has been eloquently praised, under different names, by both theologians
and philosophers. From a long and uncomplaining submission to boredom,
she had arrived at a point of blessedness where she was unable to be
bored at all. Out of the furnace of a too ardent youth, her soul had
escaped into the agreeable, if foggy, atmosphere of middle age. Peace
had been provided for her--if not by generously presenting her with the
things that she desired, still quite as effectually by crippling the
energy of her desires, until they were content to sun themselves quietly
in a row, like aged, enfeebled paupers along the south wall of the
poorhouse.

"Aunt Kesiah," said Gay, stopping beside her, "do you think any of us
understand Molly's character? Is she happy with us or not?"

It is a pleasant thing to be at the time of life, and in the possession
of the outward advantages, which compel other persons to stop in the
midst of their own interesting affairs and begin to inquire if they
understand one's character. As Kesiah lifted a caterpillar on a leaf,
and carefully laid it in the centre of the grassy walk, she thought
quite cheerfully that nobody had ever wondered about her character, and
that it must be rather nice to have some one do so.

"I don't know, Jonathan; you will tread on that caterpillar if you
aren't careful."

"Hang the caterpillar! I sometimes suspect that she isn't quite so happy
as she ought to be."

"She didn't get over Reuben's death easily, if that is what you mean."

"I don't know whether it is what I mean or not."

"Perhaps her development has surprised you, in a way. The first touch
of sorrow changed her from a child into a woman. No one ever realized, I
suppose, the strength that was in her all the time."

Turning away from her, he stared moodily at Uncle Boaz, who was trimming
the lawn beyond the miniature box hedges of the garden. Furrows of mown
grass lay like golden green wind-drifts behind the swinging passage of
the scythe, and the face of the old negro showed scarred and wistful
under the dappled sunshine. June beetles, coloured like emeralds, spun
loudly through the stillness, which had in it an almost human quality of
hushed and expectant waiting. All Nature seemed to be breathing softly,
lest she should awake from her illusion and find the world dissolved
into space.

"I wonder if it is really the miller?" said Gay suddenly. "The truth is
her life seems empty of something."

"I beg your pardon?" returned Kesiah, startled, for she had been
thinking not of Molly's life, but of her own. It was not much of a life,
to be sure, but it was all she had, so she felt it was only natural that
she should think about it.

"I said I wondered if it were the miller," repeated Gay a little
impatiently. Like his mother he found Kesiah's attacks of inattention
very trying--and if she were to get deaf the only position she had ever
filled with credit would be necessarily closed to her. What on earth did
she have to occupy her anyway if not other people's affairs?

"I can hardly believe that," she answered. "Of course he's a very
admirable young man, but it's out of the question that Molly should
worry her mind about him after he has gone and married another woman."

Her logic seemed rather feeble to Gay, but as he had told himself often
before, Kesiah never could argue.

"I hear the fellow's come out quite surprisingly. Mr. Chamberlayne tells
me he is speaking now around the neighbourhood, and he has a pretty
command of rough and ready oratory."

"I suppose that is why Molly is so anxious to hear him. She has ordered
her horse to ride over to a meeting at Piping Tree this afternoon."

"What?" He stared in amazement.

"Young Revercomb is going to speak at an open air meeting of some
kind--political, I imagine--and Molly is going to hear him."

His answer was a low whistle. "At what time?" he asked presently.

"She ordered her horse at three--the very hottest part of the day."

"Well, she'll probably have sunstroke," Gay replied, "but at any rate,
I'll not let her have it alone."



CHAPTER XI


THE RIDE TO PIPING TREE


A look of surprise came into Molly's face when she found Gay waiting for
her, but it passed quickly, and she allowed him to mount her without
a word of protest or inquiry. She had been a good rider ever since
the days when she galloped bareback on Reuben's plough horses to the
pasture, and Gay's eyes warmed to her as she rode ahead of him down the
circular drive, checkered with sunlight. Yet in spite of her prettiness,
which he had never dignified by the name of beauty, he knew that it was
no superficial accident of colour or of feature that had first caught
his fancy and finally ripened his casual interest into love. The charm
was deeper still, and resulted from something far subtler than the
attraction of her girlish freshness--from something vivid yet soft in
her look, which seemed to burn always with a tempered warmth. For need
of a better word he called this something her "soul," though he knew
that he meant, in reality, certain latent possibilities of passion which
appeared at moments to pervade not only her sensitive features, but her
whole body with a flamelike glow and mobility. While he watched her he
remembered his meeting with Blossom, and the marriage to which in some
perfectly inexplicable manner it had led him, but it was not in his
power, even if he had willed it, to conjure up the violence of past
emotions as he could summon back the outlines of the landscape which had
served as their objective background.

"Molly," he said, riding closer to her as they passed into the turnpike,
"I wish I knew why we are going on this wild goose chase after the
miller?"

"I'm not going after him--it's only that I want to hear him speak. I
don't see why that should surprise you."

"I didn't know that you were interested in politics?"

"I'm not--in politics."

"In the miller then?"

"Why shouldn't I be interested in him? I've known him all my life."

"The fact remains that you're in a different position now and can't
afford a free rein to your sportive fancies."

"He'd be the last to admit what you say about position--if you mean
class. He doesn't believe in any such thing, nor do I."

"Money, my dear, is the only solid barrier--but he's got a wife,
anyway."

"Judy and I are friends. That's another reason for my wanting to hear
him."

"But to ride six miles at three o'clock on a scorching day to listen to
a stump speech by a rustic agitator, seems to me a bit ridiculous."

"There was no reason for your coming, Jonathan. I didn't ask you."

"I accept the reproof, and I am silent--but I can't resist returning it
by telling you that you need a man's strong hand as much as any woman I
ever saw."

"I don't need yours anyway."

"By Jove, that's just whose, my pretty. You needn't think that because I
haven't made you love me, I couldn't."

"I doubt it very much--but you may think so if you choose."

"Suppose I were to dress in corduroy and run a grist mill."

Her laugh came readily.

"You're too fat!"

"Another thrust like that, and I'll gallop off and leave you."

His face was bent toward hers, and it was only the quick change in her
expression, and the restive start of her horse, that made him swerve
suddenly aside and glance at the blazed pine they were passing. Leaning
against the tree, with her arms resting on the bars, and her body
as still as if it were chiselled out of stone, Blossom Revercomb was
watching them over a row of tall tiger lilies. Her features were drawn
and pallid, as if from sharp physical pain, and a blight had spread over
her beauty, like the decay of a flower that feeds a canker at its heart.

With an exclamation of alarm, Molly turned her horse's head in the
direction of the pine, but with a hasty yet courteous gesture, Gay rode
quickly ahead of her, and leaning from his saddle spoke a few words in
an undertone. The next instant Blossom had fled and the two were riding
on again down the turnpike.

"She looked so unhappy, Jonathan. I wonder what was the matter?"

"She was tired, probably." He despised himself for the evasion, for
his character was naturally an open one, and he heartily disliked
all subterfuge. Yet he implied the falsehood even while he hated the
necessity which forced him to it. So all his life he had done the things
that he condemned, condemning himself because he did them. For more
than a year now he had lived above a continuous undercurrent of
subterfuge--he had lied to Blossom, he had deceived his mother, he had
wilfully encouraged Molly to believe a falsehood--and yet all the time,
he was conscious that his nature preferred the honourable and the candid
course. His intentions were still honest, but long ago in his boyhood,
when he had first committed himself to impulse, he had prepared the way
for his subsequent failures. To-day, with a weakened will, with an ever
increasing sensitiveness of his nervous system, he knew that he should
go on desiring the good while he compromised with the pleasanter aspect
of evil.

"She wouldn't speak to me," said Molly, "I can't understand it. What did
you say to her?"

"I asked her if she were ill and if we could do anything for her."

"I can't get over her look. I wish I had jumped down and run after her,
but she went off so quickly."

So intense was the sunshine that it appeared to burn into the white
streak of the road, where the dust floated like some smoke on the
breathless air. From the scorched hedges of sumach and bramble, a chorus
of grasshoppers was cheerfully giving praise to a universe that ignored
it.

As Molly rode silently at Gay's side, it seemed to her that Blossom's
startled face looked back at her from the long, hot road, from the waste
of broomsedge, from the cloudless sky, so bright that it hurt her eyes.
It was always there wherever she turned: she could not escape it. A
sense of suffocation in the midst of space choked back the words she
would have spoken, and she felt that the burning dust, which hung low
over the road, had drifted into her brain and obscured her thoughts as
it obscured the objects around her. When, after passing the ordinary,
they turned into the Applegate road, the heavy shade brought a sensation
of relief, and the face which had seemed to start out of the blanched
fields, faded slowly away from her.

As she entered the little village of Piping Tree, her desire to hear
Abel's speech left her as suddenly as it had come, and she began to wish
that she had not permitted herself to follow her impulse, or that at the
last moment she had forbidden Gay to accompany her. In place of the cool
determination of an hour ago, a confusing hesitancy, a baffling shyness,
had taken possession of her, weakening her resolution. She felt all at
once that in coming to Piping Tree she had yielded herself to an emotion
against which she ought to have struggled to the end. Simple as the
incident of the ride had appeared to her in the morning, she saw now
that it was, in reality, one of those crucial decisions, in which the
will, like a spirited horse, had broken control and swerved suddenly
into a diverging road in spite of the pull of the bit.

"I don't believe I'll stay, after all, Jonathan," she said weakly. "It's
so hot and I don't really want to hear him."

"But we're here now, Molly, and he's already begun." Against the
feminine instinct to fight the battle and then yield the victory, he
opposed the male determination to exact the reward in return for the
trouble. "It's over there in the picnic grounds by the court-house," he
pursued. "Come on. We needn't dismount if you don't feel like it--but
I've a curiosity to know what he's talking about."

Her fuss, of course, he told himself, had been foolish, but after she
had made the fuss, he had no intention of returning without hearing
the miller. Abel's ambition as an orator bored him a little, for in his
class the generations ahead of him had depleted the racial supply of
political material. The nuisance of politics had been spared him, he
would have said, because the control of the State was passing from the
higher to the lower classes. To his habit of intellectual cynicism, the
miller's raw enthusiasm for what Gay called the practically untenable
and ideally heroic doctrine of equality, offered a spectacle for honest
and tolerant amusement.

"Oh, come on," he urged again after a moment, "we'll stop by the fence
under that cherry-tree and nobody will see us."

As he spoke he turned his horse toward the paling fence, while Molly
hesitated, hung back, regretted bitterly that she had come, and then
slowly followed. In the cherry-tree, which was laden with red cherries a
little over ripe, birds were quarrelling, and for a minute she could not
separate the sound of Abel's voice from the confusion around her. Then
his figure, standing under a stunted cedar on a small raised platform,
which was used for school celebrations or out-of-door concerts, appeared
to gather to itself all that was magnetic and alive in the atmosphere.
Of the whole crowd, including Gay, the speaker in his blue shirt, with
his head thrown back enkindled from the fire of his enthusiasm, seemed
the one masculine and dominating intelligence. To Molly he represented
neither orator nor reformer, but a compelling force which she felt
rather than heard. What he said she was hardly aware of--for it was
emotion not thought that he aroused in her.

"That's good!" said Jonathan quietly at her side, and glancing at him
she realized that Gay was regarding merely a picturesque embodiment
of the economic upheaval of society. Judging the scene from Gay's
standpoint, she saw that it was, after all, only the ordinary political
gathering of a thinly settled community. The words, she knew now, were
familiar. It was the personality of the speaker which charged them with
freshness, with inspiration. What was it but the old plea for social
regeneration through political purity--an appeal to put the dream of the
idealist into the actual working of the State, since it is only through
the brain of the dreamer that a fact may be born into the world.

"He can speak all right," observed Gay carelessly, "there's no doubt
about that."

"I'd like to go, if you don't mind," answered Molly, and turning she
rode softly away from the picnic grounds through the scattered hamlet,
too small to be called a village. An old man, killing slugs in a potato
field, stared after them with his long stemmed corn-cob pipe hanging
loosely between his lips. Then when they had disappeared, he shook his
head twice very solemnly, spat on the ground, and went on patiently
murdering slugs.

"'Tis that fly-up-the-creek miller as they've come arter," he muttered.
"Things warn't so in my day, so they oughtn't to be so now. I ain't got
no use for anything that ain't never been befo'."

And in different language, the same thought was stirring in Gay's mind.
"It's all stuff and nonsense, these hifaluting radical theories. There's
never been a fairer distribution of property and there's never going to
be."

They rode in silence under the flowering locust-trees in the single
street, and then, crossing the grassy common, cantered between two
ripening fields of oats, and turned into the leafy freshness of the
Applegate road. The sun was high, but the long, still shadows had begun
to slant from the west, and the silence was brooding in a mellow light
over the distance.

"I don't know what we're coming to," said Gay at last, when they had
ridden a mile or two without speaking. What he really meant, though
he did not say it, was, "I don't know why in the devil's name you keep
thinking about that fellow?"

Though his own emotions were superior to reason, he was vaguely
irritated because Molly had allowed hers, even in a small matter, to
assert such a supremacy. He was accustomed to speak carelessly of
woman as "an emotional being," yet this did not prevent his feeling an
indignant surprise when woman, as occasionally happened, illustrated the
truth of his inherited generalization. A lover of the unconventional for
himself, he was almost as strong a hater of it for the women who were
related to him. It would have annoyed him excessively to see Kesiah make
herself conspicuous in any way, or deviate by a hair's breadth from the
accepted standard of her sex. And now Molly, with whom he had fallen
in love, had actually flushed and paled under his eyes at the sight of
young Revercomb! In some subtle manner she seemed to have stooped in his
estimation--to have lowered herself from the high and narrow pedestal
upon which he had placed her! Yet so contradictory are the passions,
that he felt he loved her the more, if possible, because of the angry
soreness at his heart.

Turning in the direction of Applegate, they continued their ride at
a canter, and the afternoon was over when they passed the cross-roads
again on their homeward way. A thin mist floated like thistledown from
the marshes, which were so distant that they were visible only as a
pinkish edge to the horizon. Large noisy insects, with iridescent wings,
hovered around the purple, heavy scented tubes of the Jamestown weeds by
the roadside, and the turnpike, glimmering like a white band through
the purple dusk, was spangled with fireflies. Gay was talking as they
approached the blazed pine, which stood out sinister and black against
the afterglow, and it was only when Molly cried out sharply that he saw
Blossom's face looking at them again over the tiger lilies.

"Why, what in the deuce!" he exclaimed, not in anger, but in amazement.

"Blossom, wait for me!" called Molly, and would have slipped to the
ground had not Gay reached out and held her in the saddle.

Then the figure of Blossom, which had waited there evidently since their
first passing, vanished like an apparition into the grey twilight.
The pallid face floated from them through the grape-scented mist, and
Molly's call brought no answer except the cry of a whip-poor-will from
the thicket.



CHAPTER XII


ONE OF LOVE'S VICTIMS


A week later Jim Halloween stopped with a bit of news at Bottom's
Ordinary, where old Adam Doolittle dozed under the mulberry tree in a
rush chair which had been brought over in his son's oxcart.

"Have you all heard that our Mr. Mullen has accepted a call to larger
fields?" he inquired, "an' that Judy Revercomb has gone clean daft
because he's going to leave us?"

"She didn't have far to go," observed Mrs. Bottom.

"Well, you'd never have known it to look at her," commented young Adam,
"but 'tis a true sayin' that you can't tell the quality of the meat by
the colour of the feathers."

"You'd better be speakin' particular, suh, an' not general," retorted
old Adam, who was in a querulous mood as the result of too abrupt an
awakening from his nap. "What you ain't known it doesn't follow other
folks ain't, does it? Human natur is generally made with a streak of
foolishness an' a streak of sense, just as fat an' lean runs in a piece
of bacon. That's what I say, an' I reckon I ought to know, bein' turned
ninety."

"All the same thar's some folks that ain't streaked at all, but a solid
lump of silliness like Judy Hatch," returned his son.

This was too much for the patience of the patriarchial spirit, and old
Adam began to shake as though he were suddenly smitten with palsy.

"What do you mean by contradictin' me, suh? Didn't I bring you into the
world?" he demanded.

A reproachful shake of the head passed round the group.

"You oughtn't to contradict him, young Adam. Ain't he yo' pa?" said Mrs.
Bottom, rebukingly.

"I warn't contradictin', I was talkin'," replied young Adam, abashed by
the evident disapprobation that surrounded him.

"Well, don't talk, suh, until you can talk sense," rejoined his father.
"When a talker has turned ninety an' can meet me on equal ground, I'll
consent to argue with him."

His lower lip protruded threateningly from his toothless gums, while
two tears of anger rolled slowly out of his eyes and over his veined and
roughened cheeks to the crescent shaped hollow of his chin. So deeply
rooted in his mind was the conviction that his ninety years furnished an
unanswerable argument for the truth of his opinions, that the assurance
of experience had conferred upon him something of that manner of
superhuman authority with which the assurance of inexperience had
endowed Mr. Mullen.

"I for one was al'ays against Abel's marrying," interposed Betsey with
a placable air. "I knew she'd be a drag on him, an' now that he's goin'
into politics with sech good chances, the mo's the pity. I've told him
so time and agin when he stopped at the or'nary."

At this point the appearance of Solomon Hatch caused her to explain
hurriedly, "We were jest speakin' of Abel an' his chances for the
Legislature. You've got a mighty good son-in-law, Solomon."

"Yes," said Solomon, sourly, "yes, but Judy's a fool."

The confession had burst from an overburdened soul, for like Gay
he could tolerate no divergence from the straight line of duty, no
variation from the traditional type, in any woman who was related to
him. Men would be men, he was aware, but if any phrase so original as
"women will be women" had been propounded to him, he would probably have
retorted with philosophic cynicism, that "he did not see the necessity."
His vision was enclosed in a circle beyond which he could not penetrate
even if he had desire to, and the conspicuous fact within this circle
at the moment was that Judy had made a fool of herself--that she had
actually burst out crying in church when Mr. Mullen had announced his
acceptance of a distant call! He was sorry for Abel, because Judy was
his wife, but, since it is human nature to exaggerate the personal
element, he was far sorrier for himself because she was his daughter.

"Yes, Judy's a fool," he repeated angrily, and there was a bitter
comfort in the knowledge that he had first put into words the thought
that had engaged every mind at the ordinary.

"Oh, she's young yet, an' she'll outgrow it," observed Betsey as
sincerely as she had made the opposite remark some minutes before. "A
soft heart is mo' to be pitied than blamed, an' it'll soon harden into
shape now she's settled down to matrimony."

"I ain't never seen a female with an ounce of good hard sense except
you, Mrs. Bottom," replied Solomon. "Thar's a contrariness in the rest
of 'em that makes 'em tryin' companions to a rational critter like man,
with a firm grip on his heart. To think of gittin' a husband like Abel
Revercomb--the risin' man in the county--an' then to turn aside from the
comforts of life on o'count of nothin' mo' than a feelin'."

"Well, it ain't as if she'd taken a fancy to a plain, ordinary kind of
man," remarked Betsey. "Thar's somethin' mo' elevatin' about a parson,
an' doubtless it's difficult to come down from a pulpit to common earth
when you've once lifted yo' eyes to it. Thar warn't no shame about her
cryin' out like that in church. They ought to have broke it to her mo'
gently."

"I warn't thar," said old Adam, "but how did Abel conduct himself?"

"Oh, he just got up an' led her out sort of gently, while she was cryin'
an' sobbin' so loud that it drowned what Mr. Mullen was sayin'," replied
Betsey.

"Thar ain't a better husband in the county," said Solomon, "accordin' to
a man's way of lookin' at it, but it seems a woman is never satisfied."

"I'm glad I never married," remarked young Adam, "for I might have got
one of the foolish sort seein' as they're so plentiful."

"Well, I never axed much bein' so unattractive to the sex," observed Jim
Halloween, "an' as long as a woman was handsome, with a full figger, an'
sweet tempered an' thrifty an' a good cook, with a sure hand for pastry,
an' al'ays tidy, with her hair curlin' naturally, an' neat an' fresh
without carin' about dress, I'd have been easy to please with just the
things any man might have a right to expect."

"It's the way with life that those that ax little usually get less,"
commented old Adam, "I ain't sayin' it's all as it ought to be, but by
the time the meek inherit the earth thar'll be precious little left on
it except the leavin's of the proud."

"Thar ain't any way of cultivatin' a proud natur when you're born meek,
is thar?" inquired his son.

"None that I ever heerd of unless it be to marry a meeker wife. Thar's
something in marriage that works contrariwise, an' even a worm of a man
will begin to try to trample if he marries a worm of a woman. Who's that
ridin' over the three roads, young Adam?"

"It's Abel Revercomb. Come in an' pass the time of day with us, Abel."

But the miller merely shouted back that he had ridden to Piping Tree for
a bottle of medicine, and went on at a gallop. Then he passed from the
turnpike into the sunken road that led to the mill, and the cloud of
dust kicked up by his mare drifted after him into the distance.

In spite of the scene in church, Abel had felt no resentment against
Judy. He knew that she had made herself ridiculous in the eyes of
the congregation, and that people were pitying him on account of
her hopeless infatuation for the young clergyman, but because he was
indifferent to her in his heart, he was able to look at the situation
from an impersonal point of view, and to realize something of what she
had suffered. When Solomon had railed at her after the service, Abel had
stopped him in indignation.

"If you can't speak civilly to my wife, you can leave my house," he said
sharply.

"Good God, man! Don't you know she's making a laughin' stock of you?"

"That's a lie!" Abel had replied curtly, and Solomon, with the craven
spirit of all natural despots, had muttered beneath his breath that he
"reckoned, after all, it must have been a sudden attack of sickness."

Of the attack and its nature Abel had said no word after this even to
Judy. During that embarrassed walk out of the church, while she clung
sobbing hysterically to his arm, he had resolved once for all that,
even though her behaviour cost him his ambition, he would never stoop to
reproach her. What right, indeed, had he to reproach her when he loved
Molly quite as madly, if not so openly, as she loved the rector? It was
as if he looked on Judy's suffering through his own, and was therefore
endowed with a quality of understanding which his ordinary perceptions
would never have given him.

When he came in sight of the mill, the flash of red wheels caught his
eyes, and he distinguished Mr. Mullen's gig in the road in front of the
door. Having seen Judy as he rode by on his round of visits, the rector
had stopped for a moment to inquire if she had entirely recovered her
health.

"I was much concerned about her illness in church yesterday," he
remarked, turning to the miller.

"I didn't know she was up," replied Abel, observing the inflamed and
swollen state of her features, which had apparently escaped the notice
of Mr. Mullen. "Oughtn't you to have stayed in bed, Judy?" he asked
kindly.

"Oh, no, I'd rather be about," responded Judy hurriedly. "I came over
from the house with a message for you when I saw Mr. Mullen passin'."

"I am trying a young horse of Jim Halloween's," said the clergyman, "my
bay has gone lame, and Jim offered me this one for the day. Badly broken
and needs a firm bit. I'm inclined to believe that he has never been
put between shafts before, for I had quite a sharp tussle with him about
passing that threshing machine in Bumpass's field."

"Oh, that roans all right if you don't fret him," replied Abel, who had
a poor opinion of the rector's horsemanship. "Stop jerking at his mouth,
and give him his head."

But the Reverend Orlando, having drifted naturally into the habit
of thinking that he had been placed here to offer, not to receive,
instruction, appeared a little restive under the other's directions.

"I flatter myself that I possess the understanding of horses," he
replied. "I've never had a disagreement with Harry, though I've driven
him every day since I've been here."

"All the same I'd keep a steady hand if I were going by that threshing
machine up the road," rejoined Abel who magnanimously refrained from
adding that he had assisted at the purchase of Harry, and that horse had
been fourteen, if a day, when he passed into the clergyman's keeping.

A healthful glow suffused Mr. Mullen's cheeks, while he struggled
valiantly to conceal his annoyance. He was very young, and in spite of
his early elevation to a position of spiritual leadership, he remained
after all merely an ordinary mortal. So he stiffened perceptibly on
the shiny seat of his gig, and gave a sharp pull at the reins, which
wrenched the head of the young roan away from a clump of sassafras.

"It is better for every man to follow his own ideas, don't you think,
Mr. Revercomb?" he replied, advocating in his resentment a principle
which he would have been the first to rap soundly had it been advanced
by one of his parishioners. "I mean, of course, in the matter of
driving."

"When do you go?" asked Judy suddenly, and turned her face away because
she could not trust herself to meet his beautiful, earnest eyes.

"Within a fortnight. It is important that I should assume my new
responsibilities immediately."

"And you won't come back ever again?" The meadows swam in a blur before
her eyes, and she thought of the purple velvet slippers which would
never be finished.

He was a kind-hearted young man, who wished well to all the world, and
especially to those of his congregation who had profited spiritually
by his sermons. If he had suspected the existence of Judy's passion, it
would undoubtedly have distressed him--but he did not suspect it, owing
to a natural obliquity of vision, which kept him looking away from the
world as it is in the direction of a mental image of the world as he
imagined it. So, with an amiable word or two of regret that Providence
had arranged his removal to wider fields, he drove on, sitting very
erect and sawing earnestly at the mouth of the young horse.

"He's a first-rate parson, but a darn fool of a horseman," observed
Abel, with the disgust of a good driver for a poor one. "You'd better go
in and lie down, Judy, you look like a ghost."

"I don't want to lie down--I wish I were dead," replied Judy, choking
back her hysterical sobs. Then turning suddenly into the mill, she sank
against the old mill-stone on the wooden platform and burst into a fit
of wild and agonized weeping. Her hand, when he touched it, was as cold
as clay and as unresponsive to his.

"Judy," he said and his voice was wonderfully gentle, "does it really
mean so much to you? Are you honestly grieving like this about Mr.
Mullen?"

If he had only known it his gentleness to her was the thing for which
at times she almost hated him. The woman in her was very primitive--a
creature that harked back to the raw sensations of the jungle--and
nothing less than sheer brutality on Abel's part could free her from the
charm of the young clergyman's unconscious cruelty.

She looked up at him with accusing eyes, which said, "I don't care who
knows that I love him," as plainly as did her huddled and trembling
figure, clinging pathetically to the old mill-stone, as though it were
some crudely symbolic Rock of Ages which she embraced.

"Is it because he is going away or would you have felt this just as much
if he had stayed?" he asked, after a minute in which he had watched her
with humorous compassion.

Raising herself at the question, she pushed the damp hair from her
forehead, and sat facing him on the edge of the platform.

"I could have borne it--if--if I might have had his sermons every Sunday
to help me," she answered, and there was no consciousness of shame,
hardly any recognition of her abasement, in her tone. Like all helpless
victims of great emotions, she had ceased to be merely an individual and
had become the vehicle of some impersonal destructive force in nature.
It was not Judy, but the passion within her that was speaking through
her lips.

"But what good would they have done you? You would have been miserable
still."

"At--at least I should have seen him, an'--an' been strengthened in my
religion---"

The grotesque, the pitiless horror of it struck him for an instant. That
she was half distraught and wholly morbid, he saw from her look, and the
sight awakened that indomitable pity which had served always as a medium
for the biting irony of life.

"To save my soul I can't see what satisfaction you would have got out of
that," he remarked.

"I did--I did. They helped me to be spiritual minded," wailed Judy with
the incoherence of complete despair. If her infatuation was ridiculous,
it occurred to Abel that her courage, at least, was sublime. From a
distance and with brighter hair, she might even have been mistaken for
a tragic example of immortal passion. The lover in his blood pitied her,
but the Calvinist refused to take her seriously.

"Well, if I were you, I'd go in and lie down," he said feeling that it
was, after all, the best advice he could offer her. "You're sick, that's
what's the matter with you, and a cup of tea will do you more good than
hugging that old mill-stone. I know you can't help it, Judy," he added
in response to a gesture of protestation, "you were born that way, and
none of us, I reckon, can help the way we're born." And since it is
easier for a man to change his creed than his inheritance, he spoke in
the tone of stern fatalism in which Sarah, glancing about her at life,
was accustomed to say to herself, "It's like that, an' thar wouldn't be
any justice in it except for original sin."

Judy struggled blindly to her feet, and still he did not touch her. In
spite of his quiet words there was a taste of bitterness on his lips,
as though his magnanimity had turned to wormwood while he was speaking.
After all, he told himself in a swift revulsion of feeling, Judy was his
wife and she had made him ridiculous.

"I know it's hard on you," she said, pausing on the threshold in the
vain hope, he could see, that some word would be uttered which would
explain things or at least make them bearable. None was spoken, and her
foot was on the single step that led to the path, when there came the
sound of a horse running wildly up the road through the cornlands,
and the next instant the young roan passed them, dragging Mr. Mullen's
shattered rig in the direction of the turnpike.

"Let me get there, Judy," said Abel, pushing her out of his way,
"something has happened!"

But his words came too late. At sight of the empty gig, she uttered a
single despairing shriek, and started at a run down the bank, and over
the mill-stream. Midway of the log, she stumbled shrieked again, and
fell heavily to the stream below, from which Abel caught her up as if
she were a child, and carried her to the opposite side, and across the
rocky road to the house. As she lay on Sarah's bed, with Blossom working
over her, she began to scream anew, half unconsciously, in the voice of
frenzied terror with which she had cried out at the sound of the running
horse. Her face was grey, but around her mouth there was a blue circle
that made it look like the sunken mouth of an old woman, and her
eyes--in which that stark terror was still visible, as though it had
been rendered indelible by the violence of the shock that had called
it into being--seemed looking through the figures around her, with the
intense yet unseeing gaze with which one might look through shadows in
search of an object one does not find.

"Get the doctor at once, Abel," said Blossom, "Grandma says something
has happened to bring on Judy's time. Had you two been quarrelling?"

"Good God, no. Mr. Mullen's horse ran away with him and Judy saw it
before I could catch her. I don't know yet whether he is dead or alive."

"I saw him running bareheaded through the cornfield just as you brought
Judy in, and I wondered what was the matter. He was going after his
horse, I suppose."

"Well, he's done enough harm for one day. I'm off to Piping Tree for Dr.
Fairley."

But two hours later, when he returned, with the physician on horseback
at his side, Mr. Mullen's driving, like most earnest yet ignorant
endeavours, had already resulted in disaster. All night they worked
over Judy, who continued to stare through them, as though they were but
shadows which prevented her from seeing the object for which she was
looking. Then at sunrise, having brought a still-born child into the
world, she turned her face to the wall and passed out of it in search of
the adventure that she had missed.



CHAPTER XIII


WHAT LIFE TEACHES


Judy was laid away amid the low green ridges in the churchyard, where
the drowsy hum of the threshing in a wheatfield across the road, was the
only reminder of the serious business of life. And immediately, as
if the beneficent green had enveloped her memory, her weaknesses were
effaced and her virtues were exalted in the minds of the living. Their
judgment was softened by a vague feeling of awe, but they were not
troubled, while they stood in a solemn and curious row around her grave,
by any sense of the pathetic futility of individual suffering in the
midst of a universe that creates and destroys in swarms. The mystery
aroused no wonder in their thoughts, for the blindness of habit, which
passes generally for the vision of faith, had paralyzed in youth their
groping spiritual impulses.

On the following Sunday, before leaving for fresher fields, Mr. Mullen
preached a sermon which established him forever in the hearts of his
congregation, and in the course of it, he alluded tenderly to "the
exalted Christian woman who has been recently removed from among us to a
brighter sphere." It was, on the whole as Mrs. Gay observed afterwards,
"his most remarkable effort"; and even Sarah Revercomb, who had heard
that her daughter-in-law was to be mentioned in the pulpit, and had
attended from the same spiritual pride with which she had read the
funeral notice in the Applegate papers, admitted on her way home that
she "wished poor Judy could have heard him." In spite of the young
woman's removal to a sphere which Mr. Mullen had described as
"brighter," she had become from the instant of her decease, "poor Judy"
in Sarah's thoughts as well as on her lips.

To Abel her death had brought a shock which was not so much a sense of
personal regret, as an intensified expression of the pity he had felt
for her while she lived. The huddled figure against the mill-stone had
acquired a new significance in the act of dying. A dignity which had
never been hers in life, enfolded her when she lay with the accusing and
hostile look in her face fading slowly into an expression of peace. With
the noble inconsistency of a generous heart, he began to regard Judy
dead with a tenderness he had never been able to feel for Judy living.
The less she demanded of him, the more he was ready to give her.

"I declar' it does look as if Abel was mournin'," remarked Betsey
Bottom to Sarah on a September afternoon several months later. "It
ain't suprisin' in his case seein' he jest married her to get even with
Molly."

"I don't believe myself in settin' round an' nursin' grief," responded
Sarah, "a proper show of respect is well an' good, but nobody can expect
a hearty, able bodied man to keep his thoughts turned on the departed.
With women, now, it's different, for thar's precious little satisfaction
some women get out of thar husbands till they start to wearin' weeds for
'em."

"You've worn weeds steady now, ain't you, Mrs. Revercomb?"

Sarah set her mouth tightly. "They were too costly to lay away," she
replied, and the words were as real a eulogy of her husband as she had
ever uttered.

"It's a pity Abel lost Molly Merryweather," said Betsey. "Is thar any
likelihood of thar comin' together again? Or is it true--as the rumour
keeps up--that she is goin' to marry Mr. Jonathan befo' many months?"

"It ain't likely she'll throw away all that good money once she's got
used to it," said Sarah. "For my part, I don't hold with the folks that
blamed her for her choice. Thar ain't many husbands that would be worthy
of thar hire, an' how was she to find out, till she tried, if Abel was
one of those few or not?"

"He al'ays seemed to me almost too promisin' for his good looks, Mrs.
Revercomb. I'm mighty partial to looks in a man, thar ain't no use my
denyin' it."

"Well, I ain't," said Sarah, "they're no mo' than dross an' cobwebs in
my sight, but we're made different an' thar's no sense arguin' about
tastes--though I must say for me that I could never understand how a
modest woman like you could confess to takin' pleasure in the sight of a
handsome man."

"Well, immodest or not, I hold to it," replied Betsey in as amiable a
manner as if there had been no reflection upon her refinement. "Abel
stands a good chance for the legislature now, don't he?"

"I ain't a friend to that, for I never saw the man yet that came out of
politics as clean as he went into 'em, and thar ain't nothin' that
takes the place of cleanness with me." In her heart she felt for Betsey
something of the contempt which the stoic in all ranks of life feels for
the epicurean.

At supper that night Sarah repeated this conversation, and to her
astonishment, not Abel, but Blossom, went pitiably white and flinched
back sharply as if fearing a second fall of the lash.

"I don't believe it! Mr. Jonathan will never marry Molly. There's no
truth in it!" she cried.

Over the coffee-pot which she has holding, Sarah stared at her in
perplexity. "Why, whatever has come over you, Blossom?" she asked.

"You haven't been yo'self for a considerable spell, daughter," said
Abner, turning to her with a pathetic, anxious expression on his great
hairy face. "Do you feel sick or mopin'?"

He looked at Blossom as a man looks at the only thing he loves in life
when he sees that thing suffering beneath his eyes and cannot divine the
cause. The veins grew large and stood out on his forehead, and the big
knotted hand that was carrying his cup to his lips, trembled in the air
and then sank slowly back to the table. His usually dull and indifferent
gaze became suddenly piercing as if it were charged with electricity.

"It's nothing, father," said Blossom, pressing her hand to her bosom,
as though she were choking for breath, "and it's all silly talk, I know,
about Molly."

"What does it matter to you if it's true?" demanded Sarah tartly,
but Blossom, driven from the room by a spasm of coughing, had already
disappeared.

It was a close September night, and as Abel crossed the road to look
for a young heifer in the meadow the heavy scent of the Jamestown
weeds seemed to float downward beneath the oppressive weight of
the atmosphere. The sawing of the katydids came to him out of the
surrounding darkness, through which a light, gliding like a gigantic
glow-worm along the earth, revealed presently the figure of Jonathan
Gay, mounted on horseback and swinging a lantern from his saddle.

"A dark night, Revercomb."

"Yes, there'll be rain before morning."

"Well, it won't do any harm. The country needs it. I'm glad to hear, by
the way, that you are going into politics. You're a capital speaker. I
heard you last summer at Piping Tree."

He rode on, and Abel forgot the meeting until, on his way back from the
meadow, he ran against Blossom, who was coming rather wildly from the
direction in which Jonathan had vanished.

"What has upset you so, Blossom? You are like a ghost. Did you meet Mr.
Jonathan?"

"No, why should I meet Mr. Jonathan? What do you mean?"

Without replying she turned from him and ran into the house, while
following her more soberly, he asked himself carelessly what could have
happened to disturb her. "I wonder if she is frettin' about the rector?"
he thought, and his utter inability to understand, or even to recognize
the contradictions in the nature of women oppressed his mind. "First,
she wanted Mr. Mullen and he didn't want her, then he wanted her and she
didn't want him, and now when he's evidently left off caring again, she
appears to be grievin' herself sick about him. I wonder if it's always
like that--everybody wanting the person that wants somebody else? And
yet I know I loved Molly a hundred times more, if that were possible,
when I believed she cared for me." He remembered the December afternoon
so many years ago, when she had run away from the school in Applegate,
and he had found her breasting a heavy snow storm on the road to
Jordan's Journey. Against the darkness he saw her so vividly, as she
looked with the snow powdering her hair and her eyes shining happily up
at him when she nestled for warmth against his arm, that for a minute he
could hardly believe that it was eight years ago and not yesterday.

Several weeks later, on a hazy October morning, when the air was sharp
with the scent of cider presses and burning brushwood, he met Molly
returning from the cross-roads, in the short path over the pasture.

"I thought you had gone," he said, and held out his hand.

"Not yet. Mrs. Gay wants to stay through October."

In her hand she held a bunch of golden-rod, and behind her the field in
which she had gathered it, flamed royally in the sunlight.

"Did you know that I rode to Piping Tree to hear you speak one day in
June?" she asked suddenly.

"I didn't know it, but it was nice of you."

His renunciation had conferred a dignity upon him which had in it
something of the quiet and the breadth of the Southern landscape. She
knew while she looked at him that he had accepted her decision once for
all--that he still accepted it in spite of the ensuing logic of events
which had refuted its finality. The choice had been offered her between
love and the world, and she had chosen the world--chosen in the heat of
youth, in the thirst for experience. She had not loved enough. Her
love had been slight, young, yielding too easily to the impact of other
desires. There had been no illusion to shelter it. She had never, she
remembered now, had any illusions--all had been of the substance and the
fibre of reality. Then, with the lucidity of vision through which she
had always seen and weighed the values of her emotions, she realized
that if she had the choice to make over again, she could not make it
differently. At the time flight from love was as necessary to her growth
as the return to love was necessary to her happiness to-day. She saw
clearly that her return was, after all, the result of her flight. If
she had not chosen the world, she would never have known how little the
world signified in comparison with simpler things. Life was all of a
single piece; it was impossible to pull it apart and say "without this
it would have been better"--since nothing in it was unrelated to the
rest, nothing in it existed by itself and independent of the events that
preceded it and came after it. Born as she had been out of sin, and the
tragic expiation of sin, she had learned more quickly than other women,
as though the spectre of the unhappy Janet stood always at her side to
help her to a deeper understanding and a sincerer pity. She knew now
that if she loved Abel, it was because all other interests and emotions
had faded like the perishable bloom on the meadow before the solid, the
fundamental fact of her need of him.

"Do you still get books from the library in Applegate?" she asked
because she could think of nothing to say that sounded less trivial.

"Sometimes, and second hand ones from a dealer I've found there. One
corner of the mill is given up to them."

Again there was silence, and then she said impulsively in her old
childlike way.

"Abel, have you ever forgiven me?"

"There was nothing to forgive. You see, I've learned, Molly."

"What you've learned is that I wasn't worth loving, I suppose?"

He laughed softly. "The truth is, I never knew how much you were worth
till I gave you up," he answered.

"It was the same way with me--that's life, perhaps."

"That sounded like my mother. You're too young to have learned what it
means."

"I don't believe I was ever young--I seem to have known about the
sadness of life from my cradle. That was why I wanted so passionately
some of its gaiety. I remember I used to think that Paris meant gaiety,
but when we went there I couldn't get over my surprise because of all
the ragged people and the poor, miserable horses. They spoiled it to
me."

"The secret is not to look, isn't it?" he asked.

"Yes. Jonathan never looked. It all depends, he used to tell me--upon
which set of facts I chose to regard--and he calls it philosophical not
to regard any but pleasant ones."

"Perhaps he's right, but isn't it, after all, a question of the way he's
made?"

"Everything is; grandfather used to say that was why he was never able
to judge people. Life was woven of many colours, like Joseph's coat,
he once told me, and we could make dyes run, but we couldn't wash them
entirely out. He couldn't make himself resentful when he tried--not even
with--with Mr. Jonathan."

"Have you ever forgiven him, Molly?"

"I've sometimes thought that he was sorry at the end--but how could that
undo the way he treated my mother? Being sorry when you're dying doesn't
help things you've hurt in life--but, then, grandfather would have said,
I suppose, that it was life, not Mr. Jonathan, that was to blame. And
I can see, too, in a way, that we sometimes do things we don't want to
do--that we don't even mean to do--that we regret ever afterwards--just
because life drives us to do them--" For a minute she hesitated, and
then added bravely, "I learned that by taking Mr. Jonathan's money."

"But you were right," he answered.

"To have the choice between love and money, and to choose--money?"

"You're putting it harshly. It wasn't money you chose--it was the world
or Old Church--Jordan's Journey or the grist mill."

For a moment the throbbing of her heart stifled her. Then she found her
voice.

"If I had the choice now I'd choose Old Church and the grist mill," she
said.

There was a short silence, and while it lasted she waited trembling, her
hand outstretched, her mouth quivering for his kisses. She remembered
how eagerly his lips had turned to hers in the past as one who thirsted
for water.

But when he spoke again it was in the same quiet voice.

"Would you, Molly!" he answered gently, and that was all. It was not a
question, but an acceptance. He made no movement toward her. His eyes
did not search her face.

They turned and walked slowly across the pasture over the
life-everlasting, which diffused under their feet a haunting and ghostly
fragrance. Myriads of grasshoppers chanted in the warm sunshine, and a
roving scent of wood-smoke drifted to them from a clearing across the
road. It was the season of the year when the earth wears its richest
and its most ephemeral splendour; when its bloom is so poignantly lovely
that it seems as if a breath would destroy it, and the curves of hill
and field melt like shadows into the faint purple haze on the horizon.

"If I could change it all now--could take you out of the life that suits
you and bring you back to the mill--I wouldn't do it. I like to think
I'm decent enough not even to want to do it," he said.

They had reached the fence that separated Gay's pasture from his, and
stopping, he held out his hand with a smile.

"I hear you're to marry Jonathan Gay," he added, "and whether or not you
do, God bless you."

"But I'm not, Abel!" she cried passionately as he turned away.

He did not look back, and when he had passed out of hearing, she
repeated her words with a passionate repudiation of the thing he had
suggested, "I'm not, Abel!--I'm not!"



CHAPTER XIV


THE TURN OF THE WHEEL


Tears blinded her eyes as she crossed the pasture, and when she brushed
them away, she could see nothing distinctly except the single pointed
maple that lifted its fiery torch above the spectral procession of the
aspens in the graveyard. She had passed under the trees at the Poplar
Spring, and was deep in the witch-hazel boughs which made a screen for
the Haunt's Walk, when beyond a sudden twist in the path, she saw ahead
of her the figures of Blossom Revercomb and Jonathan Gay. At first they
showed merely in dim outlines standing a little apart, with the sunlit
branch of a sweet gum tree dropping between them. Then as Molly went
forward over the velvety carpet of leaves, she saw the girl make a swift
and appealing movement of her arms.

"Oh, Jonathan, if you only would! I can't bear it any longer!" she
cried, with her hands on his shoulders.

He drew away, kindly, almost caressingly. He was in hunting clothes, and
the barrel of his gun, Molly saw, came between him and Blossom, gently
pressing her off.

"You don't understand, Blossom, I've told you a hundred times it is out
of the question," he answered.

Then looking up his eyes met Molly's, and he stood silent without
defence or explanation, before her.

"What is impossible, Jonathan? Can I help you?" she asked impulsively,
and going quickly to Blossom's side she drew the girl's weeping face to
her breast. "You're in trouble, darling--tell me, tell Molly about it,"
she said.

As they clung together in a passion of despair and of pity--the one
appealing by sheer helplessness, the other giving succour out of an
abundant self-reliance--Gay became conscious that he was witnessing
the secret wonder of Molly's nature. The relation of woman to man was
dwarfed suddenly by an understanding of the relation of woman to woman.
Deeper than the dependence of sex, simpler, more natural, closer to the
earth, as though it still drew its strength from the soil, he realized
that the need of woman for woman was not written in the songs nor in the
histories of men, but in the neglected and frustrated lives which the
songs and the histories of men had ignored.

"Tell me, Blossom--tell Molly," said the soft voice again.

"Molly!" he said sharply, and as she looked at him over Blossom's
prostrate head, he met a light of anger that seemed, while it lasted, to
illumine her features.

"Blossom and I were married nearly two years ago," he said.

"Nearly two years ago?" she repeated. "Why have we never known it?"

"I had to think of my mother," he replied almost doggedly. Then driven
by a rush of anger against Blossom because she was to blame for it
all--because he had ever seen her, because he had ever desired her,
because he had ever committed the supreme folly of marrying her, and,
most of all, because she had, in her indiscretion, betrayed him to
Molly--he added with the cruelty which is possible sometimes to generous
and kindly natures--"It was a mistake, of course. I am ready to do
anything in my power for her happiness, but it wouldn't be for her
happiness for us to start living together."

Blossom raised her face from Molly's bosom, and the strong sunlight
shining through the coloured leaves, showed the blanched look of her
skin and the fine lines chiselled by tears around her eyes. Encircling
her mouth, which Gay had once described as looking "as though it
would melt if you kissed it," there was now a heavy blue shadow which
detracted from the beauty of her still red and voluptuous lips. In many
ways she was finer, larger, nobler than when he had first met her--for
experience, which had blighted her physical loveliness, appeared, also,
to have increased the dignity and quietness of her soul. Had Gay been
able to see her soul it would probably have moved him, for he was easily
stirred by the thing that was beneath the eyes. But it was impossible to
present a woman's soul to him as a concrete image.

"I don't want to live with him--I don't want anything from him,"
responded Blossom, with pride. "I don't want anything from him ever
again," she repeated, and putting Molly's arms away from her, she turned
and moved slowly down the Haunt's Walk toward the Poplar Spring.

"I couldn't help loving you, could I, Molly?" he asked in a low voice.

Her face was pale and stern when she answered.

"And you couldn't help loving Blossom last year, I suppose?"

"If I could have helped, do you think I should have done it? You don't
understand such things, Molly."

"No, I don't understand them. When love has to cloak cruelty and
faithlessness, I can't see that it's any better than the thing it
excuses."

"But all love isn't alike. I don't love you in the least as I loved
Blossom. That was a mere impulse, and incident."

"But how was Blossom to know that? and how am I?"

"One can't explain it to a woman. They're not made of flesh and blood as
men are."

"They've had to drill their flesh and blood," she replied, stern rather
than scornful.

"I might have known you'd be hard, Molly."

When she spoke again her voice had softened.

"Jonathan, it's no use thinking of me--go back to Blossom," she said.

"Not thinking of you won't make me go back to Blossom. When that sort of
thing is over, it is over once for all."

"Even if that is true you mustn't think of me--because I belong--every
bit of me--to Abel."

He stared at her for a moment in silence. "Then it's true," he said at
last under his breath.

"It has always been true--ever since anything was true."

"But you didn't always know it."

"I had to grow to it. I believe I have been growing to it forever.
Everything has helped me to it--even my mistakes."

She spoke quite simply. Her earnestness was so large that it had swept
away her shyness and her self-consciousness, as a strong wind sweeps
away the smoke over the autumn meadows. And yet this very earnestness,
this passionate sincerity, added but another fold to the luminous evil
of mystery in which she was enveloped. He could not understand her when
she tried to tear the veil away and the terrible clearness of her soul
blinded his sight. Therein lay her charm for him--he could never reach
her, could never possess her even should she seek to approach him.
Behind the mystery of darkness which he might penetrate, there was still
the mystery of light.

"If you really care about him like that I don't see why you gave him up
and went away from him," he said helplessly. "You wanted to go. Nobody
urged you. It was your own choice."

"Yes, that's what you could never understand. I wasn't really going away
from him when I went. I was going to him. It was a long and a roundabout
road, but it was safer."

"You mean it brought you back in the end?"

"It not only brought me back, it showed me things by the way. It made me
understand about you and Blossom."

"By Jove!" he exclaimed, and was silent. The pang of his loss was
swallowed up in the amplitude of his wonder.

"Are you going to marry him, Molly?" he asked when the silence had
become unbearable.

"If he wants me. I'm not quite sure that he wants me. I know he loves
me," she added, "but that isn't just the same."

He did not answer, and they stood looking beyond the thick foliage in
the Haunt's Walk, to the meadows, over which a golden haze shimmered as
though it were filled with the beating of invisible wings.

"Molly," he said suddenly. "Shall I go after Blossom?"

"Oh, if you would, dear Jonathan," she answered.

Without a word, he turned from her and walked rapidly down the path
Blossom had followed.

When he had disappeared, Molly went up the walk to the Italian garden,
and then ascending the front steps passed into the drawing room, where
Kesiah and Mrs. Gay sat in the glow of a cedar fire, reading a new life
of Lord Byron.

Kesiah's voice, droning monotonously like the loud hum of bees, rose
above the faint crackling of the logs, on which Mrs. Gay had fixed her
soft, unfathomable eyes, while she reconstructed, after the habit of her
imagination, certain magnificent adventures in the poet's life.

"Have you seen Jonathan, Molly?" asked Kesiah, laying aside her book
while Mrs. Gay wiped her eyes.

"Yes, I left him in the Haunt's Walk."

"He has not seemed well of late," said Mrs. Gay softly, "I am trying to
persuade him to leave us and go back to Europe."

"He is anxious about your health and doesn't like to go so far away from
you," replied Molly, sitting on an ottoman beside her chair.

Taking her hand, Mrs. Gay caressed it while she answered.

"I can never think of myself when Jonathan's happiness is to be
considered." Then dropping her voice still lower, she added tenderly,
"You are a great comfort to me, dear, a very great comfort."

What she meant, and Molly grasped her meaning as distinctly as if she
had put it into words, was that she was comforted, she was reassured by
the girl's obvious indifference to Jonathan's passion. Like many
persons of sentimental turn of mind, she found no great difficulty in
reconciling a visionary romanticism with a very practical regard for the
more substantial values of life.

"I should never allow the question of my health to interfere with
Jonathan's plans," she repeated, while her expression grew angelic in
the light of her sacrificial fervour.

"I don't think he wants to go," retorted Kesiah rather snappily, and
opening the book again she began to read.

For an hour her voice droned steadily in the firelight, while Molly,
with her head against Mrs. Gay's knee, looked through the casement
window to where the October roses bloomed and dropped in the squares of
the Italian garden. Then at the sound of hurried footsteps on the walk
outside, the girl rose from the ottoman and went out, closing the door
after her. In the hall the blanched face of Uncle Abednego confronted
her like the face of a spectre.

"I ain't a-gwine ter tell Miss Angela--I ain't a-gwine ter tell Miss
Angela," he moaned, "Marse Jonathan, he's been shot down yonder at Poplar
Spring des like Ole Marster!"



CHAPTER XV


GAY DISCOVERS HIMSELF


As Gay passed rapidly down the Haunt's Walk a rustle in the witch-hazel
bushes accompanied him, stopping instantly when he stopped, and
beginning again when he moved, as though something, crouching there,
listened in breathless suspense for the fall of his footsteps. At
the Poplar Spring the sound grew so distinct that he hastened in the
direction of it, calling in an impatient voice, "Blossom! Are you there,
Blossom?" The words were still on his lips, when a thick grape-vine
parted in front of him, and the bearded immobile face of Abner Revercomb
looked out at him, with hatred in his eyes.

"Damn you!" said a voice almost in a whisper. The next instant a shot
rang out, and Gay stumbled forward as though he had tripped over the
underbrush, while his gun, slipping from his shoulder, discharged its
load into the air. His first confused impression was that he had knocked
against a poplar bough which had stuck him sharply in the side. Then, as
a small drift of smoke floated toward him, he thought in surprise,
"I'm shot. By Jove, that's what it means--I'm shot." At the instant,
underlying every other sensation or idea, there was an ironic wonder
that anybody should have hated him enough to shoot him. But while the
wonder was still engrossing him--in that same instant, which seemed to
cover an eternity, when the shot rang in his ears, something happened in
his brain, and he staggered through the curtain of grape-vine and sank
down as though falling asleep on the bed of life-everlasting. "It's
ridiculous that anybody should want to shoot me," he thought, while the
little round yellow sun dwindled smaller and smaller until a black cloud
obscured it.

A minute, or an hour afterwards, he opened his eyes with a start, and
lay staring up at the sky, where a flock of swallows drifted like smoke
in the cloudless blue. He had awakened to an odd sensation of floating
downward on a current that was too strong for him; and though he knew
that the idea was absurd, it was impossible for him to put it out of his
mind, for when he made an effort to do so, he felt that he was slipping
again into oblivion. For a time he let himself drift helplessly like a
leaf on the stream. Then seized by a sudden terror of the gulf beyond,
he tried to stop, to hold back, to catch at something--at anything--that
would check the swiftness of his descent, that would silence the rushing
sound of the river about him. But in spite of his struggles, this
current--which seemed sometimes to flow from a wound in his side,
and sometimes to be only the watery rustle of the aspens in the
graveyard--this imaginary yet pitiless current, bore him always farther
away from the thing to which he was clinging--from this thing he
could not let go because it was himself--because it had separated and
distinguished him from all other persons and objects in the universe.
"I've always believed I was one person," he thought, "but I am a
multitude. There are at least a million of me--and any one of them
might have crowded out all the others if he'd got a chance." A swift and
joyous surprise held him for a moment, as though he were conscious for
the first time of dormant possibilities in himself which he had never
suspected. "Why didn't I know this before?" he asked, like one who
stumbles by accident upon some simple and yet illuminating fact of
nature. "All this has been in me all the time, but nobody told me. I
might just as well have been any of these other selves as the one I
am." The noise of the river began in his head again, but it no longer
frightened him.

"It's only the hum of bees in the meadow," he said after a minute, "and
yet it fills the universe as if it were the sound of a battle. And now
I've forgotten what I was thinking about. It was very important, but
I shall never remember it." He closed his eyes, while the ghostly
fragrance of the life-everlasting on which he was lying rose in a cloud
to envelop him. Something brushed his face like the touch of wings,
and looking up he saw that it was a golden leaf which had fallen from a
bough of the great poplar above him. He had never seen anything in his
life so bright as that golden bough that hung over him, and when
he gazed through it, he saw that the sky was bluer than he had ever
imagined that it could be, and that everything at which he looked
had not only this quality of intense, of penetrating brightness, but
appeared transparent, with a luminous transparency which seemed a veil
spread over something that was shining beyond it. "I wonder if I'm
dead?" he thought irritably, "or is it only delirium? And if I am dead,
it really doesn't matter--an idiot could see through anything so thin as
this."

Again the cloud closed over him, and again just as suddenly it lifted
and the joyous surprise awoke in his mind. He remembered feeling the
same sensation in his boyhood, when he had walked one morning at sunrise
on a strange road, and had wondered what would happen when he turned a
long curve he was approaching. And it seemed to him now as then, that a
trackless, a virgin waste of experience surrounded him--that he was in
the midst of an incalculable vastness of wonder and delight. It was
a nuisance to have this web of flesh wrapping about him, binding his
limbs, hindering his efforts, stifling his breath.

And then, as in the brain of a fevered and delirious man, this
impression vanished as inexplicably as it had come. His ideas were
perfectly independent of his will. He could neither recover one that
he had lost nor summon a fresh one from the border of obscurity that
surrounded a centre of almost intolerable brightness into which his
mental images glided as into a brilliantly lighted chamber. Into this
brightness a troop of hallucinations darted suddenly like a motley and
ill-assorted company of players. He saw first a grotesque and indistinct
figure, which he discerned presently to be the goblin his nurse had used
to frighten him in his infancy; then the face of his uncle, the elder
Jonathan Gay, with his restless and suffering look; and after this the
face of Kesiah, wearing her deprecation expression, which said, "It
isn't really my fault that I couldn't change things"; and then the faces
of women he had seen but once, or passed in the street and remembered;
and in the midst of these crowding faces, the scarred and ravaged face
of an old crossing-sweeper on a windy corner in Paris. . . . "I wish
they'd leave me alone," he thought, with the helplessness of delirium,
"I wish they'd keep away and leave me alone." He wanted to drive these
hallucinations from his brain, and to recapture the exhilarating sense
of discovery he had lost the minute before, but because he sought it, in
some unimaginable way, it continued to elude him. The loud hum of bees
in the Indian summer confused him, and he thought impatiently that if
it would only cease for an instant, his mind might clear again, and he
might think things out--that he might even remember the important things
he had forgotten. "Abner Revercomb shot me," he said aloud. "I don't
know much. I don't know whether I am alive or dead. All I am certain of
is that it doesn't matter in the least--that it's too small a fact to
make any fuss about. It's all so small--the blamed thing isn't any more
important than those bees humming out there in the meadow. And I might
as well have developed into any one of my other selves. What were all
those seeds of possibilities for if they never came to anything? Why,
I might have been a hero--it was in me all the time--I might even have
been a god."

Then for the first time he became aware of his body as of something
outside of himself--something that had been tacked on to him. He
felt all at once that his feet were as heavy as logs--that they were
benumbed, that they had fallen asleep, and were filled with the sharp
pricking of thorns. Yet he had no control over them; he could not move
them, could hardly even think of them as belonging to himself. This
sensation of numbness began slowly to crawl upward like some gigantic
insect. He knew it would reach his knees and then pass on to his waist,
but the knowledge gave him no power to prevent its coming, and when he
tried to will his hand to move, it refused to obey the action of his
brain.

"I'm really out of my head," he thought, and the next instant, "or, it's
all a dream, and I've been only a dream from the beginning."

A century afterwards, he opened his eyes and saw a face bending over
him, which seemed as if it were of gossamer, so vague and shadowy it
looked beside the images of his delirium. An excited and eager humming
was in his ears, but he could not tell whether it was the voices of
human beings or the loud music of the bees in the meadow. From his
waist down he could feel nothing, not even the crawling of the gigantic
insect, but the rest of his body was a single throbbing pain, a pain so
intense that it seemed to drag him back from the gulf of darkness into
which he was drifting.

"Can you hear?" asked a voice from out the hum of sound, speaking in the
clear, high tone one uses to a deaf man.

Another voice, he was not sure whether it was his own or a
stranger's--repeated from a distance, "Can I hear?"

"Did you see who shot you?" said the voice.

And the second voice repeated after it: "Did I see who shot me?"

"Was it Abner Revercomb?" asked the first voice.

He knew then what they meant, and suddenly he began to think lucidly and
rapidly like a person under the mental pressure of strong excitement or
of alcohol. Everything showed distinctly to him, and he saw with this
wonderful distinctness, that it made no difference whether it was Abner
Revercomb or one of his own multitude of selves that had shot him. It
made no difference--nothing mattered except to regain the ineffable
sense of approaching discovery which he had lost.

"Was it Abner Revercomb?" said the first voice more loudly.

He was conscious now of himself and of his surroundings, and there was
no uncertainty, no hesitation in his answer.

"It was an accident. I shot myself," he said, and after a moment he
added angrily, "Why should anybody shoot me? It would be ridiculous."

It was there again--the unexplored, the incalculable vastness. If they
would only leave him alone he might recover it before it eluded him.



CHAPTER XVI


THE END


In the middle of the afternoon Molly went into the spare room in the
west wing, and stopped beside the high white bed on which Gay was lying,
with the sheet turned down from his face. In death his features wore
a look of tranquil brightness, of arrested energy, as if he had paused
suddenly for a brief space, and meant to rise and go on again about the
absorbing business of living. The windows were open, and through the
closed shutters floated a pale greenish light and the sound of dead
leaves rustling softly in the garden.

She had hardly entered before the door opened noiselessly again, and
Kesiah came in bringing some white roses in a basket. Drawing a little
away, Molly watched her while she arranged the flowers with light and
guarded movements, as if she were afraid of disturbing the sleeper. Of
what was she thinking? the girl wondered. Was she grieving for her lost
youth, with its crushed possibilities of happiness, or for the rich
young life before her, which had left its look of arrested energy
still clinging to the deserted features? Was she saddened by the tragic
mystery of Death or by the more poignant, the more inscrutable mystery
of Life? Did she mourn all the things that had not been that did not
matter, or all the things that had been that mattered even less?

Lifting her eyes from Kesiah's face, she fixed them on a small old
picture of the elder Jonathan, which hung under a rusty sword above the
bed. For the first time there came to her an impulse of compassion for
the man who was her father. Perhaps he, also, had suffered because life
had driven him to do the things that he hated--perhaps he, also, had had
his secret chamber in which his spirit was crucified? With the thought
something in her heart, which was like a lump of ice, melted suddenly,
and she felt at peace. "Because I've lived," she said softly to herself,
"I can understand."

And on the opposite side of the bed, between the long white curtains,
Kesiah was thinking, "Because I've never lived, but have stood apart and
watched life, I can understand."

Turning away presently, Molly went to the door, where she stood waiting
until the elder woman joined her.

"Is Mr. Chamberlayne still with Aunt Angela?" she asked.

"Yes. He was on his way to visit her when Cephus met him near the
cross-roads." For an instant she paused to catch her breath, and then
added softly, "Angela is bearing it beautifully."

Stooping over, she picked up a few scattered rose leaves from the
threshold and dropped them into the empty basket before she followed
Molly down the hall of the west wing to the lattice door, which opened
on the side-garden. Here the rustling of dead leaves grew louder, and
faint scents of decay and mould were wafted through the evanescent
beauty of the Indian summer.

While they stood there, Mr. Chamberlayne came down the staircase, wiping
his eyes, which were very red, on his white silk handkerchief.

"She bears it beautifully, just as we might have expected," he said "I
have seldom witnessed such fortitude, such saintly resignation to what
she feels to be the will of God."

Molly's eyes left his face and turned to the purple and gold of the
meadows, where webs of silver thistledown were floating over the
path she had trodden only a few hours ago. Nothing had changed in the
landscape--the same fugitive bloom was on the fields, the same shadows
were on the hillside, the same amber light was on the turnpike. She
thought of many things in that instant, but beneath them all, like
an undercurrent, ran the knowledge that Mrs. Gay was "bearing it
beautifully" behind her closed shutters. When her mind went back to the
past, she remembered the elder Jonathan, who had perished in the fine
silken mesh of the influence he was powerless to break. After this came
the memory of the day when Janet Merryweather had flung herself on the
mercy of the gentle heart, and had found it iron. And then she thought
of the son, who had drifted into deceit and subterfuge because he was
not strong enough to make war on a thing so helpless. He, also, had died
because he dared not throw off that remorseless tyranny of weakness.
Without that soft yet indomitable influence, he would never have lied
in the beginning, would never have covered his faithlessness with the
hypocrisy of duty.

"You have been a great comfort to her, Mr. Chamberlayne," said Kesiah,
breaking the silence at last.

A low sound, half a sob, half a sigh, escaped the lawyer's lips. "A
spirit like hers needs no other prop than her Creator," he replied.

"It is when one expects her to break down that she shows her wonderful
fortitude," added Kesiah.

"Her consolation now is the thought that she never considered either her
health or her happiness where her son was concerned," pursued the old
man. "She clings pathetically to the memory that she urged him to return
to Europe, and that he chose to remain a few weeks for the pleasure of
hunting. Not a breath stains the purity of her utter selflessness. To
witness such spiritual beauty is a divine inspiration."

For the last few hours, ever since a messenger had met him, half way on
the Applegate road, with the news of Jonathan's death, he had laboured
philosophically to reconcile such a tragedy with his preconceived belief
that he inhabited the best of all possible worlds. Only when suffering
obtruded brutally into his immediate surroundings, was it necessary
for him to set about resolving the problem of existence--for, like most
hereditary optimists, he did not borrow trouble from his neighbours. A
famine or an earthquake at a little distance appeared to him a puerile
obstacle to put forward against his belief in the perfection of the
planetary scheme; but when his eyes rested upon the martyred saintliness
of Mrs. Gay's expression, he was conscious that his optimism tottered
for an instant, and was almost overthrown. That a just and tender Deity
should inflict pain upon so lovely a being was incomprehensible to his
chivalrous spirit.

"Has any one told her about Blossom?" asked Molly.

Kesiah shook her head. "Mr. Chamberlayne feels that it would be cruel.
She knows so little about Jonathan's affairs that we may be able to keep
his marriage from her knowledge if she leaves Jordan's Journey a few
days after the funeral."

"In spite of it all I know that Jonathan hated lies," said Molly almost
fiercely.

"Our first thought must be to spare her," answered the lawyer. "It
was her son's endeavour always, just as it was my poor old friend
Jonathan's. If you will come with me into the library," he added to
Kesiah, "we will take a few minutes to look over the papers I have
arranged."

They moved away, walking side by side with halting steps, as though
they were crushed by age, and yet were trying to the last to keep up an
appearance of activity. For a minute Molly gazed after them. Then
her eyes wandered to the light that shimmered over the meadows, and
descending the stone steps into the side-garden, she walked slowly
through the miniature maze, where the paths were buried deep in
wine-coloured leaves which had drifted from the half bared trees on the
lawn. Abel was coming, she knew, and she waited for him in a stillness
that seemed akin to that softly breathing plant life around her. It was
the hour for which she had hungered for weeks, yet now that it had come,
she could hardly recognize it for the thing she had wanted. A sudden
blight had fallen over her, as though she had brought the presence of
death with her out of that still chamber. Every sound was hushed into
silence, every object appeared as unsubstantial as a shadow. Beyond the
lawn, over the jewelled meadows, she could see the white spire of Old
Church rising above the coloured foliage in the churchyard, and beyond
it, the flat ashen turnpike, which had led hundreds of adventurous feet
toward the great world they were seeking. She remembered that the sight
of the turnpike had once made her restless; now it brought her only a
promise of peace.

Turning at the sound of a step on the dead leaves, she saw that Abel
had entered the garden, and was approaching her along one of the
winding paths. When he reached her, he spoke quickly without taking her
outstretched hand. The sun was in his eyes and he lowered them to the
over-blown roses in a square of box.

"I came over earlier," he said, "but I couldn't see any one except Mr.
Chamberlayne."

"He told me you would come back. That was why I waited."

For a moment he seemed to struggle for breath. Then he said quickly.

"Molly, do you believe it was an accident?"

She started and her hands shook.

"He said so at the end--otherwise--how--how could it have happened?"

"Yes, how could it have happened?" he repeated, and added after a pause,
"He was a fine fellow. I always liked him."

Her tears choked her, and when she had recovered her voice, she put
a question or two about Blossom--delaying, through some instinct of
flight, the moment for which she had so passionately longed.

"It was all so unnecessary," she said, "that is the worst of it. It
might just as easily not have happened."

"I wish I could be of some use," he answered. "Perhaps Mr. Chamberlayne
has thought of something he would like me to do?"

"He is in the library. Uncle Abednego will show you."

He put out his hand, "Then good-bye, Molly," he said gently.

But at the first touch of his fingers the spell was broken, and the
mystery of life, not of death, rushed over her like waves of light.
She knew now that she was alive--that the indestructible desire for
happiness was still in her heart. The meaning of life did not matter
while the exquisite, the burning sense of its sweetness remained.

"Abel," she said with a sob, half of joy, half of sorrow, "if I go on my
knees, will you forgive me?"

He had turned away, but at her voice, he stopped and looked back with
the sunlight in his eyes.

"There isn't any forgiveness in love, Molly," he answered.

"Then--oh, then if I go on my knees will you love me?"

He smiled, and even his smile, she saw, had lost its boyish brightness
and grown sadder.

"I'd like to see you on your knees, if I might pick you up," he said,
"but, Molly, I can't. You've everything to lose and I've nothing on
God's earth to give you except myself."

"But if that's all I want?"

"It isn't, darling. You may think so, but it isn't and you'd find it
out. You see all this time since I've lost you, I've been learning to
give you up. It's a poor love that isn't big enough to give up when the
chance comes to it."

"If--if you give me up, I'll let everything go," she said passionately.
"I'll not take a penny of that money. I'll stay at Old Church and live
with Betsey Bottom and raise chickens. If you give me up I'll die,
Abel," she finished with a sob.

At the sound of her sob, he laughed softly, and his laugh, unlike his
smile, was a laugh of happiness.

"If you go to live with Betsey Bottom I'll come and get you," he
answered, "but Molly, Molly, how you've tortured me. You deserve a worse
punishment than raising chickens."

"That will be happiness."

"Suppose I insist that you shall draw the water and chop the wood? My
beauty, your submission is adorable if it would only last!"

"Abel, how can you?"

"I can and I will, sweetheart. I might even make a miller's wife of you
if it was likely that I'd ever do anything but worship you and keep you
wrapped in silk. Are you very much in love at last, Molly?"

The sound of his low laugh was in her blood, and while she leaned toward
him, she melted utterly, drawing him with the light of her face, with
the quivering breath between her parted lips. To his eyes she was all
womanhood in surrender, yet he held back still, as a man who has learned
the evanescence of joy, holds back when he sees his happiness within his
grasp.

"It's too late except for one thing, Molly," he said. "If it isn't
everything you're offering me--if you are keeping back a particle of
yourself--body or soul--it is too late. I won't take anything from you
unless I take everything--unless your whole happiness as well as mine is
in your giving."

Then before the look in her face, he held out his arms and stood
waiting.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Miller Of Old Church, by Ellen Glasgow

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MILLER OF OLD CHURCH ***

***** This file should be named 18286.txt or 18286.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/8/18286/

Produced by Doug Levy

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
ee*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 13011 ***

Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 13011-h.htm or 13011-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/0/1/13011/13011-h/13011-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/0/1/13011/13011-h.zip)





FAR OFF

or, Asia and Australia Described, with Anecdotes and Illustrations

BY THE AUTHOR OF "THE PEEP OF DAY," ETC. ETC. ETC.

NEW YORK

1852







[Illustration: "O ma'am that's sweet! Jesus Christ is OUR Redeemer."]



[Illustration: FAR OFF]





In the Frontispiece may be seen an English lady, who went to live upon
Mount Sion to teach little Jewesses and little Mahomedans to know the
Saviour. That lady has led three of her young scholars to a plain just
beyond the gates of Jerusalem; and while two of them are playing
together, she is listening to little Esther, a Jewess of eight years old.
The child is fond of sitting by her friend, and of hearing about the Son
of David. She has just been singing,

    "Glory, honor, praise, and power,
    Be unto the Lamb forever,
    Jesus Christ is our Redeemer,
    Hallelujah, praise the Lord;"

and now she is saying, "O, ma'am, that's sweet! Jesus Christ is _our_
Redeemer, _our_ Redeemer: no _man_ can redeem his brother, no
_money_,--nothing--but only the precious blood of Christ."






PREFACE.


This little work pleads for the notice of parents and teachers on the
same grounds as its predecessor, "Near Home."

Its plea is not completeness, nor comprehensiveness, nor depth of
research, nor splendor of description; but the very reverse,--its simple,
superficial, desultory character, as better adapted to the volatile
beings for whom it is designed.

Too long have their immortal minds been captivated by the adventures and
achievements of knights and princesses, of fairies and magicians; it is
time to excite their interest in real persons, and real events. In
childhood that taste is formed which leads the youth to delight in
novels, and romances; a taste which has become so general, that every
town has its circulating library, and every shelf in that library is
filled with works of fiction.

While these fascinating inventions are in course of perusal, many a Bible
is unopened, or if opened, hastily skimmed; many a seat in church is
unoccupied, or if occupied, the service, and the sermon disregarded--so
intense is the sympathy of the novel reader with his hero, or his
heroine.

And what is the effect of the perusal? Many a young mind, inflated with a
desire for admiration and adventure, grows tired of home, impatient of
restraint, indifferent to simple pleasures, and averse to sacred
instructions. How important, therefore, early to endeavor to prevent a
taste for FICTION, by cherishing a taste for FACTS.

But this is not the only aim of the present work; it seeks also to excite
an interest in _those_ facts which ought _most_ to interest immortal
beings--facts relative to souls, and their eternal happiness--to God, and
his infinite glory.

These are the facts which engage the attention of the inhabitants of
heaven. We know not whether the births of princes, and the coronations of
monarchs are noticed by the angelic hosts; but we do know that the
repentance of a sinner, be he Hindoo or Hottentot, is celebrated by their
melodious voices in rapturous symphonies.

Therefore "Far Off" desire to interest its little readers in the labors
of missionaries,--men despised and maligned by the world, but honored and
beloved by the SAVIOUR of the world. An account of the scenery and
natives of various countries, is calculated to prepare the young mind for
reading with intelligence those little Missionary Magazines, which appear
every month, written in so attractive a style, and adorned with such
beautiful illustrations. Parents have no longer reason to complain of the
difficulty of finding sacred entertainment for their children on Sunday,
for these pleasing messengers,--if carefully dealt out,--one or two on
each Sabbath, would afford a never failing supply.

To form great and good characters, the mind must be trained to delight in
TRUTH,--not in comic rhymes, in sentimental tales, and skeptical poetry.
The truth revealed in God's Holy Word, should constitute the firm basis
of education; and the works of Creation and Providence the superstructure
while the Divine blessing can alone rear and cement the edifice.

Parents, train up your children to serve God, and to enjoy his presence
forever; and if there be amongst them--an EXTRAORDINARY child, train him
up with extraordinary care, lest instead of doing extraordinary _good_ he
should do extraordinary _evil_, and be plunged into extraordinary misery.

Train up--the child of imagination--not to dazzle, like Byron, but to
enlighten, like Cowper: the child of wit--not to create profane mirth,
like Voltaire, but to promote holy joy, like Bunyan: the child of
reflection--not to weave dangerous sophistries, like Hume, but to wield
powerful arguments, like Chalmers: the child of sagacity--not to gain
advantages for himself, like Cromwell, but for his country, like
Washington: the child of eloquence--not to astonish the multitude, like
Sheridan, but to plead for the miserable, like Wilberforce: the child of
ardor--not to be the herald of delusions, like Swedenbourg, but to be the
champion of truth, like Luther: the child of enterprise--not to devastate
a Continent, like the conquering Napoleon, but to scatter blessings over
an Ocean, like the missionary Williams:--and, if the child be a
prince,--train him up--not to reign in pomp and pride like the fourteenth
Louis, but to rule in the fear of God, like our own great ALFRED.




CONTENTS.


ASIA

THE HOLY LAND
    Bethlehem
    Jerusalem
    The Dead Sea
    Samaria
    Galilee

SYRIA
    Damascus

ARABIA

TURKEY IN ASIA
    Armenia
    Kurdistan
    Mesopotamia

PERSIA
    Teheran

CHINA

COCHIN CHINA
    Tonquin
    Cambodia

HINDOSTAN
    The Ganges
    The Thugs
    The Hindoo Women
    The English in India

CIRCASSIA

GEORGIA
    Tiflis

TARTARY
    Astracan
    Bokhara
    The Toorkman Tartars

CHINESE TARTARY

AFFGHANISTAN

BELOOCHISTAN

BURMAH
    The Karens
    Ava
    Maulmain
    The Missionary's babe

SIAM
    Bankok

MALACCA
    Singapore
    The Christian school-girls

SIBERIA
    The Samoyedes
    The Banished Russians
    The Ural Mountains

KAMKATKA

THIBET
    Lassa

CEYLON
    Kandy
    Colombo

BORNEO
    Bruni
    The Dyaks

JAPAN

AUSTRALIA
    The Colonists or Settlers
    Botany Bay
    Sydney
    Adelaide

VAN DIEMAN'S LAND
    The Young Savages
    Little Mickey




FAR OFF.


ASIA.


    Of the four quarters of the world--Asia is the most glorious.
    There the first man lived.
    There the Son of God lived.
    There the apostles lived.
    There the Bible was written.
    Yet now there are very few Christians in Asia:
  though there are more people there than in any other quarter
  of the globe.




THE HOLY LAND.


Of all the countries in the world which would you rather see?

Would it not be the land where Jesus lived?

He was the Son of God: He loved us and died for us.

What is the land called where He lived? Canaan was once its name: but now
Palestine, or the Holy Land.

Who lives there now?

Alas! alas! The Jews who once lived there are cast out of it. There are
some Jews there; but the Turks are the lords over the land. You know the
Turks believe in Mahomet.

What place in the Holy Land do you wish most to visit?

Some children will reply, Bethlehem, because Jesus was born there;
another will answer, Nazareth, because Jesus was brought up there; and
another will say, "Jerusalem," because He died there.

I will take you first to


BETHLEHEM.

A good minister visited this place, accompanied by a train of servants,
and camels, and asses.

It is not easy to travel in Palestine, for wheels are never seen there,
because the paths are too steep, and rough, and narrow for carriages.

Bethlehem is on a steep hill, and a white road of chalk leads up to the
gate. The traveller found the streets narrow, dark, and dirty. He lodged
in a convent, kept by Spanish monks. He was shown into a large room with
carpets and cushions on the floor. There he was to sleep. He was led up
to the roof of the house to see the prospect. He looked, and beheld the
fields below where the shepherds once watched their flocks by night: and
far off he saw the rocky mountains where David once hid himself from
Saul.

But the monks soon showed him a more curious sight. They took him into
their church, and then down some narrow stone steps into a round room
beneath. "Here," said they, "Jesus was born." The floor was of white
marble, and silver lamps were burning in it. In one corner, close to the
wall, was a marble trough, lined with blue satin. "There," said the
monks, "is the manger where Jesus was laid." "Ah!" thought the traveller,
"it was not in such a manger that my Saviour rested his infant head; but
in a far meaner place."

These monks have an image of a baby, which they call Jesus. On
Christmas-day they dress it in swaddling-clothes and lay it in the
manger: and then fall down and worship it.

The next day, as the traveller was ready to mount his camel, the people
of Bethlehem came with little articles which they had made. But he would
not buy them, because they were images of the Virgin Mary and her holy
child, and little white crosses of mother-of-pearl. They were very
pretty: but they were idols, and God hates idols.


JERUSALEM.

Here our Lord was crucified.

Is there any child who does not wish to hear about it?

The children of Jerusalem once loved the Lord, and sang his praises in
the temple. Their young voices pleased their Saviour, though not half so
sweet as angels' songs.

Which is the place where the temple stood?

It is Mount Moriah. There is a splendid building there now.

Is it the temple? O no, that was burned many hundreds of years ago. It is
the Mosque of Omar that you see; it is the most magnificent mosque in all
the world. How sad to think that Mahomedans should worship now in the
very spot where once the Son of God taught the people. No Jew, no
Christian may go into that mosque. The Turks stand near the gate to keep
off both Jews and Christians.

Every Friday evening a very touching scene takes place near this mosque.
There are some large old stones there, and the Jews say they are part of
their old temple wall: so they come at the beginning of their Sabbath
(which is on Friday evening) and sit in a row opposite the stones. There
they read their Hebrew Old Testaments, then kneel low in the dust, and
repeat their prayers with their mouths close to the old stones: because
they think that all prayers whispered between the cracks and crevices of
these stones will be heard by God. Some Jewesses come, wrapped from head
to foot in long white veils, and they gently moan and softly sigh over
Jerusalem in ruins.

What Jesus said has come to pass, "Behold, your house is left unto you
desolate." The thought of this sad day made Jesus weep, and now the sight
of it makes the Jews weep.

But there is a place still dearer to our hearts than Mount Moriah. It is
Calvary. There is a church there: but such a church! a church full of
images and crosses. Roman Catholics worship there--and Greeks too: and
they often fight in it, for they hate one another, and have fierce
quarrels.

That church is called "The Church of the Holy Sepulchre." It is pretended
that Christ's tomb or sepulchre is in it. Turks stand at the door and
make Christians pay money before they will let them in.

When they enter, what do they see?

In one corner a stone seat. "There," say the monks, "Jesus sat when He
was crowned with thorns." In another part there is a stone pillar.
"There," say the monks, "He was scourged." There is a high place in the
middle of the church with stairs leading up to it. When you stand there
the monks say, "This is the top of Calvary, where the cross stood." But
we know that the monks do not speak the truth, for the Romans destroyed
Jerusalem soon after Christ's crucifixion, and no one knows the very
place where He suffered.

On Good Friday the monks carry all round the church an image of the
Saviour as large as life, and they fasten it upon a cross, and take it
down again, and put it in the sepulchre, and they take it out again on
Easter Sunday. How foolish and how wrong are these customs! It was not in
this way the apostles showed their love to Christ, but by preaching his
word.

Mount Zion is the place where David brought the ark with songs and
music. There is a church where the Gospel is preached and prayers are
offered up in Hebrew, (the Jew's language.) The minister is called the
Bishop of Jerusalem. He is a Protestant. A few Jews come to the church at
Mount Zion, and some have believed in the Lord Jesus.

And there is a school there where little Jews and Jewesses and little
Mahomedans sit side by side while a Christian lady teaches them about
Jesus. In the evening, after school, she takes them out to play on the
green grass near the city. A little Jewess once much pleased this kind
teacher as she was sitting on a stone looking at the children playing.
Little Esther repeated the verse--

    Glory, honor, praise and power
    Be unto the Lamb forever;
    Jesus Christ is our Redeemer,
    Hallelujah, praise the Lord!

and then she said very earnestly, "O, ma'am, how sweet to think that
Jesus is _our_ Redeemer. No _man_ can redeem his brother: no money--no
money can do it--only the precious blood of Jesus Christ." Little Esther
seemed as if she loved Jesus, as those children did who sang his praises
in the temple so many years ago.

But there is another place--very sad, but very sweet--where you must
come. Go down that valley--cross that small stream--(there is a narrow
bridge)--see those low stone walls--enter: it is the Garden of
Gethsemane. Eight aged olive-trees are still standing there; but Jesus
comes there no more with his beloved disciples. What a night was that
when He wept and prayed--when the angel comforted Him--and Judas betrayed
Him.

The mountain just above Gethsemane is the Mount of Olives. Beautiful
olive-trees are growing there still. There is a winding path leading to
the top. The Saviour trod upon that Mount just before he was caught up
into heaven. His feet shall stand there again, and every eye shall see
the Saviour in his glory. But will every eye be glad to see Him?

O no; there will be bitter tears then flowing from many eyes.

And what kind of a city is Jerusalem?

It is a sad and silent city. The houses are dark and dirty, the streets
are narrow, and the pavement rough. There are a great many very old Jews
there. Jews come from all countries when they are old to Jerusalem, that
they may die and be buried there. Their reason is that they think that
all Jews who are buried in their burial-ground at Jerusalem will be
raised _first_ at the last day, and will be happy forever. Most of the
old Jews are very poor: though money is sent to them every year from the
Jews in Europe.

There are also a great many sick Jews in Jerusalem, because it is such an
unhealthy place. The water in the wells and pools gets very bad in
summer, and gives the ague and even the plague. Good English Christians
have sent a doctor to Jerusalem to cure the poor sick people. One little
girl of eleven years old came among the rest--all in rags and with bare
feet: she was an orphan, and she lived with a Jewish washerwoman. The
doctor went to see the child in her home. Where was it? It was near the
mosque, and the way to it was down a narrow, dark passage, leading to a
small close yard. The old woman lived in one room with her grandchildren
and the orphan: there was a divan at each end, that is, the floor was
raised for people to sleep on. The orphan was not allowed to sleep on the
divans, but she had a heap of rags for her bed in another part. The
child's eyes glistened with delight at the sight of her kind friend the
doctor, he asked her whether she went to school. This question made the
whole family laugh: for no one in Jerusalem teaches girls to read except
the kind Christian lady I told you of.


THE DEAD SEA.

The most gloomy and horrible place in the Holy Land is the Dead Sea. In
that place there once stood four wicked cities, and God destroyed them
with fire and brimstone.

You have heard of Sodom and Gomorrah.

A clergyman who went to visit the Dead Sea rode on horseback, and was
accompanied by men to guard him on the way, as there are robbers hid
among the rocks. He took some of the water of the Dead Sea in his mouth,
that he might taste it, and he found it salt and bitter; but he would not
swallow it, nor would he bathe in it.

He went next to look at the River Jordan. How different a place from the
dreary, desolate Dead Sea! Beautiful trees grow on the banks, and the
ends of the branches dip into the stream. The minister chose a part quite
covered with branches and bathed there, and as the waters went over his
head, he thought, "My Saviour was baptized in this river." But he did not
think, as many pilgrims do who come here every year, that his sins were
washed away by the water: no, he well knew that Christ's blood alone
cleanses from sin. There is a place where the Roman Catholics bathe, and
another where the Greeks bathe every year; they would not on any account
bathe in the same part, because they disagree so much.

After drinking some of the sweet soft water of Jordan, the minister
travelled from Jericho to Jerusalem. He went the very same way that the
good Samaritan travelled who once found a poor Jew lying half-killed by
thieves. Even to this day thieves often attack travellers in these parts:
because the way is so lonely, and so rugged, and so full of places where
thieves can hide themselves.

A horse must be a very good climber to carry a traveller along the steep,
rough, and narrow paths, and a traveller must be a bold man to venture to
go to the edge of the precipices, and near the robbers' caves.


SAMARIA.

In the midst of Palestine is the well where the Lord spoke so kindly to
the woman of Samaria. In the midst of a beautiful valley there is a heap
of rough stones: underneath is the well. But it is not easy to drink
water out of this well. For the stone on the top is so heavy, that it
requires many people to remove it: and then the well is deep, and a very
long rope is necessary to reach the water. The clergyman (of whom I have
spoken so often) had nothing to draw with; therefore, even if he could
have removed the stone, he could not have drunk of the water. The water
must be very cool and refreshing, because it lies so far away from the
heat. That was the reason the Samaritan woman came so far to draw it: for
there were other streams nearer the city, but there was no water like the
water of Jacob's well.

The city where that woman lived was called Sychar. It is still to be
seen, and it is still full of people. You remember that the men of that
city listened to the words of Jesus, and perhaps that is the reason it
has not been destroyed. The country around is the most fruitful in all
Canaan; there are such gardens of melons and cucumbers, and such groves
of mulberry-trees.


GALILEE.

How different from Sychar is Capernaum! That was the city where Jesus
lived for a long while, where he preached and did miracles. It was on the
borders of the lake of Genesareth. The traveller inquired of the people
near the lake, where Capernaum once stood; but no one knew of such a
place: it is utterly destroyed. Jesus once said, "Woe unto Capernaum."
Why? Because it repented not.

The lake of Genesareth looked smooth as glass when the traveller saw it;
but he heard that dreadful storms sometimes ruffled those smooth waters.
It was a sweet and lovely spot; not gloomy and horrible like the Dead
Sea. The shepherds were there leading their flocks among the green hills
where once the multitude sat down while Jesus fed them.

Not very far off is the city where Jesus lived when he was a boy.

NAZARETH.--All around are rugged rocky hills. In old times it was
considered a wicked city; perhaps it got this bad name from wicked people
coming here to hide themselves: and it seems just fit for a hiding-place.
From the top of one of the high crags the Nazarenes once attempted to
hurl the blessed Saviour.

There is a Roman Catholic convent there, where the minister lodged. He
was much disturbed all day by the noise in the town; not the noise of
carts and wagons, for there are none in Canaan, but of screaming
children, braying asses, and grunting camels. One of his servants came to
him complaining that he had lost his purse with all his wages. He had
left it in his cell, and when he came back it was gone. Who could have
taken it? It was clear one of the servants of the convent must have
stolen it, for one of them had the key of the room. The travellers went
to the judge of the town to complain; but the judge, who was a Turk, was
asleep, and no one was allowed to awake him. In the evening, when he did
awake, he would not see justice done, because he said he had nothing to
do with the servants at the convent, as they were Christians. Nazareth,
you see, is still a wicked city, where robbery is committed and not
punished.

There is much to make the traveller sad as he wanders about the Holy
Land.

That land was once _fruitful_, but now it is barren. It is not surprising
that no one plants and sows in the fields, because the Turks would take
away the harvests.

Once it was a _peaceful_ land, but now there are so many enemies that
every man carries a gun to defend himself.

Once it was a _holy_ land, but now Mahomet is honored, and not the God of
Israel.

When shall it again be fruitful, and peaceful, and holy? When the Jews
shall repent of their sins and turn to the Lord. Then, says the prophet
Ezekiel, (xxxvi. 35,) "They shall say, This land that was desolate is
become like the garden of Eden."[1]

    [1] Taken chiefly from "A Pastor's Memorial," by the Rev. George Fisk.




SYRIA.


Those who love the Holy Land will like to hear about Syria also; for
Abraham lived there before he came into Canaan. Therefore the Israelites
were taught to say when they offered a basket of fruit to God, "A Syrian
was my father." It was a heathen land in old times; and it is now a
Mahomedan land; though there are a few Christians there, but very
ignorant Christians, who know nothing of the Bible.

Syria is a beautiful land, and famous for its grand mountains, called
Lebanon. The same clergyman who travelled through the Holy Land went to
Lebanon also. He had to climb up very steep places on horseback, and
slide down some, as slanting as the roof of a house. But the Syrian
horses are very sure-footed. It is the custom for the colts from a month
old to follow their mothers; and so when a rider mounts the back of the
colt's mother, the young creature follows, and it learns to scramble up
steep places, and to slide down; even through the towns the colt trots
after its mother, and soon becomes accustomed to all kinds of sights and
sounds: so that Syrian horses neither shy nor stumble.

The traveller was much surprised at the dress of the women of Lebanon:
for on their heads they wear silver horns sticking out from under their
veils, the strangest head-dress that can be imagined.

There are sweet flowers growing on the sides of Lebanon; but at the top
there are ice and snow.

The traveller ate some ice, and gave some to the horses; and the poor
beasts devoured it eagerly, and seemed quite refreshed by their cold
meal.

The snow of Lebanon is spoken of in the Bible as very pure and
refreshing. "Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon, which cometh from the
rock of the field?"--Jer. xviii. 14.

The traveller earnestly desired to behold the cedars of Lebanon: for a
great deal is said about them in the Bible; indeed, the temple of Solomon
was built of those cedars. It was not easy to get close to them; for
there were craggy rocks all around: but at last the traveller reached
them, and stood beneath their shade. There were twelve very large old
trees, and their boughs met at the top, and kept off the heat of the sun.
These trees might be compared to holy men, grown old in the service of
God: for this is God's promise to his servants,--"The righteous shall
flourish like the palm-tree: he shall grow like a cedar in
Lebanon."--Psalm xc. 11, 12.


DAMASCUS.

This is the capital of Syria.

It is perhaps the most ancient city in the world. Even in the time of
Abraham, Damascus was a city; for his servant Eliezer came from it.

But Damascus is most famous, on account of a great event which once
happened near it. A man going towards that city suddenly saw in the
heavens a light brighter than the sun, and heard a voice from on high,
calling him by his name. Beautiful as the city was, he saw not its beauty
as he entered it, for he had been struck blind by the great light. That
man was the great apostle Paul.

Who can help thinking of him among the gardens of fruit-trees surrounding
Damascus?

The damask rose is one of the beauties of Damascus. There is one spot
quite covered with this lovely red rose.

I will now give an account of a visit a stranger paid to a rich man in
Damascus. He went through dull and narrow streets, with no windows
looking into the streets. He stopped before a low door, and was shown
into a large court behind the house. There was a fountain in the midst of
the court, and flower-pots all round. The visitor was then led into a
room with a marble floor, but with no furniture except scarlet cushions.
To refresh him after his journey, he was taken to the bath. There a man
covered him with a lather of soap and water, then dashed a quantity of
hot water over him, and then rubbed him till he was quite dry and warm.

When he came out of the bath, two servants brought him some sherbet. It
is a cooling drink made of lemon-juice and grape-juice mixed with water.

The master of the house received the stranger very politely: he not only
shook hands with him, but afterwards he kissed his own hand, as a mark of
respect to his guest. The servants often kissed the visitor's hand.

The dinner lasted a long while, for only one dish was brought up at a
time. Of course there were no ladies at the dinner, for in Mahomedan
countries they are always hidden. There were two lads there, who were
nephews to the master of the house; and the visitor was much surprised to
observe that they did not sit down to dinner with the company; but that
they stood near their uncle, directing the servants what to bring him;
and now and then presenting a cup of wine to him, or his guests. But it
is the custom in Syria for young people to wait upon their elders;
however, they may speak to the company while they are waiting upon them.

Damascus used to be famous for its swords: but now the principal things
made there, are stuffs embroidered with silver, and boxes of curious
woods, as well as red and yellow slippers. The Syrians always wear yellow
slippers, and when they walk out they put on red slippers over the
yellow. If you want to buy any of the curious works of Damascus, you must
go to the bazaars in the middle of the town; there the sellers sit as in
a market-place, and display their goods.

SCHOOLS.--It is not the custom in Syria for girls to learn to read. But a
few years ago, a good Syrian, named Assaad, opened a school for little
girls as well as for boys.

It was easy to get the little boys to come; but the mothers did not like
to send their little girls. They laughed, and said, "Who ever heard of a
girl going to school? Girls need not learn to read." The first girl who
attended Assaad's school was named Angoul, which means "Angel." Where is
the child that deserves such a name? Nowhere; for there is none
righteous, no, not one. Angoul belonged not to Mahomedan parents, but to
those called Christians; yet the Christians in Syria are almost as
ignorant as heathens.

Angoul had been taught to spin silk; for her father had a garden of
mulberry-trees, and a quantity of silk worms. She was of so much use in
spinning, that her mother did not like to spare her: but the little maid
promised, that if she might go to school, she would spin faster than ever
when she came home. How happy she was when she obtained leave to go! See
her when the sun has just risen, about six o'clock, tripping to school.
She is twelve years old. Her eyes are dark, but her hair is light. Angoul
has not been scorched by the sun, like many Syrian girls, because she has
sat in-doors at her wheel during the heat of the day. She is dressed in a
loose red gown, and a scarlet cap with a yellow handkerchief twisted
round it like a turban.

At school Angoul is very attentive, both while she is reading in her
Testament, and while she is writing on her tin slate with a reed dipped
in ink. She returns home at noon through the burning sun, and comes to
school again to stay till five. Then it is cool and pleasant, and Angoul
spins by her mother's side in the lovely garden of fruit-trees before the
house. Has she not learned to sing many a sweet verse about the garden
above, and the heavenly husbandman? As she watches the budding vine, she
can think now of Him who said, "I am the true vine." As she sits beneath
the olive-tree, she can call to mind the words, "I am like a green
olive-tree in the house of my God." Angoul is growing like an angel, if
she takes delight in meditating on the word of God.[2]

    [2] Extracted chiefly from the Rev. George Fisk's "Pastor's
        Memorial," and Kinnear's Travels.




ARABIA.


This is the land in which the Israelites wandered for forty years. You
have heard what a dry, dreary, desert place the wilderness was. There is
still a wilderness in Arabia; and there are still wanderers in it; not
Israelites, but Arabs. These men live in tents, and go from place to
place with their large flocks of sheep and goats. But there are other
Arabs who live in towns, as we do.

Do you know who is the father of the Arabs?

The same man who is the father of the Jews.

What, was Abraham their father?

Yes, he was.

Do you remember Abraham's ungodly son, Ishmael?

He was cast out of his father's house for mocking his little brother
Isaac, and he went into Arabia.

And what sort of people are the Arabs?

Wild and fierce people.

Travellers are afraid of passing through Arabia, lest the Arabs should
rob and murder them; and no one has ever been able to conquer the Arabs.
The Arabs are very proud, and will not bear the least affront. Sometimes
one man says to another, "The wrong side of your turban is out." This
speech is considered an affront never to be forgotten. The Arabs are so
unforgiving and revengeful that they will seek to kill a man year after
year. One man was observed to carry about a small dagger. He said his
reason was, he was hoping some day to meet his enemy and kill him.

Of what religion are this revengeful people? The Mahomedan.

Mahomed was an Arab. It is thought a great honor to be descended from
him. Those men who say Mahomed is their father wear a green turban, and
very proud they are of their green turbans, even though they may only be
beggars.

THE ARABIAN WOMEN.--They are shut up like the women in Syria when they
live in towns, but the women in tents are obliged to walk about;
therefore they wear a thick veil over their face, with small holes for
their eyes to peep out.

The poor women wear a long shirt of white or blue; but the rich women
wrap themselves in magnificent shawls. To make themselves handsome, they
blacken their eyelids, paint their nails red, and wear gold rings in
their ears and noses. They delight in fine furniture. A room lined with
looking-glasses, and with a ceiling of looking-glasses, is thought
charming.

ARAB TENTS.--They are black, being made of the hair of black goats. Some
of them are so large that they are divided into three rooms, one for the
cattle, one for the men, and one for the women.

ARAB CUSTOMS.--The Arabs sit on the ground, resting on their heels, and
for tables they have low stools. A large dish of rice and minced mutton
is placed on the table, and immediately every hand is thrust into it; and
in a moment it is empty. Then another dish is brought, and another; and
sometimes fourteen dishes of rice, one after the other, till all the
company are satisfied. They eat very fast, and each retires from dinner as
soon as he likes, without waiting for the rest. After dinner they drink
water, and a small cup of coffee without milk or sugar. Then they smoke
for many hours.

The Arabs do not indulge in eating or drinking too much, and this is one
of the best parts of their character.

[Illustration: CAMELS.]


THE THREE EVILS OF ARABIA.

The first evil is want of water. There is no river in Arabia: and the
small streams are often dried up by the heat.

The second evil is many locusts, which come in countless swarms, and
devour every green thing.

The third evil is the burning winds. When a traveller feels it coming, he
throws himself on the ground, covering his face with his cloak, lest the
hot sand should be blown up his nostrils. Sometimes men and horses are
choked by this sand.

These are the three great evils; but there is a still greater, the
religion of Mahomed: for this injures the soul; the other evils only hurt
the body.


THE THREE ANIMALS OF ARABIA.

The animals for which Arabia is famous are animals to ride upon.

Two of them are often seen in England; though here they are not nearly as
fine as in Arabia; but the third animal is never used in England. Most
English boys have ridden upon an ass. In Arabia the ass is a handsome and
spirited creature. The horse is strong and swift, and yet obedient and
gentle. The camel is just suited to Arabia. His feet are fit to tread
upon the burning sands; because the soles are more like India-rubber than
like flesh: his hard mouth, lined with horn, is not hurt by the prickly
plants of the desert; and his hump full of fat is as good to him as a bag
of provisions: for on a journey the fat helps to support him, and enables
him to do with very little food. Besides all this, his inside is so made
that he can live without water for three days.

A dromedary is a swifter kind of camel, and is just as superior to a
camel as a riding-horse is to a cart-horse.


THE THREE PRODUCTIONS OF ARABIA.

These are coffee, dates, and gums.

For these Arabia is famous.

The coffee plants are shrubs. The hills are covered with them; the white
blossoms look beautiful among the dark green leaves, and so do the red
berries.

The dates grow on the palm-trees; and they are the chief food of the
Arabs. The Arabs despise those countries where there are no dates.

There are various sweet-smelling gums that flow from Arabian trees.


THE THREE PARTS OF ARABIA.

You see from what I have just said that there are plants and trees in
Arabia. Then it is clear that the whole land is not a desert. No, it is
not; there is only a part called Desert Arabia; that is on the north.
There is a part in the middle almost as bad, called Stony Arabia, yet
some sweet plants grow there; but there is a part in the south called
Happy Arabia, where grow abundance of fragrant spices, and of
well-flavored coffee.


THE THREE CITIES OF ARABIA.

Arabia has long been famous for three cities, called Mecca, Medina, and
Mocha.

_Mecca_ is considered the holiest city in the world. And why? Because the
false prophet Mahomed was born there. On that account Mahomedans come
from all parts of the world to worship in the great temple there.
Sometimes Mecca is as full of people as a hive is full of bees.

Of all the cities in the East, Mecca is the gayest, because the houses
have windows looking into the streets. In these houses are lodgings for
the pilgrims.

And what is it the pilgrims worship?

A great black stone, which they say the angel Gabriel brought down from
heaven as a foundation for Mahomed's house. They kiss it seven times, and
after each kiss they walk round it.

Then they bathe in a well, which they say is the well the angel showed to
Hagar in the desert, and they think the waters of this well can wash away
all their sins. Alas! they know not of the blood which can wash away
_all_ sin.

_Medina_ contains the tomb of Mahomed; yet it is not thought so much of
as Mecca. Perhaps the Mahomedans do not like to be reminded that Mahomed
died like any other man, and never rose again.

_Mocha_.--This is a part whence very fine coffee is sent to Europe.


TRAVELS IN THE DESERT.

Of all places in Arabia, which would you desire most to see? Would it not
be Mount Sinai? Our great and glorious God once spoke from the top of
that mountain.

I will tell you of an English clergyman who travelled to see that
mountain. As he knew there were many robbers on the way, he hired an Arab
sheikh to take care of him. A sheikh is a chief, or captain. Suleiman
was a fine-looking man, dressed in a red shirt, with a shawl twisted
round his waist, a purple cloak, and a red cap. His feet and legs were
bare. His eyes were bright, his skin was brown, and his beard black. To
his girdle were fastened a huge knife and pistols, and by his side hung a
sword. This man brought a band of Arabs with him to defend the travellers
from the robbers in the desert.

One day the whole party set out mounted on camels. After going some
distance, a number of children were seen scampering among the rocks, and
looking like brown monkeys. These were the children of the Arabs who
accompanied the Englishman. The wild little creatures ran to their
fathers, and saluted them in the respectful manner that Arab children are
taught to do.

At last a herd of goats was seen with a fine boy of twelve years old
leading them. He was the son of Suleiman. The father seemed to take great
delight in this boy, and introduced him to the traveller. The kind
gentleman riding on a camel, put down his hand to the boy. The little
fellow, after touching the traveller's hand, kissed his own, according to
the Arabian manner.

The way to Mount Sinai was very rough; indeed, the traveller was
sometimes obliged to get off his camel, and to climb among the crags on
hands and knees. How glad he was when the Arabs pointed to a mountain,
and said, "That is Mount Sinai." With what fear and reverence he gazed
upon it! Here it was that the voice of the great God was once heard
speaking out of the midst of the smoke, and clouds, and darkness!

How strange it must be to see in this lonely gloomy spot, a great
building! Yet there is one at the foot of the mountain. What can it be? A
convent. See those high walls around. It is necessary to have high walls,
because all around are bands of fierce robbers. It is even unsafe to have
a door near the ground. There is a door quite high up in the wall; but
what use can it be of, when there are no steps by which to reach it? Can
you guess how people get in by this door? A rope is let down from the
door to draw the people up. One by one they are drawn up. In the inside
of the walls there are steps by which travellers go down into the convent
below. The monks who live there belong to the Greek church.

The clergyman was lodged in a small cell spread with carpets and
cushions, and he was waited upon by the monks.

These monks think that they lead a very holy life in the desert. They eat
no meat, and they rise in the night to pray in their chapel. But God does
not care for such service as this. He never commanded men to shut
themselves up in a desert, but rather to do good in the world.

One day the monks told the traveller they would show him the place where
the burning bush once stood. How could they know the place? However, they
pretended to know it. They led the way to the chapel, then taking off
their shoes, they went down some stone steps till they came to a round
room under ground, with three lamps burning in the midst. "There," said
the monks, "is the very spot where the burning bush once stood."

There were two things the traveller enjoyed while in the convent, the
beautiful garden full of thick trees and sweet flowers; and the cool pure
water from the well. Such water and such a garden in the midst of a
desert were sweet indeed.

The Arabs, who accompanied the traveller, enjoyed much the plentiful
meals provided at the convent; for the monks bought sheep from the
shepherds around, to feed their guests. After leaving the convent,
Suleiman was taken ill in consequence of having eaten too much while
there. The clergyman gave him medicine, which cured him. The Arabs were
very fond of their chief, and were so grateful to the stranger for giving
him in medicine, that they called him "the good physician." Suleiman
himself showed his gratitude by bringing his own black coffee-pot into
the tent of the stranger, and asking him to drink coffee with him; for
such is the pride of an Arab chief, that he thinks it is a very great
honor indeed for a stranger to share his meal.

But the traveller soon found that it is dangerous to pass through a
desert. Why? Not on account of wild beasts, but of wild men. There was a
tribe of Arabs very angry with Suleiman, because he was conducting the
travellers through _their_ part of the desert. They wanted to be the
guides through that part, in hopes of getting rewarded by a good sum of
money. You see how covetous they were. The love of money is the root of
all evil.

These angry Arabs were hidden among the rocks and hills; and every now
and then they came suddenly out of their hiding-places, and with a loud
voice threatened to punish Suleiman.

How much alarmed the travellers were! but none more than Suleiman
himself. He requested the clergyman to travel during the whole night, in
order the sooner to get out of the reach of the enemy. The clergyman
promised to go as far as he was able. What a journey it was! No one durst
speak aloud to his companions, lest the enemies should be hidden among
the rocks close by, and should overhear them. At midnight the whole
company pitched their tents by the coast of the Red Sea. Early in the
morning the minister went alone to bathe in its smooth waters. After he
had bathed, and when he was just going to return to the tents, he was
startled by hearing the sound of a gun. The sound came from the midst of
a small grove of palm-trees close by. Alarmed, he ran back quickly to the
tents: again he heard the report of a gun: and again a third time. The
travellers, Arabs and all, were gathered together, expecting an enemy to
rush out of the grove. But where was Suleiman? He had gone some time
before into the grove of palm-trees to talk to the enemies.

Presently the traveller saw about forty Arabs leave the grove and go far
away. But Suleiman came not. So the minister went into the grove to
search for him, and there he found---not Suleiman--but his dead body!

There it lay on the ground, covered with blood. The minister gazed upon
the dark countenance once so joyful, and he thought it looked as if the
poor Arab had died in great agony. It was frightful to observe the number
of his wounds. Three balls had been shot into his body by the gun which
went off three times. Three great cuts had been made in his head; his
neck was almost cut off from his head, and his hand from his arm! How
suddenly was the proud Arab laid low in the dust! All his delights were
perished forever. Suleiman had been promised a new dress of gay colors at
the end of the journey; but he would never more gird a shawl round his
active frame, or fold a turban round his swarthy brow. The Arabs wrapped
their beloved master in a loose garment, and placing him on his beautiful
camel, they went in deep grief to a hill at a little distance. There they
buried him. They dug no grave; but they made a square tomb of large loose
stones, and laid the dead body in the midst, and then covered it with
more stones. There Suleiman sleeps in the desert. But the day shall come
when "the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her
slain:" and then shall the blood of Suleiman and his slain body be
uncovered, and his murderer brought to judgment.[3]

    [3] Extracted chiefly from "The Pastor's Memorial," by the Rev.
        G. Fisk. Published by R. Carter & Brothers.




TURKEY IN ASIA.


Is there a Turkey in Asia as well as a Turkey in Europe?

Yes, there is; and it is governed by the same sultan, and filled by the
same sort of persons. All the Turks are Mahomedans.

You may know a Mahomedan city at a distance. When we look at a Christian
city we see the steeples and spires of churches; but when we look at a
Mahomedan city we see rising above the houses and trees the domes and
minarets of mosques. What are domes and minarets? A dome is the round top
of a mosque: and the minarets are the tall slender towers. A minaret is
of great use to the Mahomedans.

Do you see the little narrow gallery outside the minaret. There is a man
standing there. He is calling people to say their prayers. He calls so
loud that all the people below can hear, and the sounds he utters are
like sweet music. But would it not make you sad to hear them when you
remembered what he was telling people to do? To pray to the god of
Mahomet, not to the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ; but to a
false god: to no God. This man goes up the dark narrow stairs winding
inside the minaret five times a day: first he goes as soon as the sun
rises, then at noon, next in the afternoon, then at sunset, and last of
all in the night. Ascending and descending those steep stairs is all his
business, and it is hard work, and fatigues him very much.

In the court of the mosque there is a fountain. There every one washes
before he goes into the mosque to repeat his prayers, thinking to please
God by clean hands instead of a clean heart. Inside the mosque there are
no pews or benches, but only mats and carpets spread on the floor. There
the worshippers kneel and touch the ground with their foreheads. The
minister of the mosque is called the Imam. He stands in a niche in the
wall, with his back to the people, and repeats prayers.

But he is not the preacher. The sheikh, or chief man of the town,
preaches; not on Sunday, but on Friday. He sits on a high place and talks
to the people--not about pardon and peace, and heaven and holiness--but
about the duty of washing their hands before prayers, and of bowing down
to the ground, and such vain services.

In the mosque there are two rows of very large wax candles, much higher
than a man, and as thick as his arm, and they are lighted at night.

It is considered right to go to the mosque for prayers five times a day;
but very few Mahomedans go so often. Wherever people may be, they are
expected to kneel down and repeat their prayers, whether in the house or
in the street. But very few do so. While they pray, Mahomedans look about
all the time, and in the midst speak to any one, and then go on again;
for their hearts are not in their prayers; they do not worship in spirit
and in truth.

There are no images or pictures in the mosques, because Mahomet forbid
his followers to worship idols. There are Korans on reading stands in
various parts of the mosque for any one to read who pleases.

The people leave their red slippers at the door, keeping on their yellow
boots only; but they do not uncover their heads as Christians do.

Was Christ ever known in this Mahomedan land? Yes, long before he was
known in England. Turkey in Asia used to be called Asia Minor, (or Asia
the less,) and there it was that Paul the apostle was born, and there he
preached and turned many to Christ. But at last the Christians began to
worship images, and the fierce Turks came and turned the churches into
mosques. This was the punishment God sent the Christians for breaking his
law. In some of the mosques you may see the marks of the pictures which
the Christians painted on the walls, and which the Turks nearly scraped
off.

How dreadful it would be if our churches should ever be turned into
mosques! May God never send us this heavy punishment.


ARMENIA.

One corner of Turkey in Asia is called Armenia. There are many high
mountains in Armenia, and one of them you would like to see very much. It
is the mountain on which Noah's ark rested after the flood. I mean
Ararat.[4]

It is a very high mountain with two peaks; and its highest peak is always
covered with snow. People say that no one ever climbed to the top of that
peak. I should think Noah's ark rested on a lower part of the mountain
between the two peaks, for it would have been very cold for Noah's
family on the snow-covered peak, and it would have been very difficult
for them to get down. How pleasant it must be to stand on the side of
Ararat, and to think, "Here my great father Noah stood, and my great
mother, Noah's wife; here they saw the earth in all its greenness, just
washed with the waters of the flood, and here they rejoiced and praised
God."

I am glad to say that all the Armenians are not Mahomedans. Many are
Christians, but, alas! they know very little about Christ except his
name. I will tell you a short anecdote to show how ignorant they are.

Once a traveller went to see an old church in Armenia called the Church
of Forty Steps, because there are forty steps to reach it: for it is
built on the steep banks of a river.

The traveller found the churchyard full of boys. This churchyard was
their school-room. And what were their books? The grave-stones that lay
flat upon the ground. Four priests were teaching the boys. These priests
wore black turbans; while Turkish Imams wear white turbans. One of these
Armenian priests led the traveller to an upper room, telling him he had
something very wonderful to show him. What could it be? The priest went
to a nacho in the wall and took out of it a bundle; then untied a silk
handkerchief, and then another, and then another; till he had untied
twenty-five silk handkerchiefs. What was the precious thing so carefully
wrapped up? It was a New Testament.

It is a precious book indeed: but it ought to be read, and not wrapped
up. The priest praised it, saying, "This is a wonderful book; it has
often been laid upon sick persons, and has cured them." Then a poor old
man, bent and tottering, pressed forward to kiss the book, and to rub his
heavy head. This was worshipping the _book_, instead of Him who wrote it.

An Armenian village looks like a number of molehills: for the dwellings
are holes dug in the ground with low stone walls round the holes; the
roof is made of branches of trees and heaps of earth. There are generally
two rooms in the hole--one for the family, and one for the cattle.

A traveller arrived one evening at such a village; and he was pleased to
see fruit-trees overshadowing the hovels, and women, without veils,
spinning cotton under their shadow. But he was not pleased with the room
where he was to sleep. The way lay through a long dark passage under
ground; and the room was filled with cattle: there was no window nor
chimney. How dark and hot it was! Yet it was too damp to sleep out of
doors, because a large lake was near; therefore he wrapped his cloak
around him, and lay upon the ground; but he could not sleep because of
the stinging of insects, and the trampling of cattle: and glad he was in
the morning to breathe again the fresh air.

Rich Armenians have fine houses. Once a traveller dined with a rich
Armenian. The dinner was served up in a tray, and placed on a low stool,
while the company sat on the ground. One dish after another was served up
till the traveller was tired of tasting them. But there was not only too
much to _eat_; there was also too much to _drink_. Rakee, a kind of
brandy, was handed about; and afterwards a musician came in and played
and sang to amuse the company. In Turkey there is neither playing, nor
singing, nor drinking spirits. The Turks think themselves much better
than Christians. "For," say they, "we drink less and pray more." They do
not know that real Christians are not fond of drinking, and are fond of
praying; only _they_ pray more in _secret_, and the Turks more in
_public_.


KURDISTAN.

The fiercest of all the people in Asia are the Kurds.

They are the terror of all who live near them.

Their dwellings are in the mountains; there some live in villages, and
some in black tents, and some in strong castles. At night they rush down
from the mountains upon the people in the valleys, uttering a wild yell,
and brandishing their swords. They enter the houses, and begin to pack up
the things they find, and to place them on the backs of their mules and
asses, while they drive away the cattle of the poor people; and if any
one attempts to resist them, they kill him. You may suppose in what
terror the poor villagers live in the valleys. They keep a man to watch
all night, as well as large dogs; and they build a strong tower in the
midst of the village where they run to hide themselves when they are
afraid.

The reason why the Armenians live in holes in the ground is because they
hope the Kurds may not find out where they are.

Those Kurds who live in tents often move from place to place. The black
tents are folded up and placed on the backs of mules; and a large kettle
is slung upon the end of the tent-pole. The men and women drive the
herds and flocks, while the children and the chickens ride upon the cows.

The Kurds have thin, dark faces, hooked noses, and black eyes, with a
fierce and malicious look.

They are of the Mahomedan religion, and the call to prayers may be heard
in the villages of these robbers and murderers.


MESOPOTAMIA.

This country is part of Turkey in Asia. It lies between two very famous
rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates, often spoken of in the Bible. The
word Mesopotamia means "between rivers." It was between these rivers that
faithful Abraham lived when God first called him to be his friend. Should
you not like to see that country? It is now full of ruins. The two most
ancient cities in the world were built on the Tigris and Euphrates.

Nineveh was on the Tigris.

What a city that was at the time Jonah preached there! Its walls were so
thick that three chariots could go on the top all abreast.

But what is Nineveh now? Look at those green mounds. Under those heaps of
rubbish lies Nineveh. A traveller has been digging among those mounds,
and has found the very throne of the kings of Nineveh, and the images of
winged bulls and lions which adorned the palace. God overthrew Nineveh
because it was wicked.

There is another ancient city lying in ruins on the Euphrates, it is
Babylon the Great.

There are nothing but heaps of bricks to be seen where once proud Babylon
stood. Where are now the streets fifteen miles long? Where are the
hanging gardens? Gardens one above the other, the wonder of the world?
Where is now the temple of Belus, (or of Babel, as some think,) with its
golden statue? All, all are now crumbled into rubbish. God has destroyed
Babylon as he said.

There are dens of wild beasts among the ruins. A traveller saw some bones
of a sheep in one, the remains, he supposed, of a lion's dinner; but he
did not like to go further into the den to see who dwelt there. Owls and
bats fill all the dark places. But no men live there, though human bones
are often found scattered about, and they turn into dust as soon as they
are touched.

There is now a great city in Mesopotamia, called Bagdad. In Babylon no
sound is heard but the howlings of wild beasts; in Bagdad men may be
heard screaming and hallooing from morning to night. The drivers of the
camels and the mules shout as they press through the narrow crooked
streets, and even the ladies riding on white donkeys, and attended by
black slaves, scream and halloo.

In summer it is so hot in Bagdad that people during the day live in rooms
under ground, and sleep on their flat roofs at night.

It is curious to see the people who have been sleeping on the roof get up
in the morning. First they roll up their mattrasses, their coverlids, and
pillows, and put them in the house. The children cannot fold up theirs,
but their mothers or black slaves do it for them. The men repeat their
prayers, and then drink a cup of coffee, which their wives present to
them. The wives kneel as they offer the cup to their lords, and stand
with their hands crossed while their lords are drinking, then kneel down
again to receive the cup, and to kiss their lords' hand. Then the men
take their pipes, and lounge on their cushions, while the women say their
prayers. And when do the children say their prayers? Never. They know
only of Mahomet; they know not the Saviour who said, "Suffer little
children to come unto me."

    [4] It is remarkable that this mountain lies at the point where
        three great empires meet, namely, Russia, Persia, and Turkey.




PERSIA.


Is this country mentioned in the Bible? Yes; we read of Cyrus, the king
of Persia. Isaiah spoke of him before he was born, and called him by his
name. See chapter xlv.

Persia is now a Mahomedan country. The Turks, you remember, are
Mahomedans too. Perhaps you think those two nations, the Turks and the
Persians, must agree well together, as they are of the same religion. Far
from it. No nations hate one another more than Turks and Persians do; and
the reason is, that though they both believe in Mahomet, they disagree
about his son-in law, Ali. The Persians are very fond of him, and keep a
day of mourning in memory of his death; whereas the Turks do not care for
Ali at all.

But is this a reason why they should hate one another so much?

Even in their common customs the Persians differ from the Turks. The
Turks sit cross-legged on the ground; the Persians sit upon their heels.
Which way of sitting should you prefer? I think you would find it more
comfortable to sit like a Turk.

The Turks sit on sofas and lean against cushions; the Persians sit on
carpets and lean against the wall. I know you would prefer the Turkish
fashion. The Turks drink coffee without either milk or sugar; the
Persians drink tea with sugar, though without milk. The Turks wear
turbans; the Persians wear high caps of black lamb's-wool.

Not only are their _customs_ different; but their _characters_. The Turks
are grave and the Persians lively. The Turks are silent, the Persians
talkative. The Turks are rude, the Persians polite. Now I am sure you
like the Persians better than the Turks. But wait a little--the Turks are
very proud; the Persians are very deceitful. An old Persian was heard to
say, "We all tell lies whenever we can." The Persians are not even
ashamed when their falsehoods are found out. When they sell they ask too
much; when they make promises they break them. In short, it is impossible
to trust a Persian.

The Turks obey Mahomet's laws; they pray five times a day, and drink no
wine. But the Persians seldom repeat their prayers, and they do drink
wine, though Mahomet has forbidden it. In short, the Persian seems to
have no idea of right and wrong. The judges do not give right judgment,
but take bribes. The soldiers live by robbing the poor people, for the
king pays them no wages, but leaves them to get food as they can; and so
the poor people often build their cottages in little nooks in the
valleys, where they hope the soldiers will not see them.

THE COUNTRY.--Persia is a high country and a dry country. There are high
mountains and wide plains; but there are very few rivers and running
brooks, because there is so little rain. However, in some places the
Persians have cut canals, and planted willow-trees by their side. Rice
will not grow well in such a dry country, but sheep find it very pleasant
and wholesome. The hills are covered over with flocks, and the shepherds
may be seen leading their sheep and carrying the very young lambs in
their arms. This is a sight which reminds us of the good Shepherd: for it
is written of Jesus, "He gathered the lambs in his arms."

The sweetest of all flowers grows abundantly in Persia--I mean the rose.
The air is filled with its fragrance. The people pluck the rose leaves
and dry them in the sun, as we dry hay. How pleasant it must be for
children in the spring to play among the heaps of rose-leaves. Once a
traveller went to breakfast with a Persian Prince, and he found the
company seated upon a heap of rose-leaves, with a carpet spread over it.
Afterwards the rose-leaves were sent to the distillers, to be made into
rose-water.

Persian cats are beautiful creatures, with fur as soft as silk.

The best melons in the world grow in Persia.

The three chief materials for making clothes are all to be found there in
abundance. I mean wool, cotton, and silk. You have heard already of the
Persian sheep; so you see there is wool. Cotton trees also abound. Women
and children may be been picking the nuts which contain the little pieces
of cotton. There are mulberry-trees also to feed the numerous silk worms.

POOR PEOPLE.--The villages where the poor live are miserable places. The
houses are of mud, not placed in rows, but straggling, with dirty narrow
paths winding between them.

In summer the poor people sleep on the roofs; for the roofs are flat, and
covered with earth, with low walls on every side to prevent the sleepers
falling off. Here the Persians spread their carpets to lie upon at night.

Winter does not last long in Persia, yet while it lasts it is cold. Then
the poor, instead of sleeping on their roofs, sleep in a very curious
warm bed. In the middle of each cottage there is a round hole in the
floor, where the fire burns. In the evening the fire goes out, but the
hot cinders remain. The Persians place over it a low round table, and
then throw a large coverlid over the table, and all round about. Under
this coverlid the family lie at night, their heads peeping out, and their
feet against the warm fire-place underneath. This the Persians call a
comfortable bed.

The poor wear dirty and ragged clothes, and the children may be seen
crawling about in the dust, and looking like little pigs. Yet in one
respect the Persians are very clean; they bathe often. In every village
there is a large bath.

The poor people have animals of various kinds--a few sheep, or goats, or
cows. In the day one man takes them all out to feed. In the evening he
brings them back to the village, and the animals of their own accord go
home to their own stables. Each cow and each sheep knows where she will
get food and a place to sleep in. The prophet Isaiah said truly, "The ass
knoweth his owner, and the ox his master's crib; but Israel doth not
know, my people doth not consider."

THE PERSIAN LADIES.--They wrap themselves up in a large dark blue
wrapper, and in this dress they walk out where they please. No one who
meets them can tell who they are.

And where do these women go? Chiefly to the bath, where they spend much
of their time drinking coffee and smoking. There too they try to make
themselves handsome by blackening their eyebrows and dyeing their hair.
Sometimes the ladies walk to the burial-grounds, and wander about for
hours among the graves. When they are at home they employ themselves in
making pillau and sherbet. Pillau is made of rice and butter; sherbet is
made of juice mixed with water.

The ladies have a sitting-room to themselves. One side of it is all
lattice-work, and this makes it cool. At night they spread their carpets
on the floor to sleep upon, and in the day they keep them in a
lumber-room.

PERSIAN INNS.--They are very uncomfortable places. There are a great many
small cells made of mud, built all round a large court. These cells are
quite empty, and paved with stone. The only comfortable room is over the
door-way of the court, and the first travellers who arrive are sure to
settle in the room over the door-way.

Once an English traveller arrived at a Persian inn with his two servants.
All three were very ill and in great pain, from having travelled far over
burning plains and steep mountains.

But as the room over the door-way was occupied, they were forced to go
into a little cold damp cell. As there was no door to the cell, they hung
up a rag to keep out the chilling night air, and they placed a pan of
coals in the midst. Many Persians came and peeped into the cell; and
seeing the sick men looking miserable as they lay on their carpets, the
unfeeling creatures laughed at them, and no one would help them or give
them anything to eat. The travellers bought some bread and grapes at the
bazaar, but these were not fit food for sick men, but it was all they
could get. At last a Persian merchant heard of their distress; and he
came to see them every day, bringing them warm milk and wholesome food:
when they were well enough to be moved, he took them to his own house,
and nursed them with the greatest care.

Who was this kind merchant? Not a Mahomedan, but of the religion of the
fire worshippers, or Parsees. Was he not like the good Samaritan of whom
we read in the New Testament? O that Bahram, the merchant, might know the
true God!

PILGRIMS AND BEGGARS.--Very often you may see a large company of Pilgrims
some on foot, and some mounted on camels, horses, and asses. They are
returning from Mecca, the birth-place of Mahomet. What good have they got
by their pilgrimage? None at all. They think they are grown very holy,
but they make such an uproar at the inns by quarrelling and fighting when
they are travelling home, that no one can bear to be near them.

There is a set of beggars called dervishes. They call themselves very
holy, and think people are bound to give money to such holy men. They are
so bold that sometimes they refuse to leave a place till some money has
been given.

Once a dervish stopped a long while before the house of the English
ambassador, and refused to go away. But a plan was thought of to _make_
him go away.

The dervish was sitting in a little niche in the wall. The ambassador
ordered his servants to build up bricks to shut the dervish in. The men
began to build, yet the dervish would not stir, till the bricks came up
as high as his chin: then he began to be frightened, and said he would
rather go away.

THE KING OF PERSIA.--He is called King of Kings. What a name for a man!
It is the title of God alone. The king sits on a marble throne, and his
garments sparkle with jewels of dazzling brightness. The walls of his
state-chamber are covered with looking-glasses. One side of the room
opens into a court adorned with flowers and fountains. Great part of his
time is spent in amusements, such as hunting and shooting, writing
verses, and hearing stories. He keeps a man called a story-teller, and he
will never hear the same story repeated twice. It gives the man a great
deal of trouble to find new stories every day. The king keeps jesters,
who make jokes; and he has mimics, who play antics to make him laugh. He
dines at eight in the evening from dishes of pure gold. No one is allowed
to dine with him; but two of his little boys wait upon him, and his
physician stands by to advise him not to eat too much.

Do you think he is happy in all his grandeur? Judge for yourself.

All his golden dishes come up covered and sealed. Why? For fear of
poison. There is a chief officer in the kitchen who watches the cook, to
see that he puts no poison into the food: and he seals up the dishes
before they are taken to the king, in order that the servants may not put
in poison as they are carrying them along. In what fear this great king
lives! He cannot trust his own servants.

TEHERAN.--This is the royal city. It is built in a barren plain, and is
exceedingly hot, as the hills around keep off the air. It is a mean
city, for it is chiefly built of mud huts.

The king's palace is called the "Ark," and is a very strong as well as
grand place.[5]

    [5] Extracted chiefly from Southgate's Travels.




CHINA.


There is no country in the world like China.

How different it is from Persia, where there are so few people; whereas
China is crowded with inhabitants!

How different it is from England, where the people are instructed in the
Bible, whereas China is full of idols.

China is a heathen country; yet it is not a savage country, for the
people are quiet, and orderly, and industrious.

It would be hard for a child to imagine what a great multitude of people
there are in China.

If you were to sit by a clock, and if all the Chinese were to pass before
you one at a time, and if you were to count one at each tick of the
clock, and if you were never to leave off counting day or night--how long
do you think it would be before you had counted all the Chinese?

Twelve years. O what a vast number of people there must be in China! In
all, there are about three hundred and sixty millions! If all the people
in the world were collected together, out of every three one would be a
Chinese. How sad it is to think that this immense nation knows not God,
nor his glorious Son!

There are too many people in China, for there is not food enough for them
all; and many are half-starved.

FOOD.--The poor can get nothing but rice to eat and water to drink;
except now and then they mix a little pork or salt fish with their rice.
Any sort of meat is thought good; even a hash of rats and snakes, or a
mince of earth-worms. Cats and dogs' flesh are considered as nice as
pork, and cost as much.

An Englishman was once dining with a Chinaman, and he wished to know what
sort of meat was on his plate. But he was not able to speak Chinese. How
then could he ask? He thought of a way. Looking first at his plate, and
then at the Chinaman, he said, "Ba-a-a," meaning to ask, "Is this
mutton?" The Chinaman understood the question, and immediately replied,
"Bow-wow," meaning to say, "It is puppy-dog." You will wish to know
whether the Englishman went on eating; but I cannot tell you this.

While the poor are in want of food, the rich eat a great deal too much. A
Chinese feast in a rich man's house lasts for hours. The servants bring
in one course after another, till a stranger wonders when the last course
will come. The food is served up in a curious way; not on dishes, but in
small basins--for all the meats are swimming in broth. Instead of a knife
and fork, each person has a pair of chop-sticks, which are something like
knitting-needles; and with these he cleverly fishes up the floating
morsels, and pops them into his mouth. There are spoons of china for
drinking the broth.

You will be surprised to hear that the Chinese are very fond of eating
birds' nests. Do not suppose that they eat magpies' nests, which are made
of clay and sticks, or even little nests of moss and clay; the nests they
eat are made of a sort of gum. This gum comes out of the bird's mouth,
and is shining and transparent, and the nest sticks fast to the rock.
These nests are something like our jelly, and must be very nourishing.

The Chinese like nothing cold; they warm all their food, even their wine.
For they have wine, not made of grapes, but of rice, and they drink it,
not in glasses, but in cups. Tea, however, is the most common drink; for
China is the country where tea grows.

The hills are covered with shrubs bearing a white flower, a little like a
white rose. They are tea-plants. The leaves are picked; each leaf is
rolled up with the finger, and dried on a hot iron plate.

The Chinese do not keep all the tea-leaves; they pack up a great many in
boxes, and send them to distant lands. In England and in Russia there is
a tea-kettle in every cottage. Some of the Chinese are so very poor that
they cannot buy new tea-leaves, but only tea-leaves which ire sold in
shops. I do not think in England poor people would buy old tea-leaves.
Some very poor Chinese use fern-leaves instead of tea-leaves.

The Chinese do not make tea in the same way that we do. They have no
teapot, or milk-jug, or sugar-basin. They put a few tea-leaves in a cup,
pour hot water on them, and then put a cover on the cup till the tea is
ready. Whenever you pay a visit in China a cup of tea is offered.

APPEARANCE.--The Chinese are not at all like the other natives of Asia.
The Turks and Arabs are fine-looking men, but the Chinese are
poor-looking creatures. You have seen their pictures on their boxes of
tea, for they are fond of drawing pictures of themselves.

Their complexion is rather yellow, but many of the ladies, who keep in
doors, are rather fair. They have black hair, small dark eyes, broad
faces, flat noses, and high cheek-bones. In general they are short. The
men like to be stout; and the rich men are stout: the fatter they are,
the more they are admired: but the women like to be slender.

A Chinaman does not take off his cap in company, and he has a good reason
for it: his head is close shaven: only a long piece behind is allowed to
grow, and this grows down to his heels, and is plaited. He wears a long
dark blue gown, with loose hanging sleeves. His shoes are clumsy, turned
up at the toes in an ugly manner, and the soles are white. The Chinese
have more trouble in whitening their shoes than we have in blacking ours.

A Chinese lady wears a loose gown like a Chinaman's; but she may be known
by her head-dress, her baby feet, and her long nails. Her hair is tied
up, and decked with artificial flowers; and sometimes a little golden
bird, sparkling with jewels, adorns her forehead. Her feet are no bigger
than those of a child of five years old; because, when she was five, they
were cruelly bound up to prevent them from growing. She suffered much
pain all her childhood, and now she trips about as if she were walking on
tiptoes. A little push would throw her down. As she walks she moves from
side to side like a ship in the water, for she cannot walk firmly with
such small feet. The Chinese are so foolish as to admire these small
feet, and to call them the "golden lilies". As for her finger-nails, they
are seldom seen, for a Chinese lady hides her hands in her long sleeves;
but the nails on the left hand are very long, and are like bird's claws.
The nails on the right hand are not so long, in order that the lady may
be able to tinkle on her music, to embroider, and to weave silk.

The gentlemen are proud of having one long nail on the little finger, to
show that they do not labor like the poor, for if they did, the nail
would break. Men in China wear necklaces and use fans.

What foolish customs I have described. Surely you will not think the
Chinese a wise people, though very _clever_, as you will soon find.

Men and women dress in black, or in dark colors, such as blue and purple;
the women sometimes dress in pink or green. Great people dress in red,
and the royal family in yellow. When you see a person all in white, you
may know he is in mourning. A son dresses in white for three years after
he has lost one of his parents.

HOUSES.--See that lantern hanging over the gate. The light is rather dim,
because the sides are made of silk instead of glass. What is written upon
the lantern? The master's name. The gateway leads into a court into
which many rooms open. There are not doors to all the rooms; to some
there are only curtains. Curtains are used instead of doors in many hot
countries, because of their coolness; but the furniture of the Chinese
rooms is quite different from the furniture of Turkish and Persian rooms.
The Chinese sit on chairs as we do, and have high tables like ours: and
they sleep on bedsteads, yet their beds are not like ours, for instead of
a mattrass there is nothing but a mat.

Instead of pictures, the Chinese adorn their rooms with painted lanterns,
and with pieces of white satin, on which sentences are written: they have
also book-cases and china jars. But they have no fire-places, for they
never need a fire to keep themselves warm: the sun shining in at the
south windows makes the rooms tolerably warm in winter; and in summer the
weather is very hot. The Chinese in winter put on one coat over the other
till they feel warm enough. In the north of China it is so cold in winter
that the place where the bed stands (which is a recess in the wall) is
heated by a furnace underneath, and the whole family sit there all day
crowded together.

The Chinese houses have not so many stories as ours; in the towns there
is one floor above the ground floor, but in the country there are no
rooms up stairs.

It would amuse you to see a Chinese country house. There is not one large
house, but a number of small buildings like summer-houses, and long
galleries running from one to another. One of these summer-houses is in
the middle of a pond, with a bridge leading to it. In the pond there are
gold and silver fish; for these beautiful fishes often kept in glass
bowls in England, came first from China. By the sides of the garden walls
large cages are placed; in one may be seen some gold and silver
pheasants, in another a splendid peacock; in another a gentle stork, and
in another an elegant little deer. There is often a grove of
mulberry-trees in the garden, and in the midst of the grove houses made
of bamboo, for rearing silk-worms. It is the delight of the ladies to
feed these curious worms. None but very quiet people are fit to take care
of them, for a loud noise would kill them. Gold and silver fish also
cannot bear much noise.

In every large house in China there is a room called the Hall of
Ancestors. There the family worship their dead parents and grand-parents,
and great-grand-parents, and those who lived still further back. There
are no images to be seen in the Hall of Ancestors, but there are tablets
with names written upon them. The family bow down before the tablets, and
burn incense and gold paper! What a foolish service! What good can
incense and paper do to the dead? And what good can the dead do to their
children? How is it that such clever people as the Chinese are so
foolish?

RELIGION.--You have heard already that the Chinese worship the dead.

Who taught them this worship?

It was a man named Confucius, who lived a long while ago. This Confucius
was a very wise man. From his childhood he was very fond of sitting alone
thinking, instead of playing with other children. When he was fourteen he
began to read some old books that had been written not long after the
time of Noah. In these books he found very many wise sentences, such as
Noah may have taught his children. The Chinese had left off reading these
wise books, and were growing more and more foolish.[6] Confucius, when he
was grown up, tried to persuade his countrymen to attend to the old
books. There were a few men who became his scholars, and who followed him
about from place to place. They might be seen sitting under a tree,
listening to the words of Confucius.

Confucius was a very tall man with a long black beard and a very high
forehead.

Had he known the true God, how much good he might have done to the
Chinese; but as it was he only tried to make them happy in this world. He
himself confessed that he knew nothing about the other world. He gave
very good advice about respect due to parents; but he gave very bad
advice about worship due to them after they were dead.

Was he a good man? Not truly good; for he did not love God; neither did
he act right: for he was very unkind to his wife, and quite cast her off.
Yet he used to talk of going to other countries to teach the people. It
would have been a happy thing for him, if he had gone as far as Babylon;
for a truly wise man lived there, even Daniel the prophet. From him he
might have learned about the promised Saviour, and life everlasting. But
Confucius never left China.

He was ill-treated by many of the rich and great, and he was so poor that
rice was generally his only food. When he was dying he felt very unhappy,
as well he might, when he knew not where he was going. He said to his
followers just before his death, "The kings refuse to follow my advice;
and since I am of no use on earth, it is best that I should leave it." As
soon as he was dead, people began to respect him highly, and even to
worship him. At this day, though Confucius died more than two thousand
years ago, there is a temple to his honor in every large city, and
numbers of beasts are offered up to him in sacrifice. There are thousands
of people descended from him, and they are treated with great honor as
the children of Confucius, and one of them is called kong or duke.

There is another religion in China besides the religion of Confucius, and
a much worse religion. About the same time that Confucius lived, there
was a man called La-on-tzee. He was a great deceiver, as you will see. He
pretended that he could make people completely happy. There were three
things he said he would do for them: first, he would make them rich by
turning stone into gold; next, he would prevent their being hurt by
swords or by fire through charms he could give them; and, last of all,
he could save them from death by a drink he knew how to prepare.

[Illustration: THE PRIESTS OF LA-ON-TZEE.]

What an awful liar this man must have been! Yet many people believed in
him, and still believe in him. There are now priests of La-on-tzee, and
once a year they rush through hot cinders and pretend they are not hurt.
You will wonder their tricks are not found out, seeing they cannot give
any one the drink to keep them from dying. It is indeed wonderful that
any one can believe these deceitful priests.

Their religion is called the "_Taou_" sect. Taou means reason. The name
of folly would be a better title for such a religion.

There is a _third_ religion in China. It is the sect of Buddha.[7] This
Buddha was a man who once pretended to be turned into a god called Fo.
You see he was even worse than La-on-tzee.

Buddha pretended that he could make people happy; and his way of doing so
was very strange. He told them to think of nothing, and then they would
be happy. It is said that one man fixed his eyes for nine years upon a
wall without looking off, hoping to grow happy at last. You can guess
whether he did. There are many priests of Buddha, always busy in telling
lies to the people. They recommend them to repeat the name of Buddha
thousands and thousands of times, and some people are so foolish as to do
this; but no one ever found any comfort from this plan.

The priests of Buddha say that their souls, when they leave their bodies,
go into other bodies. This idea is enough to make a dying person very
miserable. One poor man, when he was dying, was in terror because he had
been told his soul would go into one of the emperor's horses. Whenever
he was dropping off to sleep, he started up in a fright, fancying that he
felt the blows of a cruel driver hurrying him along: for he knew how very
fast the emperor's horses were made to go. How different are the
feelings of a dying man who knows he is going to Jesus.

He can say with joy,--

    "For me my elder brethren stay,
    And angels beckon me away,
    And Jesus bids me come."

The Buddhists are full of tricks by which to get presents out of the
people.

Once a year they cause a great feast to be made, and for whom? For the
poor? No. For beasts? No. For children? No. For themselves? No. You will
never guess. For ghosts! The priests declare that the souls of the dead
are very hungry, and that it is right to give them a feast. A number of
tables are set out, spread with all kinds of dishes. No one is seen to
eat, nor is any of the food eaten; but the priests say the ghosts eat the
spirit of the food. When it is supposed the ghosts have finished dinner,
the people scramble for the food, and take it home, and no doubt the
priests get their share.

The dead are supplied with money as well as with food, and that is done
by burning gilt paper; clothes are sent to them by cutting out paper in
the shape of clothes, (only much smaller,) and by burning the article;
and even houses are conveyed to the dead by making baby-houses and
burning them.

As an instance of the deceits of the priests, I will tell you of two
priests who once stood crying over a pour woman's gate. "What is the
matter?" inquired the woman. "Do you see those ducks?" the priests
replied; "our parents' souls are in them, and we are afraid lest you
should eat them for supper." The foolish woman out of pity gave the ducks
to the cunning priests, who promised to take great care of the precious
birds; but, in fact, they ate them for their own supper.

The Buddhist priests may be known by their heads close shaven, and their
black dress. The priests of Taou have their hair in a knot at the top of
their heads and they wear scarlet robes. There are no priests of
Confucius; and this is a good thing.

All the religions of China are bad, but of the three the religion of
Confucius is the least foolish.

There can be no doubt which of the three religions of China is the least
absurd.

The religion of Taou teaches men to act like mad-men.

The religion of Buddha teaches them to act like idiots.

The religion of Confucius teaches them to act like wise men, but without
souls.

THE EMPEROR.--There is no emperor in the world who has as many subjects
as the Emperor of China: he has six times as many as the Emperor of
Russia.

Neither is it possible for any man to be more honored than this emperor;
for he is worshipped by his people like a god. He is called "The Son of
Heaven," and "Ten Thousand Years;" yet he dies like every other child of
earth. His sign is the dragon, and this is painted on his flags, a fit
sign for one who, like Satan, makes himself a god.

Yet the emperor is also styled "Father of his people," and to show that
he feels like a father, when there is a famine or plague in the land, he
shuts himself up in his palace to grieve for his people; and by this
means he gets the love of his subjects.

Once a year, too, this great emperor tries to encourage his people to be
industrious by ploughing part of a field and sowing a little corn; and
the empress sets an example to the women, by going once a year to feed
silk worms and to wind the balls of silk.

The emperor wears a yellow dress, and all his relations wear yellow
girdles.

But the relations of the emperor are not the most honorable people in the
land: the most learned are the most honorable. Every one in China who
wishes to be a great lord studies day and night. One man, that he might
not fall asleep over his books, tied his long plaited tail of hair to
the ceiling, and when his head nodded, his hair was pulled tight, and
that woke him.

But what is it the Chinese learn with so much pains?

Chiefly the books of Confucius, and a few more; but in none of them is
God made known: so that, with all his wisdom, the Chinaman is foolish
still. The words of the Bible are true.

"The world by wisdom knew not God." Yet to know God is better than to
know all beside.

There is a great hall in every town where all the men who wish to be
counted learned meet together once a year. They are desired to write, and
then to show what they have written; and then those who have written
well, and without a mistake, have an honorable title given to them; and
they are allowed to write another year in another greater hall; and at
last the most learned are made mandarins.

What is a mandarin? He is a ruler over a town, and is counted a great
man. The most learned of the mandarins are made the emperor's
counsellors. There are only three of them, and they are the greatest men
in all China, next to the emperor.

There are many poor men who study hard in hopes to be one of these three.

This is the greatest honor a Chinaman can obtain. But a Christian can
obtain a far greater, even the honor of a crown and a throne in the
presence of the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming.

The mandarins are all of the religion of Confucius, and despise the poor
who worship Buddha.

ANIMALS AND TREES.--Once there were lions in China, but they have all
been killed; there are still bears and tigers in the mountains and
forests on the borders of the land.

There are small wild-cats, which are caught and fastened in cages, and
then killed and cooked. There are tame cats, too, with soft hair and
hanging ears, which are kept by ladies as pets.

There are dogs to guard the house, and they too are eaten; but as they
are fed on rice only, their flesh is better than the flesh of our dogs.
The dogs are so sensible that they know when the butcher is carrying away
a dog that he is going to kill him, and the poor creatures come round him
howling, as if begging for their brother's life.

The pig is the Chinaman's chief dish; for it can be fed on all the refuse
food, and there is very little food to spare in China.

There are not many birds in China, because there is no room for trees.
Only one bird sings, and she builds her nest on the ground; it is a bird
often heard singing in England floating in the air,--I mean the lark.

In most parts of China men carry all the burdens, and not horses and
asses.

A gentleman is carried in a chair by two men: and a mandarin by four. Yet
the emperor rides on horseback.


THE THREE GREAT CITIES

    Pekin on the north.
    Nankin in the middle.
    Canton on the south.

    Pekin is the grandest.
    Nankin is the most learned.
    Canton is the richest.

At Pekin is the emperor's palace. The gardens are exceedingly large, and
contain hills, and lakes, and groves within the walls, besides houses for
the emperor's relations.

At Nankin is the China tower. It is made of China bricks, and contains
nine rooms one over the other. It is two hundred feet high, a wonderful
height.

Of what use is it? Of none--of worse than none. It is a temple for
Buddha, and is full of his images.

At Canton there are so many people that there is not room for all in the
land; so thousands live on the water in bouts. Many have never slept a
single night on the shore. The children often fall overboard, but as a
hollow gourd is tied round each child's neck, they float, and are soon
picked up.

For a long while the Chinese would not allow foreigners to come into
their cities. A great many foreign ships came to Canton to buy tea and
silk; but the traders were forbidden to enter the town, and they lived in
a little island near, and built a town there called Macao.

But lately the Chinese emperor has agreed to permit strangers to come to
five ports, called Shang-hae, Ning-po, Foo-choo, Amoy, and Hong-Kong.

This last port, Hong-Kong, is an island near Canton, and the English have
built a city there and called it Victoria.

THE TWO RIVERS.--There is one called Yeang-te-sang, or "the Son of the
Ocean." It is the largest in Asia.

The other is the Yellow River, for the soft clay mixed with the water
gives it a yellow color.

LAKES.--There are immense lakes, covered with boats and fishermen.

But the best fishers are the tame cormorants, who catch fish for their
masters.

THE TWO GREAT WONDERS.--The great CANAL is wonder. It joins the two
rivers; so that a Chinese can go by water from Canton to Pekin.

The great WALL is a greater wonder, but not nearly as useful as the
canal.

This wall was built at the north of China to keep the Tartars out. It is
one thousand five hundred miles long, twenty feet high, and twenty-five
broad. But there were not soldiers enough in China to keep the enemies
out, and the Tartars came over the wall.

The Emperor of China is a Tartar.

The Empress does not have small feet, like the Chinese.

It is the Tartars who forced the Chinese to shave their heads, for they
used to tie up their hair in a knot at the top of their heads. Many of
the Chinese preferred losing their heads to their hair. Was it not cruel
to cut off their heads, merely because they would not shave them? But the
Tartars were very cruel to the Chinese.

KNOWLEDGE AND INVENTIONS.--We must allow that the Chinese are very
clever. They found out how to print, and they found out how to make
gunpowder, and they found out the use of the loadstone. What is that? A
piece of steel rubbed against the loadstone will always point to the
north. The Chinese found out these three things, printing, gunpowder,
and the use of the loadstone, before we in Europe found them out. But
they did not teach them to us; we found them out ourselves.

But there are two arts that the Chinese did teach us: how to make silk,
and how to make china or porcelain. And yet I should not say they taught
us; for they tried to prevent our learning their arts; but we saw their
silk and their porcelain, and by degrees we learned to make them
ourselves. A sly monk brought some silk-worm's eggs from China hidden in
a hollow walking-stick.

LANGUAGE.--There is no other language at all like the Chinese. Instead of
having letters to spell words, they have a picture for each word. I call
it a picture, but it is more like a figure than a picture. The Chinese
use brushes for writing instead of pens; and they rub cakes of ink on a
little marble dish, first dipping them in a little water, as we dip cakes
of paint. There is a hollow place in the marble dish, to hold the water.
What do you think the Chinese mean by "the four precious things?" They
mean the ink, the brush, the marble dish, and the water. They call them
precious because they are so fond of writing. Schoolmasters are held in
great honor in China, as indeed they ought to be everywhere. Yet schools
in China are much like those in Turkey, more fit for parrots than
children; only Chinese boys sit in chairs with desks before them, instead
of sitting cross-legged on the ground, as in Turkey. They learn first to
paint the words, and next to repeat lessons by heart. This they do in a
loud scream; always turning their backs to their masters while they are
saying their lessons to him.

The first book which children read is full of stories, with a picture on
each page. Would you like to hear one of these stories?

"There was a boy of eight years old, named Um-wen. His parents were so
poor that they could not afford to buy a gauze curtain for their bed, to
keep off the flies in summer. This boy could not bear that his parents
should be bitten by the flies; so he stood by their bedside, and
uncovered his little bosom and his back that the flies might bite him,
instead of his parents. 'For,' said he, 'if they fill themselves with my
blood, they will let my parents rest.'"

Would it be right for a little boy to behave in this way? Certainly not;
for it would grieve kind parents that their little boys should be bitten.
Poor little Chinese boys! They do not know about Him who was bitten by
the old serpent that we might not be devoured and destroyed.

PUNISHMENT.--The Chinese are very quiet and orderly; and no wonder,
because they are afraid of the great bamboo stick.

The mandarins (or rulers of towns) often sentence offenders to lie upon
the ground, and to have thirty strokes of the bamboo. But the wooden
collar is worse than the bamboo stick. It is a great piece of wood with a
hole for a man to put his head through. The men in wooden collars are
brought out of their prisons every morning, and chained to a wall, where
everybody passing by can see them. They cannot feed themselves in their
wooden collars, because they cannot bring their hands to their mouths;
but sometimes a son may be seen feeding his father, as he stands chained
to the wall. There are men also whose business it is to feed the
prisoners. For great crimes men are strangled or beheaded.

CHARACTER.--A Chinaman's character cannot be known at first. You might
suppose from his way of speaking that a Chinaman was very humble; because
he calls himself "the worthless fellow," or "the stupid one," and he
calls his son "the son of a dog;" but if you were to tell him he had an
evil heart, he would be very much offended; for he only gives himself
these names Thai he may _seem_ humble. He calls his acquaintance
"venerable uncle," "honorable brother." This he does to please them. The
Chinese are very proud of their country, and think there is none like it.
They have given it the name of the "Heavenly or Celestial Empire." They
look upon foreigners as monkeys and devils. Often a woman may he heard in
the streets saying to her little child, "There is a foreign devil (or a
Fan Quei"). The Chinese think the English very ugly, and called them the
"red-haired nation."

It must be owned that the Chinese are industrious: indeed, if they were
not, they would be starved. A poor man often has to work all day up to
the knees in water in the rice-field, and yet gets nothing for supper but
a little rice and a few potatoes.

The ladies who can live without working are very idle, and in the winter
rise very late in the morning.

Men, too, play, as children do here; flying kites is a favorite game.
Dancing, however, is quite unknown.

The Chinese are very selfish and unfeeling. Beggars may be seen in the
middle of the town dying, and no one caring for them, but people gambling
close by.

The Chinese have an idea that after a man is dead the house must be
cleansed from ghosts; so to save themselves this trouble, poor people
often cast their dying relations out of their hovels into the street to
die!

But in general sons treat their parents with great respect. They often
keep their father's coffin in the house for three months, and a son has
been known to sleep by it for three years. Relations are usually kind to
each other, because they meet together in the "Hall of Ancestors" to
worship the same persons. To save money they often live together, and a
hundred eat at the same table.

The Chinese used to be temperate, preferring tea to wine. There are
tea-taverns in the towns. How much better than our beer-shops! But lately
they have begun to smoke opium. This is the juice of the white poppy,
made up into dark balls. The Chinese are not allowed to have it; but the
English, sad to say, sell it to them secretly. There are many opium
taverns in China, where men may be seen lying on cushions snuffing up the
hot opium, and puffing it out of their mouths. Those who smoke opium have
sunken cheeks and trembling hands, and soon become old, foolish, and
sick. Why, then, do they take opium? Many of them say they wish to leave
it off, but cannot.

MISSIONARIES.--Are there any in China? Yes, many; and more are going
there. But how many are wanted for so many people! Missionaries travel
about China to distribute Bibles and tracts. One of them hired a rough
kind of chair with two bearers. In this he went to villages among the
mountains, where a white man had never been seen. The children screaming
with terror ran to their mothers. The men came round him to look at his
clothes and his white skin. They were much surprised at the whiteness of
his hands, and they put their yellow ones close to his to see the
difference. These mountaineers were kind, and brought tea and cakes to
refresh the stranger.

An English lady went to China to teach little girls; for no one teaches
them. She has several little creatures in her school that she saved from
perishing: because the Chinese are so cruel as to leave many girl-babies
to die in the streets; they say that girls are not worth the trouble of
bringing up.

One cold rainy evening, Miss Aldersey heard a low wailing outside the
street-door, and looking out she saw a poor babe, wrapped in coarse
matting, lying on the stone pavement. She could not bear to leave it
there to be devoured by famished dogs; so she kindly took it in, and
brought it up.

It is a common thing to stumble over the bodies of dead babies in the
streets. In England it is counted murder to kill a babe, but it is
thought no harm in China. Yet the Chinese call themselves good. But when
you ask a poor man where he expects to go when he dies, he replies, "To
hell of course;" and he says this with a loud laugh. His reason for
thinking he shall go to hell is, because he has not money enough to give
to the gods; for rich people all expect to go to heaven. Mandarins
especially expect to go there. If they were to read the Bible, they would
see that God will punish kings, and mighty men, and great captains, and
_all_ who are wicked.

    [6] These are some of the sentences written in the old books:

        "Never say, There is no one who sees me, for there is a wise
        Spirit who sees all."

        "Man no longer has what he had before the fall, and he has
        brought his children into his misery. O! Heaven, you only can
        help us. Wipe away the stains of the father, and save his
        children."

        "Never speak but with great care. Do not say, It is only a single
        word. Remember that no one has the keeping of your heart and
        tongue but you."

        These sentences are like some verses in the Psalms and Proverbs;
        and, it may be, they were spoken first by some holy men of old.

        Here is one more remarkable than all:--

        "God hates the proud, and is kind to the humble."

    [7] The means by which the Buddhist religion entered China are
        remarkable. A certain Chinese emperor once read in the book of
        Confucius this sentence, "The true saint will be found in the
        West." He thought a great deal about it; at last he dreamed about
        it. He was so much struck by his dream that he sent two of his
        great lords to look for the true religion in the West. When they
        reached India, they found multitudes worshipping Buddha. This
        Buddha was a wicked man who had been born in India a thousand
        years before. The Chinese messengers believed all the absurd
        histories they heard about Buddha, and they returned to China
        with a book which had been written about him. Ah! had they gone
        as far as Canaan they might have heard Paul and Peter preaching
        the Gospel. Alas! why did they go no further, and why did they go
        so far, only to return to China with idols!




COCHIN CHINA.


Any one on hearing this name would guess that the country was like China;
and so it is. If you were to go there you would be reminded of China by
many of the customs. You would see at dinner small basins instead of
plates, chop-sticks instead of knives and forks; you would have rice to
eat instead of bread; and rice wine to drink instead of grape wine.

But you would not find _all_ the Chinese customs in Cochin-China: for you
would see the women walking about at liberty, and with large feet, that
is, with feet of the natural size, and not cramped up like the "golden
lilies" of China. Neither would you see the people treated as strictly in
Cochin-China as in China. Beatings are not nearly as common there, and
behavior is not nearly as good as in China.

The people are very different from the Chinese; for they are gay and
talkative, and open and sociable, while the Chinese are just the
contrary. However, they resemble the Chinese in fondness for eating. They
are very fond of giving grand dinners, and sometimes provide a hundred
dishes, and invite a hundred guests. A man is thought very generous who
gives such grand dinners. No one in Cochin-China would think of eating
his morsel alone, but every one asks those around to partake; and if any
one were not to do so, he would be counted very mean. Yet the people of
Cochin-China are always begging for gifts; and if they cannot get the
things they ask for, they steal them. Are they generous? No, because they
are covetous. It is impossible to be at the same time generous and
covetous; for what goodness is there in giving away our own things, if we
are wishing for other people's things?

And now let us leave the _people_ and look at the _land_. It is fruitful
and beautiful, being watered abundantly by fine rivers: but these rivers,
flowing among lofty mountains, often overflow, and drown men and cattle.
The grass of such a country must be very rich; and there are cows feeding
on it; yet there is no milk or butter to be had. Why? Because the people
have a foolish idea that it is wrong to milk cows.

In no country are there stronger and larger elephants; so strong and so
large that one can carry thirteen persons on his back at once.

The land is full of idols: for Buddha or Fo is worshipped in
Cochin-China, as he is in China.

The idols are sometimes kept in high trees, and priests may be seen
mounting ladders to present offerings.

But the people are not satisfied with idols in trees; they have pocket
idols, which they carry about with them everywhere.


TONQUIN.--CAMBODIA.

These two kingdoms belong to the king of Cochin-China; yet all three,
Tonquin, Cambodia, and Cochin-China, pay tribute to China, and therefore
they must be considered as conquered countries.

They are all very much like China in their customs. There are large
cities in them all, and multitudes of people, but very little is known
about them in England.




HINDOSTAN.


This word Hindostan means "black place," for in the Persian language
"hind" is "black," and "stan" is "place." You may guess, therefore, that
the people in Hindostan are very dark; yet they are not quite black, and
some of the ladies are only of a light brown complexion.

What a large country Hindostan is! Has it an emperor of its own, as China
has? No: large as it is, it belongs to the little country called England.

How did the English get it?

They conquered it by little and little. When first they came there, they
found there a Mahomedan people, called the Moguls. These Moguls had
conquered Hindostan: but by degrees the English conquered them, and
became masters of all the land.

There is only one small country among the mountains which has not been
conquered by the English, and that place is Nepaul. It is near the
Himalaya mountains. See that great chain of mountains in the north: they
are the Himalaya--the highest mountains in the world. The word "him," or
"hem," means snow--and snowy indeed are those mountains.

There is a great river that flows from the Himalaya called the Ganges. It
flows by many mouths into the ocean; yet of all these mouths only one is
deep enough for large ships to sail in; the other mouths are all choked
up with sand. The deep mouth of the Ganges is called the Hoogley.

It was on the banks of the Hoogley that the first English city was built.
It was built by some English merchants, and is called Calcutta. That name
comes from the name of a horrible idol called Kalee, of which more will
be said hereafter.

Calcutta is now a very grand city; there is the governor's palace, and
there are the mansions of many rich Englishmen. It has been called "the
city of palaces."

There is another great river on the other side of Hindostan called the
Indus. It was from that river that Hindostan got the name of India, or
the East Indies.

VILLAGES.--Calcutta is built on a large plain called Bengal. Dotted about
this plain are many villages. At a distance they look prettier than
English villages, for they are overshadowed with thick trees; but they
are wretched places to live in. The huts are scarcely big enough to hold
human creatures, nor strong enough to bear the pelting of the storm. When
you enter them you will find neither floor nor window, and very little
furniture; neither chair, nor table, nor bed--nothing but a large earthen
bottle for fetching water, a smaller one for drinking, a basket for
clothes, a few earthen pans, a few brass plates, and a mat.

A Hindoo is counted very rich who has procured a wooden bedstead to place
his mat upon, and a wooden trunk, with a lock and key, to contain his
clothes; such a man is considered to have a well-furnished house.

As you pass through the villages, you may see groups of men sitting under
the trees smoking their pipes, while children, without clothes, are
rolling in the dust, and sporting with the kids. Prowling about the
villages are hungry dogs and whining jackalls, seeking for bones and
offal; but the children are too much used to these creatures to be afraid
of them. Hovering in the air are crows and kites, ready to secure any
morsel they can see, or even to snatch the food, if they can, out of the
children's little hands.

What a confused noise do you hear as you pass along! barking, whining,
and squalling, loud laughing, and incessant chattering. It is a heathen
village, and the sweet notes of praise to God are never sung there.

Yet in every village there is a little temple with an idol, and a priest
to take the idol, to lay it down to sleep, and to offer it food, which he
eats himself.

The poor people bring the food for the idol with flowers, and place it at
the door of the temple.

APPEARANCE.--The Hindoos are pleasing in their appearance, for their
features are well-formed, their teeth are white, and their eyes have a
soft expression. The women take much pains to dress their long black
hair, which is soft as silk: they gather it up in a knot at their heads,
and crown it with flowers. They have no occasion for a needle to make
their dresses, as they are all in one piece. They wind a long strip of
white muslin (called a saree) round their bodies, and fold it over their
heads like a veil, and then they are full dressed, except their
ornaments, and with these they load themselves; glass rings of different
colors on their arms, silver rings on their fingers and toes, and gold
rings in their ears, and a gold ring in their nose.

The men wear a long strip of calico twisted closely round their bodies,
and another thrown loosely over their shoulders; but this last they cast
off when they are at work: it is their upper garment. On their heads they
wear turbans, and on their feet sandals. The clothes of both men and
women are generally white or pink, or white bordered with red.

FOOD.--The most common food is rice; and with this curry is often mixed
to give it a relish. What is curry? It is a mixture of herbs, spices, and
oil.

Very poor people cannot afford to eat either rice or curry; and they eat
some coarse grain instead. A lady who made a feast for the poor provided
nothing but rice, and she found that it was thought as good as roast
beef and plum pudding are thought in England. The day after the feast
some of the poor creatures came to pick up the grains of rice that were
fallen upon the ground.

The rich Hindoos eat mutton and venison, but not beef; this they think it
wicked to eat, because they worship bulls and cows.

A favorite food is clarified butter, called "ghee," white rancid stuff,
kept in skin bottles to mix with curry.

Water is the general drink, and there could not be a better. Yet there
are intoxicating drinks, and some of the Hindoos have learned to love
them, from seeing the English drink too much. What a sad thing that
Christians should set a bad example to heathens!

PRODUCTIONS.--There are many beautiful trees in India never seen in
England, and many nice fruits never tasted here.

The palm-tree, with its immense leaves, is the glory of India. These
leaves are very useful; they form the roof, the umbrella, the bed, the
plate, and the writing-paper of the Hindoo.

The most curious tree in India is the banyan, because one tree grows into
a hundred. How is that? The branches hang down, touch the ground, strike
root there, and spring up into new trees--joined to the old. Under an
aged banyan there is shade for a large congregation. Seventy thousand men
might sit beneath its boughs.

There is a sort of grass which grows a hundred feet high, and becomes
hard like wood. It is called the bamboo. The stem is hollow like a pipe,
and is often used as a water-pipe. It serves also for posts for houses,
and for poles for carriages.

There are abundance of nice fruits in India; and of these the mangoe is
the best. You might mistake it for a pear when you saw it, but not when
you tasted it. Pears cannot grow in India; the sun is too hot for grapes
and oranges, excepting on the hills.

The chief productions of India are rice and cotton; rice is the food, and
cotton is the clothing of the Hindoo: and quantities of these are sent to
England, for though we have wheat for food, we want rice too; and though
we have wool for clothing, we want cotton too.

RELIGION.--There is no nation that has so many gods as the Hindoos. What
do you think of three hundred and thirty millions! There are not so many
people in Hindostan as that. No one person can know the names of all
these gods; and who would wish to know them? Some of them are snakes, and
some are monkeys!

The chief god of all is called Brahm. But, strange to say, no one
worships him. There is not an image of him in all India.

And why not? Because he is too great, the Hindoos say, to think of men on
earth. He is always in a kind of sleep. What would be the use of
worshipping him?

Next to him are three gods, and they are part of Brahm.

Their names are--

    I.   Brahma, the Creator.
    II.  Vishnoo, the Preserver.
    III. Sheeva, the Destroyer.

Which of these should you think men ought to worship the most? Not the
destroyer. Yet it is _him_ they do worship the most. Very few worship
Brahma the creator. And why not? Because the Hindoos think he can do no
more for them than he has done; and they do not care about thanking him.

Vishnoo, the preserver, is a great favorite; because it is supposed that
he bestows all manner of gifts. The Hindoos say he has been _nine_ times
upon the earth; first as a fish, then as a tortoise, a man, a lion, a
boar, a dwarf, a giant; _twice_ as a warrior, named Ram, and once as a
thief, named Krishna. They say he will come again as a conquering king,
riding on a white horse. Is it not wonderful they should say that? It
reminds one of the prophecy in Rev. xix. about Christ's second coming.
Did the Hindoos hear that prophecy in old time? They may have heard it,
for the apostle Thomas once preached in India, at least we believe he
did.

Why do the people worship Sheeva the destroyer? Because they hope that if
they gain his favor, they shall not be destroyed by him. They do not know
that none can save from the destroyer but God.

The Hindoos make images of their gods. Brahma is represented as riding on
a goose; Vishnoo on a creature half-bird and half-man; and Sheeva on a
bull.

Sheeva's image looks horribly ferocious with the tiger-skin and the
necklace of skulls and snakes; but Sheeva's _wife_ is far fiercer than
himself. Her name is Kalee. Her whole delight is said to be in blood.
Those who wish to please her, offer up the blood of beasts; but those who
wish to please her still more, offer up their own blood.

[Illustration: THE SWING.]

Her great temple, called Kalee Ghaut, is near Calcutta. There is a great
feast in her honor once a year at that temple. Early in the morning
crowds assemble there with the noise of trumpets and kettle-drums. See
those wild fierce men adorned with flowers. They go towards the temple. A
blacksmith is ready. Lo! one puts out his tongue, and the blacksmith
cuts it: that is to please Kalee: another chooses rather to have an iron
bar run through his tongue. Some thrust iron bars and burning coals into
their sides. The boldest mount a wooden scaffold and throw themselves
down upon iron spikes beneath, stuck in bags of sand. It is very painful
to fall upon these spikes; but there is another way of torture quite as
painful--it is the swing. Those who determine to swing, allow the
blacksmith to drive hooks into the flesh upon their backs, and hanging by
these hooks they swing in the air for ten minutes, or even for half an
hour. And WHO all these cruel tortures? To please Kalee, and to make the
people wonder and admire, for the multitude around shout with joy as they
behold these horrible deeds.

THE CASTES.--The Hindoos pretend that when Brahma created men, he made
some out of his mouth, some out of his arms, some out of his breast, and
some out of his foot. They say the priests came out of Brahma's mouth,
the soldiers came out of his arm, the merchants came out of his breast,
the laborers came out of his foot. You may easily guess who invented this
history. It was the priests themselves: it was they who wrote the sacred
books where this history is found.

The priests are very proud of their high birth, and they call themselves
Brahmins.

The laborers, who are told they come out of Brahma's foot, are much
ashamed of their low birth. They are called sudras.

You would be astonished to hear the great respect the sudras pay to the
high and haughty Brahmins. When a sudra meets a Brahmin in the street, he
touches the ground three times with his forehead, then, taking the
priest's foot in his hand, he kisses his toe.

The water in which a Brahmin has washed his feet is thought very holy. It
is even believed that such water can cure diseases.

A Hindoo prince, who was very ill of a fever, was advised to try this
remedy. He invited the Brahmins from all parts of the country to
assemble at his palace. Many thousands came. Each, as he arrived, was
requested to wash his feet in a basin. This was the medicine given to the
sick prince to drink. It cost a great deal of money to procure it; for
several shillings were given to each Brahmin to pay him for his trouble,
and a good dinner was provided for all. It is said that the prince
recovered immediately, but we are quite certain that it was not the water
which cured him.

In the holy books, or shasters, great blessings are promised to those who
are kind to a Brahmin. Any one who gives him an umbrella will never more
be scorched by the sun; any one who gives him a pair of shoes will never
have blistered feet; any one who gives him sweet spices will never more
be annoyed by ill smells; and any one who gives him a cow will go to
heaven.

You may be sure that, after such promises, the Brahmins get plenty of
presents; indeed, they may generally be known by their well-fed
appearance, as well as by their proud manner of walking. They always wear
a white cord hung round their necks.

But we must not suppose that all Brahmins are rich, and all sudras poor;
for it is not so. There are so many Brahmins that some can find no
employment as priests, and they are obliged to learn trades. Many of them
become cooks.

There are sudras as rich as princes; but still a sudra can never be as
honorable as a Brahmin, though the Brahmin be the cook and the sudra the
master.

But the sudras are not the _most_ despised people. Far from it. It is
those who have no caste at all who are the most despised. They are called
pariahs. These are people who have lost their caste. It is a very easy
thing to lose caste, and once lost it can never be regained. A Brahmin
would lose his caste by eating with a sudra; a sudra would lose his by
eating with a pariah, and by eating with _you_--yes, with _you_, for the
Hindoos think that no one is holy but themselves. It often makes a
missionary smile when he enters a cottage to see the people putting away
their food with haste, lest he should defile it by his touch.

Once an English officer, walking along the road, passed very near a
Hindoo just going to eat his dinner; suddenly he saw the man take up the
dish and dash it angrily to the ground. Why? The officer's shadow had
passed over the food and polluted it.

If you were to invite poor Hindoos to come to a feast, they would not eat
if you sat down with them: nor would they eat unless they knew a Hindoo
had cooked their food. Even children at school will not eat with children
of a lower caste,--or with their teachers, if the teachers are not
Hindoos.

There was once a little Hindoo girl named Rajee. She went to a
missionary's school, but she would not eat with her schoolfellows,
because she belonged to a higher caste than they did. As she lived at the
school, her mother brought her food every day, and Rajee sat under a tree
to eat it. At the end of two years she told her mother that she wished to
turn from idols, and serve the living God. Her mother was much troubled
at hearing this, and begged her child not to bring disgrace on the family
by becoming a Christian. But Rajee was anxious to save her precious soul.
She cared no longer for her caste, for she knew that all she had been
taught about it was deceit and folly; therefore one day she sat down and
ate with her schoolfellows. When her mother heard of Rajee's conduct,
she ran to the school in a rage, and seizing her little daughter by the
hair of the head, began to beat her severely. Then she hastened to the
priests to ask them whether the child had lost her caste forever. The
priests replied, "Has the child got her new teeth?" "No," said the
mother. "Then we can cleanse her, and when her new teeth come she will be
as pure as ever. But you must pay a good deal of money for the
cleansing." Were they not _cunning_ priests? and _covetous_ priests too?

The money was paid, and Rajee was brought home against her will. Dreadful
sufferings awaited the poor child. The cleansing was a cruel business.
The priests burned the child's tongue. This was one of their cruelties.
When little Rajee was suffered to go back to school, she was so ill that
she could not rise from her bed.

The poor deceived mother came to see her. "I am going to Jesus," said the
young martyr. The mother began to weep, "O Rajee, we will not let you
die."

"But I am glad," the little sufferer replied, "because I shall go to
Jesus. If you, mother, would love him, and give up your idols, we should
meet again in heaven."

An hour afterwards Rajee went to heaven; but I have never heard whether
her mother gave up her idols.

THE GANGES.--This beautiful river waters the sultry plain of Bengal. God
made this river to be a blessing, but man has turned it into a curse. The
Hindoos say the River Ganges is the goddess Gunga; and they flock from
all parts of India to worship her. When they reach the river they bathe
in it, and fancy they have washed away all their sins. They carry away
large bottles of the sacred water for their friends at home.

But this is not all; very cruel deeds are committed by the side of the
river. It is supposed that all who die there will go to the Hindoo
heaven. It is therefore the custom to drag dying people out of their
beds, and to lay them in the mud, exposed to the heat of the broiling
sun, and then to pour pails of water over their heads.

One sick man, who was being carried to the water, covered up as if he
were dead, suddenly threw off the covering, and called out, "I am not
dead, I am only very ill." He knew that the cruel people who were
carrying him were going to cast him into the water while he was still
alive: but nothing he could say could save him: the cruel creatures
answered, "You may as well die _now_ as at any other time;" and so they
drowned him, pretending all the while to be very kind.

It is thought a good thing to be thrown into the river after death. The
Ganges is the great burying-place; and dead bodies may be seen floating
on its waters, while crows and vultures are tearing the flesh from the
bones. There would be many more of these horrible sights were it not that
many bodies are burned, and their ashes only cast into the river.

Some foolish deceived creatures drown themselves in the Ganges, hoping to
be very happy hereafter as a reward. The Brahmins are ready to accompany
such people into the water. Some men were once seen going into the river
with a large empty jar fastened to the back of each. The empty jar
prevented them from sinking; but there was a cup in the hands of each of
the poor men, and with these cups they filled the jars, and then they
began to sink. One of them grew frightened, and tried to get on shore;
but the wicked Brahmins in their boats hunted him, and tried to keep him
in the water; however, they could not catch him, and the miserable man
escaped. There are villages near the river whither such poor creatures
flee, and where they end their days together; for their old friends would
not speak to them if they were to return to their homes.

BEGGARS.--As you walk about Hindostan, you will sometimes meet a horrible
object, with no other covering than a tiger's skin, or else an orange
scarf; his body besmeared with ashes, his hair matted like the shaggy
coat of a wild beast, and his nails like birds' claws. The man is a
beggar, and a very bold one, because he is considered as one of the
holiest of men. Who is he?

A sunnyasee. Who is _he_?

A Brahmin, who wishing to be more holy than other Brahmins (holy as they
are), has left all and become a beggar. As a reward, he expects, when he
dies, to go straight to heaven, without being first born again in the
world. It is wonderful to see the tortures which a sunnyasee will endure.
He will stand for years on one leg, till it is full of wounds, or, if he
prefers it, he will clench his fist till the nails grow through the
hands.

These holy beggars are found in all parts of India, but they are
particularly fond of the most desolate spots. Near the mouth of the
Ganges there are some desert places, the resort of tigers, and there many
of the sunnyasees live in huts. They pretend not to be afraid of the
tigers, and the Hindoos think that tigers will not touch such holy men;
but it is certain that tigers have been seen dragging some of these proud
men into the woods.

There is another kind of beggars called fakirs; they are just as wicked
and foolish as the sunnyasees; but they are Mahomedans and not Brahmins.

ANIMALS.--Some of the fiercest and most disagreeable animals are highly
honored in India.

The monkey is counted as a god; the consequence is, that the monkeys,
finding they are treated with respect, grow very bold, and are
continually scrambling upon the roofs of the houses. In one place there
is a garden where monkeys riot about at their pleasure, for all in that
garden is for them alone, the delicious fruits, the cool fountains, the
shady bowers, all are for the worthless, mischievous monkeys.

But if it be strange for men to worship _monkeys_, is it not stranger
still to worship _snakes_ and _serpents_? Yet there is a temple in India
where serpents crawl about at their pleasure, where they are waited upon
by priests, and fed with fruits and every dainty. How much delighted must
the old serpent be with this worship!

Kites also, those fierce birds, are worshipped. There is meat sold in
shops on purpose for them; and it is bought and thrown up in the air to
the great greedy creatures.

There are splendid peacocks flying about in the woods, but the Hindoos do
not worship them; they shoot and eat them.

Of all the animals in India there is none which terrifies man so much as
the tiger. The Bengal tiger is a fine and fierce beast. Woe to the man or
woman on whom he springs! What then do you think must become of the man
who falls into his den? These dens are generally hid in jungles, which
are places covered with trees, and overgrown with shrubs and tall grass.

A gentleman was once walking through a jungle, when he felt himself
sinking into the ground, while a cloud of dust blinded his eyes. Soon he
heard a low growling noise. He fancied that he had sunk into a den, and
so he had. Beside him lay some little tigers, too young indeed to hurt
him; but these tigers had a mother, and she could not be far off, though
she was not in the den when the stranger fell in. The astonished man felt
there was no time to be lost, for the tigress, he knew, would soon return
to her cubs. How could he prepare to meet her? He had neither gun nor
sword, nor even stick in his hand. But a thought came into his head.
Snatching a silk handkerchief from his neck, and taking another from his
pocket, he bound them tightly round his arm up to his elbow; and thus
prepared to meet his enemy. She soon appeared, crouching on the ground,
and then with a spring leaped upon the stranger. At the same moment the
brave man thrust his arm between her open jaws, and seizing hold of her
rough tongue, twisted it backwards and forwards with all his might. The
beast was now unable to close her mouth, and to bite with her sharp
fangs; but she could scratch with her sharp claws; and scratch she did,
till the clothes were torn off the man's body, and the flesh from his
bones. But the brave man would not loose his hold; and the tigress was
tired out first: alarmed,--with a sudden start backward, she jerked her
tongue out of the man's hand, and rushed out of the den and out of the
jungle.

How glad was the man to escape from a horrible fate! his body was faint
and bleeding; but his life was preserved, and his heart overflowed with
gratitude to God for his wonderful deliverance. He who delivered Daniel
from the lion's den delivered him from the tiger's den. The tiger's
mouth, indeed, had not been shut; but his open mouth had not been
suffered to devour the Lord's servant.


THE THUGS.

There is a set of people in India more dangerous than wild beasts. They
are called Thugs, that is, deceivers; and well do they deserve the name;
for their whole employment is to _deceive_ that they may _destroy_. Yet
they are not ashamed of their wickedness; for they worship the goddess
Kalee, and they know that she delights in blood. Before they set out on
one of their cruel journeys, they bow down before the image of Kalee, and
they ask her to bless the shovel and the cloth that they hold in their
hands.

What are they for?

The cloth is to strangle poor travellers, and the shovel to dig their
graves.

A Hindoo family were once travelling when they overtook three men on the
way. These men seemed very civil and obliging; and they soon got
acquainted with the family, and accompanied them on their journey. Who
were these men? Alas! they were Thugs. It was very foolish of the family
to be so ready to go with strangers. At last they came up to three other
men, who were sitting under the shade of a tree, eating sugared rice.
These men also were Thugs; and they had agreed with the other Thugs to
help them in their wicked plans. But the family thought they were kind
and friendly men, and consented to sit down with them in the shade, and
to partake of their food. They did not know that with the rice was mixed
a sort of drug to cause people to fall asleep. The family ate and fell
asleep: and when they were asleep, the Thugs strangled them all with
their cloths,--the father, the mother, and the five young people,--and
then with their shovels they dug their graves. But before they buried
them they stripped them of their garments and their jewels; for it was to
get their precious spoils they had committed these dreadful murders. The
Thugs went afterwards to the priests of Kalee to receive a blessing, and
they rewarded the priests by giving them some of their stolen treasures.

But, after all, these wicked men did not escape punishment; for the
English governors heard of their crimes, and caught them, and brought
them to justice. Then these murderers confessed the wicked deed just
related: but this was not their only crime; for it had been the business
of their lives to rob and to destroy.

Do not these Thugs resemble him who is always walking about seeking whom
he may devour? Only he destroys the _soul_ as well as the _body_. He is
the great Deceiver, and the great Destroyer. None but God can keep us
from falling into his power: therefore we pray, "Deliver us from evil,"
or from the evil one.


THE HINDOO WOMEN.

It is a miserable thing to be a Hindoo lady. While she is a very little
girl, she is allowed to play about, but when she comes to be ten or
twelve years old, she is shut up in the back rooms of the house till she
is married; and when she is married she is shut up still. She may indeed
walk in the garden at the back of the house, but nowhere else.

Hindoo ladies are not taught even those trifling accomplishments which
Chinese ladies learn: they can neither paint, nor play music; much less
can they read and write. They amuse themselves by putting on their
ornaments, or by making curries and sweetmeats to please their husbands:
but most of their time they spend in idleness, sauntering about and
chattering nonsense. As rich Hindoos have several wives, the ladies are
not alone; and being so much together, they quarrel a great deal.

Some English ladies once visited the house of a rich Hindoo. They were
led into the court at the back of the house, and shown into a little
chamber. One by one some women came in, all looking very shy and afraid
to speak; yet dressed very fine in muslin sarees, worked with gold and
silver flowers, and they were adorned with pearls and diamonds. At last
they ventured to admire the clothes of their visitors, and even to touch
them. Then they asked the English ladies to come and see their jewels;
and they took them into a little dark chamber with gratings for windows,
and displayed their treasures. They talked very loud, and all together
and so foolishly, that the ladies reproved them. The poor creatures
replied, "We should like to learn to read and work like the English
ladies; but we have nothing to do, and so we are accustomed to be idle,
and to talk foolishly. Do come again, and bring us books, and pictures,
and dolls."

You see what useless, wearisome lives the Hindoo _ladies_ lead. Now hear
what hard and wretched lives the _poor_ women lead. The wife of a poor
man rises from her mat before it is day, and by the light of a lamp spins
cotton for the family clothing. Next she feeds the children, and sweeps
the house and yard, and cleans the brass and stone vessels. Then she
washes the rice, bruises, and boils it. By this time it is ten o'clock,
when she goes with some other women to bathe in the river, or if there be
no river near, in a great tank of rain-water. While there, she often
makes a clay image of her god, and worships it with prayers, and bowings,
and offerings of fruit and flowers, for nearly an hour. On her return
home she prepares the curry for dinner: her kitchen is a clay furnace in
the yard, and there she boils the rice. When dinner is ready, she dares
not sit down with her husband to eat it: no, she places it respectfully
before his mat, and then retires to the yard. Her little boys eat with
their father; but her little girls dine with her upon the food that is
left.

It is not the busy life she leads that makes a poor woman unhappy: it is
the ill-treatment she endures. A kind word is seldom spoken to her: but a
hard blow is often given. Her own boys are encouraged to insult her
because she is only a woman. She is taught to worship her husband as a
god, however bad he may be. There is a proverb which shows how much women
are despised in India. "How can you place the black rice-pot beside the
golden spice-box!" By the rice-box a woman is meant: by the spice-box a
man: and the meaning of the proverb is that a wife is unworthy to sit at
the same table with her husband.

In this manner a _wife_ is treated: a _widow_ is still more despised.
However young she may be, she is not allowed to marry again; but is
obliged to live in her father's house, or (if she has no father) in her
brother's house, to do the hardest work, and never to eat more than one
meal a day, and that meal of the coarsest food. Widows used to burn
themselves in a great fire with their husbands' dead bodies; but the
English government has forbidden them to do so any more; but their
hard-hearted relations make them as miserable as possible.

MISSIONARIES.--There are hundreds of missionaries in India; but not
nearly enough for so many millions of people. The Hindoos call them
Padri-Sahibs, which means "Father-Gentlemen," and they give them this
name to show their love, as well as respect.

Once a missionary who had been long in India was going back to England
for a little while. It was from Calcutta that he set sail. The Christian
Hindoos stood in crowds by the river-side to bid him farewell. Among the
rest was a little girl with her parents. She was a gracious child, who
had turned from idols to serve the living God. The missionary said to
her, "Well, my child, you know I am going to England. What shall I bring
you from that country?"

"I do not want anything," she modestly replied. "I have my parents, and
my brother, and the Padri-Sahibs, and my books, what can I want more?"

"But," said the missionary, "you are only a little girl, and surely you
would like something from England. Shall I bring you some playthings?"

"No, thank you," said the child; "I do not want playthings--I am learning
to read."

"Come, come," said the missionary, "shall I bring you a playfellow, a
white child from England!"

"No, no," answered the little girl, "it would be taking her from her
parents."

"Well then," said her friend, "is there nothing I can bring you?"

"Well, if you are so kind as to insist on bringing me something, ask the
Christians in England to send me a Bible-book and more PADRI-SAHIBS."

[Illustration: MISSIONARY'S HOUSE.]

This was a good request indeed, but to get Padri-Sahibs is a hard thing
to do. Who can tell how much good they have done already! There are many
Christian villages in India, and they are as different from heathen
villages as a dove's nest is different from a tiger's den.

Some very wicked men have been converted. You have heard of those proud
and hateful beggars, the Sunnyasees and the Fakirs.

One day a missionary, who had gone for his health to the Himalaya
Mountains, was walking in the verandah of his house, when he was
surprised by a man suddenly throwing himself down at his feet, and
embracing his knees. The missionary could not tell who this man was, for
a dark blanket covered the man's head and face. But soon the covering was
lifted up, and a swarthy and withered countenance was shown; the
missionary knew it to be that of an old Fakir he once had known, as the
chief priest of a gang of robbers, but now the Mahomedan was become a
Christian; and he had travelled six hundred miles, hoping to see once
more the face of his teacher; and lo! he had seen it at last.

SCHOOLS.--The Hindoos have schools of their own, but only for boys. The
scholars sit in a shed, cross-legged upon mats, and learn to scratch
letters with iron pins upon large leaves. But what can they learn from
Brahmin teachers but foolish tales about false gods?

Missionaries have far better schools, where the Bible is taught; and
missionaries' wives have schools for girls; and sometimes they take pity
on poor orphans, and receive them into their houses.

One evening as a Christian lady was returning home, she saw a Hindoo
woman lying on the ground, and a little boy sitting by her side. The lady
spoke kindly to the sick woman, and then the little boy looked up and
said, with tears in his eyes, "My mother is sick, and has nothing to eat;
I fear she will die." The lady had compassion on the mother and the
child, and hastening home, she sent her servant to fetch them both. They
were soon put to rest on a nice clean mat, with a blanket to cover them;
but the mother died next morning. The little boy was left an orphan, but
not forlorn, nor friendless, for the Christian lady took care of him. He
was five years old, thin and delicate, and much fairer than most Hindoo
children. He had many winning ways; but he had a proud heart. He was
proud of his name, "Ramchunda," because it was the name of a great false
god: but when he had learned about the true God, he asked for a new name,
and was called "John." His wishing to change his name was a good sign:
and there were other good signs in this little orphan; and before he
died,--for he died soon,--he showed plainly that he had not a new _name_
only, but a new _nature_.

Little Phebe was another child received by a missionary's wife. She was
not an orphan, yet she was as much to be pitied as an orphan; for her
mother told the missionaries that if they did not take the child, she
would throw her to the jackals. It was a happy exchange for the infant to
leave so cruel a mother to be reared by a Christian lady, who, instead of
throwing her to jackals, brought her to Jesus.

She died when only five years old by an accident: when washing her hands
in the great tank she fell in, and was drowned.

But some Hindoo children, though carefully instructed, do not grow gentle
and loving, like John and Phebe.

The tents of some English soldiers were pitched in a lonely part of
India; and the night was dark, when an officer's lady thought she heard
the sound of a child crying. The lady sent her servants out to look, and
at last they brought in a little girl of four years old. And where do you
think they had found her? Buried up to her throat in a bog, her little
head alone peeping out. And who do you think had put her there? Her
cruel mother. Yes, she had left her there to die.

This child gave a great deal of trouble to the kind lady who had saved
her, nor did she show her any love in return for her kindness; and after
keeping her about two years, the lady sent her to a missionary's school.

You see how cruelly mothers in India sometimes treat their children.
Their religion teaches them to be cruel.

A mother is taught to believe that if her babe is sick, an evil spirit is
angry. To please this evil spirit, she will put her babe in a basket, and
hang it up in a tree for three days. She goes then to look at it, and if
it be alive, she takes it home. But how seldom does she find it alive!
Either the ants or the vultures have eaten it, or it is starved to death.

When there is a famine in the land, many mothers will sell their children
for sixpence each: and if they cannot sell them, they will leave them to
perish.

One missionary received fifty-one poor starving children into his house:
they were always crying, "Sahib, roti, roti;" that is, "Master, bread,
bread." But the bread came to late too save their lives; for all died
except one.

Yet these sick children were very wicked.

One of them stole a brass basin, and sold it for sweetmeats. Though very
kindly treated, some of them wished to escape; and to prevent it, the
missionary tied them together in strings of fifteen;

There is a tribe in India called Khunds; and they sprinkle their fields
with children's blood, and they say this is the way to make the corn
grow. The English government once rescued eighty poor children from the
Khunds, and sent them to a Christian school. What miserable little
creatures they were when they arrived! but they were soon clothed and
comforted; and taught to hold a needle, and to know their letters; and,
better still, to pronounce the name of Jesus. Like these poor little
captives, we were all condemned to die, till Jesus rescued us, and
promised everlasting life to those who believe.


THE ENGLISH IN INDIA.

There are many rich English gentlemen living in India: some are judges,
and some are merchants, and some are officers in the army. They dwell in
large and grand houses, with many windows down to the ground, and a wide
verandah to keep off the sun. Instead of _glass_, there is _grass_ in the
windows: the blinds are made of sweet-scented grass, and servants outside
continually pour water on the grass to make the air cool. Instead of
_fires_, they have _fans_. These fans are like large screens hanging from
the ceiling, and waving to and fro to refresh the company. Instead of
carpets there are mats on the floor; and round the beds gauze curtains
are drawn to keep out the insects.

The servants are all Hindoos, and a great number are kept; and this is
necessary, because each servant will only do one kind of work.

Each horse has two servants, one to take care of it, and the other to cut
grass: even the dog has a boy to look after it alone. The servants do not
live in their master's house, but in small huts near. The place where
they live is called "the compound."

When English people travel they do not go in carriages, but in
palanquins. A palanquin is like a child's cot, only larger; and there a
traveller can sleep at his ease.

The men who carry the palanquins are called "Bearers." The nurses are
called Ayahs. Babies are carried out of doors by their ayahs, but
children of three or four are taken out by the bearers.

There was once a little girl of three years old who taught her bearer to
fear God.

Little Mary was walking out in a grove with her heathen bearer. She
observed him stop at a small Hindoo temple, and bow down to the stone
image before the door.

The lisping child inquired,--"Saamy, what for, you do that?"

"O, missy," said he, "that is my god!"

"Your god!" exclaimed the child, "your god, Saamy! Why your god can no
see, no can hear, no can walk--your god stone! My God make you, make me,
make everything!" Yet Saamy still, whenever he passed the temple, bowed
down to his idol: and still the child reproved him. Though the old man
would not mind, yet he loved his baby teacher. Once when he thought she
was going to England he said to her,--"What will poor Saamy do when missy
go to England? Saamy no father, no mother."

"O Saamy!" replied the child, "if you love God he will be your father,
and mother too."

The poor bearer promised with tears in his eyes that he would love God.
"Then," said she, "you must learn my prayers;" and she began to teach him
the Lord's Prayer. Soon afterwards Mary's papa was surprised to see the
bearer enter the room at the time of family prayers, and still more
surprised to see him take off his turban, kneel down, and repeat the
Lord's Prayer after his master. The lispings of the babe had brought the
old man to God: Saamy did not only bow the knee, he worshipped in spirit
and in truth, and became a real Christian.


CHIEF CITIES.

There are three great cities which may be called English cities, though
in India: because Englishmen built them, and live in them, and rule over
them. Their names are Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay.

The capital city is Calcutta. There the chief governor resides. Part of
Calcutta is called the Black Town, and it is only a heap of mud huts
crowded with Hindoos. The other part of Calcutta is called the English
town; and it consists of beautiful houses by the river-side, each house
surrounded by a charming garden and a thick grove.

Madras is built on a plain by the sea, and is adorned by fine avenues of
trees, amongst which the English live in elegant villas and gardens. Here
also there is a Black town. It is very hard to land at Madras, because
there is no harbor.

Bombay has one of the best harbors in the world. It is built on a small
island covered with cocoa-nut groves.

Now let us compare these places with each other.

_Calcutta_ boasts of her fine river, but then the ground is flat and
marshy; and therefore the air is damp and unhealthy, and there are no
grand prospects.

Madras is very dry, and sandy, and dusty; but then there is the sea to
enliven and refresh it.

Bombay has the sea also, besides the groves, and at a little distance,
high mountains, which look beautiful, and which it is delightful to
visit. There are no such mountains near Calcutta or Madras.

These are the chief English cities. I must now speak of the favorite city
of the Hindoos.

It is Benares on the Ganges.

You might go from Calcutta in a boat, and after sailing four hundred
miles, you would reach Benares. The Hindoos say that it was built by
their god Sheeva, of gold and precious stones; but that, as we are living
in a bad time, it _appears_ to be made of bricks and mud, though really
very different. They say that Benares is eighty thousand steps nearer
heaven than any other city, and that whoever dies there (even though he
eat BEEF!) will go to heaven.

A missionary once reported a Hindoo for telling lies. The answer was,
"Why, what of that? do I not live at Benares?" The man thought he was
quite safe, however wicked he might be.

In walking about Benares a stranger might be surprised to meet every now
and then a white bull, with a hump on its back, without a driver or a
rider, or any one to keep it in order. You must know that a white bull is
said to belong to the chief god of Benares, and it is considered a sacred
animal, and is allowed to do as it pleases.

And how does it behave?

It behaves much in the same manner as a child would who had its own way.
The white bull helps itself to the fruit and vegetables sold in the
streets, and even to the sweetmeats. It has a great taste for flowers;
and it cunningly hides itself near the doors of the temples, to watch for
the people coming out with their garlands of marigolds round their necks.
At these the bull eagerly snatches with its tongue, and swallows them in
a moment. Finding it is petted by every one, it grows so bold, as to walk
into the houses, and even to go up the stone stairs on to the roof, where
it seems to enjoy the cool air, as it quietly chews the cud.

In the spring the white bulls like to wander out in the fields to eat the
tender green grass. A farmer finding one of these bulls in his fields,
made him get into a boat, and sent him by a man across the river Ganges.
But the cunning creature came back in the evening; for he watched till he
saw some people setting out in a boat, and then jumped in; and though
the passengers tried to turn him out, he would stay there. In this way he
got back to the cornfields.

So much respected are these bulls that a Hindoo would sooner lose his own
life than suffer one of them to be killed. An English gentleman was just
going to shoot one that had broken into his garden, when his Hindoo
servant rushed between him and the bull, saying, "Shoot me, sir, shoot
me, but let him go." You may be sure that the gentleman did not shoot the
servant, and I think it probable he spared the bull's life.

There is one more city to be noticed.

DELHI was once the grandest city in India, and the seat of the great
Moguls, those Mahomedans who conquered India before the British came. The
ancient palace is still to be seen: it is built of red stone; but its
ornaments are gone; where is now the room lined with crystal, the golden
palm-tree with diamond fruits, and the golden peacock with emerald wings,
overshadowing the monarch's throne?

The Persians have stripped the palace of all its gorgeous splendor.

We have now described the two most numerous nations in the world, China
and Hindostan. They contain together more than half the world. In some
respects they are alike, and in some respects they are different. In
these respects they are different.

IN CHINA.                          IN HINDOSTAN.

There is one emperor.              There is no emperor, and
                                   the English govern the country.

There is one language.             There are many.

They use chairs, and tables,       They sit and sleep on mats.
and beds.

They eat with chop-sticks.         They eat with their fingers.

They wear shoes.                   They go barefoot, and wear
                                   sandals.

The men shave their heads          The men twist up their
except one lock.                   hair with a comb.

They seldom wash themselves.       They bathe often.

They eat pigs more than            They abhor pigs.
any other meat.

They are grave and silent.         They are merry and talkative.

They are industrious.              They are idle.

The most learned rise to be        Every one is high and low
great men.                         according to his caste.

They mind the laws.                They care not for laws.

The land is well cultivated.       There is much waste land,
                                   and many jungles.

Now let us consider in what respects they are _alike_.

China and Hindostan are alike in these respects. They are both very
_populous_, though China has twice as many inhabitants as Hindostan.

In both rice is the chief food.

In both large grown-up families live together.

In both the women are shut up.

In both foreigners are hated.

In both conjurers are admired.

In both many idols are worshipped.

In both there are ancient sacred books.

In both the people are deceitful, unmerciful to the poor, and in the
habit of destroying their own little girls when babies.

In both it is believed that the soul after death goes into another body,
and is born over and over again into this world.

Is it not mournful to think that more than half the people in the world
have no bright hope to cheer a dying bed? One poor Hindoo was heard to
exclaim as he was dying, "Where shall I go _last_ of all?" He asked a
wise question. He wanted to know where, after having been born ever so
many times, he should be put for _ever_ and _ever_. That is the great
point we all want to know. But the Hindoo and the Chinaman cannot know
this: they have never heard of _everlasting_ happiness.




CIRCASSIA.


This is not a vast country like China, or Hindostan. It may be called a
nook, it is so small compared with some great kingdoms: but it is famous
on account of the beauty of the people. They are fair, like Europeans,
with handsome features, and fine figures. But their beauty has done them
harm, and not good; for the cruel Turks purchase many of the Circassian
women, because they are beautiful, and shut them up in their houses.
Perhaps you will be surprised to hear that the young Circassians think it
a fine thing to go to Turkey--to live in fine palaces and gardens,
instead of remaining in their own simple cottages. But I think that when
they find themselves confined between high walls, they must sigh to think
of their flocks and their farms at home, and more than all, of the dear
relations they have left behind.

Circassia is a pleasant country, situated near the noble mountains of
Caucasus. The snow on the mountains cools the air, and makes Circassia as
pleasant to live in as our own England. Indeed, if you were suddenly to
be transported into Circassia, you would be ready to exclaim, "Is not
this England? Here are apple-trees, and pear-trees, and plum-trees, like
those in my father's garden: those sounds are like the notes of the
blackbird and thrush, which sing among the hawthorns in English woods."

But look again, you will see vines interlacing their fruitful branches
among the spreading oaks. You do not see such vines in England. But hark!
what do I hear? It is a sound never heard in England. It is the yell of
jackals.

MANNERS OF THE PEOPLE.--There is no country in the world where the people
are as kind to strangers as in Circassia. Every family, however poor, has
a guest-house. There is the family-house, with its orchard, and stables,
and at a little distance, another house for strangers. This is no more
than a large room, with a stable at one end. The walls are made of
wicker-work, plastered with clay. There is no ceiling but the rafters,
and no floor but the bare earth. Yet there is a wide chimney, where a
blazing fire is kept up with a pile of logs. And there is a sofa or
divan, covered with striped silk, and many neat mats to serve as beds for
as many travellers as may arrive. The wind may whistle through the
chinks, and the rain come through the roof, but the stranger is well
warmed, and comfortably lodged; and above all, he has the host to wait
upon him with more attention than a servant. The supper is served as soon
as the sun sets.

But where is the table? There is none. Is the supper placed on the floor?
Not so. It is brought in on stools with three legs. They answer the
purpose of tables, trays, and dishes, all in one. What is the fare served
up? This is the sort of dinner provided. On the first table is placed a
flat loaf; the gravy in the middle, and the meat all round. When this is
taken away, another table is brought in with cheese-cakes; a third with
butter and honey; a fourth with a pie; a fifth with a cream; and last of
all, a table, with a wooden bowl of curdled milk. The company have no
plates; but each Circassian carries a spoon and a knife in his girdle,
and with these he helps himself. The servants who stand by, are not
forgotten: a piece of meat or of pie-crust is often given to one of them;
it is curious to see the men take it into a corner to eat it there. There
are many hungry poor waiting at the door of the guest-house, ready to
help the servants to devour the remains of the feast; and there is often
a great deal of food left; for there are generally _ten_ tables, and
sometimes there are _forty_ tables. The guests are expected to taste the
food on each, however many there may be.

Instead of wine, there is a drink called shuat handed to the guests: it
is distilled from grain and honey. Vegetables are not much eaten in
Circassia: for greens are considered fit only for beasts: and there are
no potatoes. Pies, and tarts, and tartlets of various kinds are too well
liked, and the finest ladies in the land are skilful in making them.

The family live in a thatched cottage, called "the family-house." It is
not divided into rooms. If a man wants several rooms, he builds several
houses.

As you approach the dwelling of a Circassian, you hear the barking of
dogs, and upon coming nearer, you see women milking cows, and feeding
poultry, and boys tending goats, and leading horses.

If you go into the farm-yard, you will see among the animals, the
buffalo--but no pig. There are, however, wild boars in the woods.

CIRCASSIAN WOMEN.--They are not shut up as Hindoo, and Chinese, and
Turkish ladies are. They do not indeed go into the guest-house to see
strangers; but strangers are sometimes invited into the family-house to
see them.

An Englishman, who visited a family-house, was introduced to the wife and
daughter. They both rose up when he entered: nor would they sit down,
till he sat down; and this respect ladies show not only to gentlemen, but
even to the poorest peasants. The only furniture in the house was the
divan, on which the ladies sat; a pile of boxes, containing the beds,
which were to be spread on the floor at night; and a loom for weaving
cloth, and spindles for spinning.

The daughter, who was sixteen, was dressed in a skirt of striped silk,
with a blue bodice, and silver clasps; and she wore a cap of scarlet
cloth, adorned with silver lace--her light hair flowing over her
shoulders: yet though so finely arrayed, her feet were bare; for she only
put on her red slippers when she walked out. The mother was covered with
a loose calico wrapper, and her face was concealed by a thick white veil.
The visitor laid some needle-cases at the ladies' feet, for it is not the
custom for them to receive presents in their hands.

The needle-cases greatly delighted the young Hafiza, and her mother. The
present was well chosen, because the Circassian women are very
industrious, supplying their husbands and brothers with all their
clothes, from the woollen bonnet to the morocco shoe. The wool, the flax,
and the hemp, are all prepared at home by the mothers, and made into
clothes by the girls, who first spin the thread, then weave the cloth,
and finish by sewing the seams. Some girls are very clever in knitting
silver lace for trimming garments. A girl named Dussepli was famous for
her skill in this art, indeed her name signifies, "Shining as lace."

An Englishman went to the place where she lived to buy some of her lace.
He was shown into the guest-house, and he soon saw Dussepli approaching
in a pair of high pattens. At first sight there was nothing pleasing in
Dussepli but when she spoke she seemed so kind, and so true, that it was
impossible not to like her. By her industry in knitting lace, and dyeing
cloth, she helped to support her father, who was poor.

THE CIRCASSIAN MEN.--War is their chief occupation. Working in the fields
is left to the women, and the little boys, and the slaves. There is,
alas! great occasion for the men to fight, as the land has long been
infested with many dangerous enemies.

The Russians are endeavoring to conquer the Circassians: but the
Circassians declare they will die sooner than yield. Long ago the enemies
must have triumphed, had it not been for the high mountains which afford
hiding-places for the poor hunted inhabitants. Every man carries a gun, a
pistol, a dagger, and a sword; and the nobles are distinguished by a bow,
and a quiver of arrows. The usual dress is of coarse dark cloth, and
consists of a tunic, trowsers, and gaiters. The cap or bonnet is of
sheep-skin, or goatskin.

The boys are taught from their infancy to be hardy and manly. They are
brought up in a singular way. Instead of remaining at home, they are
given at three years old, into the care of a stranger: and the reason of
this custom is, that they may not be petted by their parents. The
stranger is called "foster-father," and he teaches any boy under his care
to ride well, and to shoot at a mark. The boy follows his foster-father
over the mountains, urging his horses to climb tremendous heights, and to
rush down ravines; and appeasing his hunger with a mouthful of honey from
the bag, fastened to his girdle. Such is the life he leads, till he is a
tall and a strong youth; and then he returns home to his parents. His
foster-father presents him with a horse, and weapons of war, and requires
no payment in return for all his care.

Men brought up in this manner must be wild, bold, restless, and ignorant.
Such are the Circassians. They care not for learning, as the Chinese do,
but only for bravery. We cannot wonder at this, when we remember what
enemies they have in their land. The Russians have built many strong
towers, whence they shoot at all who come near. But, not satisfied
with this, they often come forth and rob the villages.

[Illustration: Guz Beg the "Lion of Circassia."]

There was a Circassian,