n - aot?eAWNS AND BARNACLES.

In nearly every shore-pool you may see Shrimps and Prawns darting out of
sight, and, for every one you see, there are many more hidden away.
These delicate, transparent, lively creatures are not much like the
boiled Shrimps and Prawns of the fish-shop.

They are the prey of so many fish, crabs, and birds, that they have
learnt to "make themselves scarce." Have you ever watched them in a
glass tank, or aquarium? If so, you will know that it is not easy to see
them. In the shore-pools it is harder still.

Some are swaying about in the still, clear water, moving their long
feelers from side to side. Others have burrowed into the sand. In doing
this, they raise a sandy cloud, which settles on them and hides them. To
catch some, you must use a "shrimp-net," for they can dart across the
pool like arrows.

[Illustration: THE SHRIMP.]

Some are Shrimps, and some are Prawns; how can we tell the difference?
When they are boiled the answer is easy. All the Shrimps turn brown and
the Prawns red. (The red "Shrimps" are near relations of the Prawn.) To
tell a live Shrimp from a Prawn, look at the long pointed beak which
juts out from the front of the head. That of the Prawn is toothed, like
a little saw. If the beak is quite smooth its wearer is a Shrimp.

Until Prawns are grown up, they haunt the sandy shallows with their
cousins the Shrimps. But the larger Prawns live in deeper water. They
are generally caught in traps, as are their relatives, the crab and
lobster.

Now look closely at a Prawn, and try to find how it swims. Turn it
upside down. It has ten legs; and, under each of the horny rings of its
body, you can see a pair of little paddles. They are fringed with hairs.
When the Prawn or Shrimp is not in a hurry, he swims slowly but surely
with the little paddles, or "swimmerets." If any danger threatens, he
uses his tail, in this way:--It is made of five fringed plates, which,
as you can see, spread out or close up, like a fan. As he doubles up his
body, the plates spread themselves out. They strike the water with great
force, and so send the Prawn or Shrimp quickly _backwards_. As the body
becomes straight again, the fan closes, ready for another stroke. To
move quickly, the Shrimp or Prawn merely bends his body, then
straightens it. The tail thus becomes a strong oar, driving him
backwards with rapid jerks.

Look now at the Prawn's long, hair-like feelers. There are two pairs. On
one pair are the ears, a special kind of ear for hearing in water.

You will notice that the Shrimp's eyes are on the end of short stalks.
Each big eye is really a cluster of little eyes, rather like the
"compound eyes" of insects. If you lift up the horny shield behind the
head, you see a row of what look like curly feathers. These are the
breathing gills.

Shrimps carry their eggs about with them; no doubt you have often found
masses of eggs under the Shrimp's body. Each egg is fastened by a kind
of "glue," or else the rapid jerking of the mother Shrimp would soon
loosen the eggs and set them free.

The hard, shelly covering of the Shrimp and Prawn is like the armour of
the crab--it will not stretch in the least. The body is easily bent,
owing to the soft hinges between the hard rings. But the coat itself
will not stretch. Then how do these little creatures grow? We see small
Shrimps and large ones, so grow they must, in some way.

They are of the same family--the _crustacea_--as the crab; and they grow
in much the same way. The hard covering gets too tight for the body
inside it. Then it splits across the back. After much wriggling, the
Shrimp appears in a new soft skin. While the skin is still soft the
Shrimp grows very quickly. Crustaceans have a funny way of growing, have
they not? Instead of growing evenly, little by little, they grow by
"fits and starts," a great deal in a few hours and then not at all.

Besides being good food for us, and for the fish, Shrimps and Prawns
have another use. They are scavengers. They pick to pieces and eat the
vegetable and animal stuff which floats in the sea. Before it can decay
and become poisonous, these useful creatures use it up as food. Great
numbers of Shrimps and Prawns are caught for our markets. Some are
caught by men who push a small net over the sands near shore, but most
are caught by the _shrimp-trawl_, a large net cast from a small sailing
vessel.

The rocks, and the wooden piles of the pier, are often covered with the
hard shells known as Barnacles, or Acorn Shells. If you slip on them
with bare feet their sharp edges cut you. Each Acorn Shell is a little
house. Have you ever caught a glimpse of the animal living inside?

If you will look very carefully, you will see that the Acorn Shell is
made of three-sided pieces, closely joined. There is a little door at
the top, kept tightly closed until the tide comes up and covers the
rocks. Then watch, and you will see a bunch of tiny feathers appear
through a slit in the door. This means that the animal is hungry, and
has put its twelve legs out of doors to catch a dinner!

This is strange, but true! The Barnacle is always upside down in its
home, and its twelve feathery legs are thrust out of the door at the
top. They make a fine net, in which minute animals are caught and
brought into the mouth below. This funny creature actually kicks its
food into its mouth! If you own a magnifying glass, you can see this for
yourself at the seaside.

You will not be able to see the mouth, however, which is inside the
shell. It is fitted with moving parts, and feelers, like the mouth of a
crab. Also, the Barnacle has a good set of teeth to grind its food. It
has no real eyes, having no use for them. Of what use are eyes to an
animal standing on its head in a small dark shell! Now and then it casts
its coat (like the Crab and Shrimp). The old coat is rolled up and
thrown away outside the door.

Now comes the strangest thing of all. As a baby, the Barnacle is a free
swimming creature. It has three pairs of legs, a tail, a useful mouth,
and one eye. After kicking about in the sea for some time, and changing
its skin, it changes its shape entirely. It now looks more like a tiny
mussel. It has two little "shells," two eyes, legs, and feelers. Now its
swimming days are nearly over, and it must settle down. It gives up
eating, and roves about looking and feeling for a place to settle on.

Finding a suitable spot, the little animal stands on its head. Then a
kind of glue is formed, which fixes it for life to that place, head
down. The two shells and the two eyes are now thrown off. The Barnacle
quickly builds up a shelly house, and, after a life of adventure and
change, becomes a fixed Barnacle for the rest of its days.

For many years people knew little of this strange animal. All its
wonderful changes, and the way its body is made, tell us plainly that
the Barnacle is actually first cousin to the Crab, Lobster, Shrimp and
Prawn! It belongs to the class known as the _Crustacea_; but, for some
reason or other, it has chosen to live its grown-up life fixed to a
rock.


EXERCISES

1. How does the Shrimp swim?

2. Of what use are Shrimps and Prawns in the sea?

3. How can you tell a live Shrimp from a live Prawn?

4. How does the Barnacle obtain its food?

5. Give the names of five crustaceans.




LESSON VI.


PLANTS OF THE SHORE.

To pick a bunch of gay flowers you would look in the fields and
hedge-rows, and not by the sea. Flowers, as you know, love moist soil,
and not dry sand; and, like us, they prefer one food to another. Sand
they do not like, and salt is a poison to them. Both of these are
enemies to plant life.

Also, flowers choose sheltered spots. They do not like rough winds, and
the glare of the sun shrivels them up. Yet there are plants with pretty
flowers to be found by the sea, and many others with small, dull
flowers. These seaside plants have to fight for their lives. The dry,
shifting sand, and the salt spray, are enough to kill them, you would
think. They have no shelter from the strong sea wind, nor from the
fierce glare of the summer sun. The puzzle is, how do they live among so
many enemies? For you know that the flowers of the field would at once
die if you planted them in salt and sand. They would starve to death.

Even the strongest seaside plants shun that part of the beach washed by
the waves. They leave that to the seaweeds.

Let us look first at some plants which have their home on the
sand-hills. Here is a fine one, like a thistle, with stiff prickly
leaves, and a stiff blue stem. In August it has blue-grey flowers. This
plant is called Sea Holly, its leaves being like those of the holly. It
has an unpleasant smell, yet its roots are used for making some kinds of
sweets.

Now try to pull up a plant of Sea Holly. You find it no easy task. Then
dig away the sand, and you see that its large roots have gone deep and
far. All these plants of sandy places grow like that. Sand has no food
or drink to give to plants. So they send their roots out, like plants in
a desert, until they find what they want. Besides food and drink, they
need a firm anchor in the loose sand. The Sea Holly, with its roots deep
down and far-spreading, can hold its own, though the gale tears at it
and throws its sandy bed here and there.

We pass many small creeping plants as we walk in the dry sand. There is
a pretty Sea Convolvulus, with its stems deeply buried. It is a cousin
of the common Bindweed. Then we see many plants of Thyme, and a few
ragged bushes of Gorse. We notice that several little plants grow near
the Gorse, as if they had crept there for shelter. The sea breeze has
blown the sand into heaps, and even on these dry, thirsty hillocks we
see many tufts of grass.

[Illustration: 1. THE COMMON LOBSTER. 2. HERMIT CRAB.]

These Couch Grasses and Dune Grasses, as they are often called, are
coarse and hard. Cattle pass them by in disgust. Yet they are the most
useful plants on the shore. They can live and spread where other plants
die. They have very long underground stems, which go through and through
the dry, loose sand. The wind does its best to bury them in sand, but
they send up hard, sharp buds, and go on living, and spreading.

Bit by bit, the sand is held together by the matted stems of these
grasses. It becomes firm, instead of loose; the wind can no longer blow
it about. Then other plants can grow in that place. You know how men go
out to the wild parts of the earth and, by hard work, make those places
ready for others to settle there. Well, the sand-grass works like that.
It prepares the way for useful plants to grow in places where they could
not grow before.

Quite near to the sea we shall find a very strange little plant. It has
no leaves, only fleshy, jointed stems. It is known as the Glass-wort,
being full of a substance useful in making glass. It belongs to a family
which seems to delight in deserts and salty soil! They have all sorts of
dodges to help them live in such places. For instance, their leaves are
fleshy. Squeeze them, and they are like wet, juicy fruit.

The Sea Beet is also a member of this family. The Red Beet, as well as
the Mangel-wurzel, we owe to this humble seaside plant. Most of our
sugar comes from the Sugar-beet.

Another useful plant is the Sea Cabbage, which grows on some parts of
our sea coast. It is rather a ragged, tough kind of Cabbage, and perhaps
you would not choose it for your dinner-table. We have more tempting
sorts in our gardens--Brussels Sprouts, Broccoli, Cauliflower, but long,
long ago the wild seaside cabbage was the only one growing. Men found it
to be eatable, and began to plant it near their huts or caves. From that
small beginning all our garden cabbages have come.

Walking a little farther from the sea, we leave the sand and come to
stones, rocks and cliffs. We pass a pretty plant, the Sea Lavender, and
another, the Sea Stock. They love best the sandy, muddy parts of the
shore. Their lilac flowers look bright and pretty. Coming to the rocky
places, we find tufts of the flower known as Sea Pink or Thrift. Its
leaves are like grass, and its flowers form a round pink bundle at the
top of a bare stalk.

There are many tufts of Thrift growing among the rocks; and each tuft
has a number of pink flowers. In some places you could step from one
tuft to another for several miles. Bare and ugly stretches of coast are
made into a gay garden by this lovely flower.

Here and there on the rocks is a plant with large yellow blossoms--the
Yellow Horned Poppy. It is a handsome plant, and you are surprised to
see such fine flowers among dry shingle, sand, or rock; but the Horned
Poppy is well able to stand the salt spray and storms of its favourite
home. When the petals have dropped, a green seed-pod is left. It is very
long--nearly twice as long as this page and looks much more like a stem
than a seed-pod.

Sometimes this seaside poppy is seen growing high up the face of the
cliff, where only the jackdaw and sea-birds can find a footing; and many
another plant may be seen there too. The cliffs are full of cracks, some
tiny and some wide. In these places there is always a certain amount of
dirt and grit. You could hardly call it "soil," and most plants would
starve if you planted them in such a place.

[Illustration: SEA LILY.]

These plants of the rock and cliff are not so proud. They have very long
and very thin roots, admirably suited to pierce the grit, and explore
the cracks in the rock, to find the moisture they need. Besides this,
they have fleshy leaves which help them to keep alive. The Stone-crop
and the Penny-wort are well-known plants of this kind. They grow where
you would least expect to find a living plant. Neither heat nor thirst
seems to kill them. Mother Nature has found many a wonderful way of
helping her children to live.


EXERCISES

1. Why do plants which grow in sand have such long roots?

2. In what way are the grasses growing on the sand so useful?

3. Give the names of four flowering plants of the shore.

4. Where would you look for the Stone-crop and Penny-wort?

5. Why do these two plants have such thin roots?




LESSON VII.


FLOWER-LIKE ANIMALS.

The prettiest of the creatures of the shore is the Sea Anemone. No one
can see it without being reminded of a flower, an Aster or Daisy, with a
thick stalk and many coloured petals; but, knowing how it is made, and
how it lives, we place it in the Animal Kingdom, though among the
lowliest members of that Kingdom. It is a cousin of that strange
creature, the Jelly-fish, which we shall look at in another lesson.

[Illustration: SEA ANEMONE.]

When the tide falls, you can walk among the rocks and pools by the sea,
and find Anemones in plenty. They are fixed to the rocks. Some are under
the ledges, out of sight, others are low down, half buried in the wet
sand; and others are on the sides of the rocks, looking like blobs of
green, brown, or red jelly. Feel one of them. It is slimy, and rather
firm, not so soft and yielding as the Jelly-fish. You cannot easily pull
it from the rocks without harming it; but you will find other Anemones
on stones and shells; and these you can put in a jar of sea-water, with
some weed, and carry home to examine later on.

When covered with sea-water the ugly blobs of jelly open out like
beautiful flowers. In some places along our coast the floor of the sea
is like a flower garden, gay with thousands of coloured Anemones.

Those little "petals" are really _tentacles_, used for catching and
holding food. We will use a shorter word and call them feelers. They are
set in circles round the top of the Anemone, and there are many of them.
The Daisy Anemone, for instance, has over seven hundred feelers. Each
feeler can be moved from side to side, and can also be tucked away, out
of sight and out of danger; but, when hungry, the animal spreads them
widely, for, as we shall see, they are the net in which it catches its
dinner.

The whole body of the Anemone is like two bags, one hanging inside the
other. The space between the two bags is filled with water. The feelers
are hollow tubes which open out of this space; so they, too, are filled
with water.

[Illustration: CRUSTACEA.

1. THE LARVA OF A LEAF-BODIED CRUSTACEAN CALLED PHYLLOSOMA.

2. A PRAWN-LIKE CREATURE, SHOWING THE FRONT LIMBS THAT ARE USED FOR
GRASPING PREY.

3. A CRAB.

4. THIS IS A SHRIMP-LIKE CREATURE CALLED CUMA SCORPIOIDES.]

The Anemone can press the water into them, and so force them to open
out. In rather the same way you can expand the fingers of a glove by
forcing your breath into them. The Anemone, you see, can open or close
just as it pleases.

What does it eat, and how does it find food? Perhaps you have watched an
open Anemone in a pool, or in a glass tank, and seen it at its meals. A
small creature swims near, and touches one of the feelers. Instead of
darting away, it appears to be held still; and then other feelers bend
towards it and hold the victim. Then they are all drawn to the centre of
the Anemone, carrying their prey with them; and the feelers, prey and
all, are tucked out of sight.

That is the way the Anemone obtains its food. As soon as the feelers get
hold of a small animal they carry it to the opening of a tube in the
centre. This is the mouth, leading to the stomach. Very often the
feelers, with their victim, are tucked away into the stomach, and the
feelers do not appear again for some time. Is not this a strange way of
eating!

Much stranger still is the way in which the food is held, and made so
helpless that it cannot escape. On the skin of the Anemone there are
many thousands of very tiny pockets, or cells. Each cell contains a fine
thread with a poisoned barb at the tip, The thread is packed away in the
cell, coiled up like the spring of a watch. As soon as anything presses
against the cells they shoot out their threads. Thus the tips of many
poisoned threads enter the skin of any soft animal which is unlucky
enough to touch an Anemone.

If your own skin is tender, these little stinging hairs will irritate
it, but not enough to hurt you. It is different, however, with the small
creatures of the sea. They are made quite helpless when caught by
hundreds of these strange threads. We shall find similar poison-threads
in the Jelly-fish; and these, in some cases, can cause us serious
illness. You cannot see them without the aid of a microscope.

All those parts of its food which the Anemone cannot digest, it throws
out again. If you feed an Anemone on raw meat, it tucks the pieces into
its mouth, and, some days after, throws out the hard part of the meat,
having taken all the "goodness" from it.

No doubt the Anemones themselves are eaten by other animals in the sea,
but many kinds of fish will not touch them. You may remember that we
noticed an Anemone which lived on the stolen home of the Hermit Crab.
The crab lives in the whelk shell, and the Anemone lives on the roof, as
it were. In nearly every ocean, all over the world, these two partners
are found, using the same shell. It is thought that the Anemone lives
there for two good reasons. First, the Hermit moves from place to place;
you can see that this would give the Anemone a better chance of
obtaining food. Also, bits of food float to the Anemone when the crab is
picking his dinner to pieces.

The crab seems to like having his strange partner with him. No doubt the
Anemone is of some use to him, or he would at once pull it off. It is
thought that the Anemone protects him from his enemies, the fish. Some
of them would swallow the whelk shell, crab and all, but they would not
eat one on which an Anemone was fixed. We are not _sure_ that these
reasons are the right ones. All we know for certain is, that a crab and
an Anemone have, for some good reasons, gone into partnership.

Anemones have large families. Sometimes they have numbers of eggs; at
other times their little ones come straight into the world as very tiny
Anemones. A boy who kept a large Anemone in a tank of sea water, was
astonished to find that in a short time, he had not one, but hundreds,
of the creatures. The tiny Anemones were fixed to the glass and rock,
all fishing for food with their little outspread tentacles. Sometimes
the Anemone will calmly divide itself into two, each half becoming a
perfect Anemone!

Anemones are of many shapes, sizes, and colours. The loveliest of our
British ones is the Plumose Anemone. It is like a carnation, and may
grow to be six inches high--that is, nearly as long as this page. It is
known by its shape, not by its colour. It may be any of these
colours--brown, deep green, pale orange, flesh colour, cream, bright
red, brick colour, lemon, or pure white.

There are many other creatures in the sea which resemble plants and are
often mistaken for them. The Sea Lily (p.49) is one of the flower-like
animals; it is a relative of the Starfish, living in deep water. The Sea
Mat (p.59) is often found on the shore. It seems like a horny kind of
weed, but is really a colony of tiny animals, each one having its own
little cell to live in.


EXERCISES

1. How does the Anemone expand its "feelers"?

2. In what way does the Anemone catch the small animals on which it
feeds?

3. Where is the mouth of the Anemone?

4. In what way might the Anemone be of use to its partner, the hermit
crab?




LESSON VIII.


SEA-WEEDS AND SEA-GRASS

We think of weeds as useless plants which insist on growing just where
they are not wanted. So it is a pity that _Sea-weeds_ are so named, for
the part they play in the sea is a useful one; and they are often
beautiful, though they do not bear flowers like so many plants of the
land. You see draggled heaps of them, lying on the shore where the waves
have thrown them. They are best seen in their proper home, buoyed up by
the water, and spreading out their broad coloured fronds, or long waving
threads. There are, in many places, meadows of Sea-grass, and forests of
Sea-weed! Mother Earth still has her carpet of green, even when covered
by the salt water. The plants are very unlike those of the land, but, as
you will see, they are of great use. We will suppose you put on a diving
dress. Then you can walk out, under the water, and explore the forests
of the sea.

Down by the line of low tide, before you have waded up to your knees,
you find plants clinging to the rocks. They cover them with a slippery
coat of green; when you turn these Sea-weeds over you find periwinkles
and other animals feeding or hiding. Sea-weed makes good "cover" for the
creatures of the rock-pools, who have many enemies to fear.

You notice that most of these shore weeds are green, sometimes as green
as young grass. Pull up a bunch of the weed, and you find that it clings
to the rocks and stones, but has no real roots. Seaweeds belong to a
humble family in the world of plants, having no real roots, no flowers,
and no real seeds. They can attach themselves to the stones or rocks.
Along comes a great wave, and perhaps they are torn up; but this does
not harm them, for they still live as they wash to and fro in the water,
until they cling to another rock. Or they are thrown on the shore to
die, or else to be washed back to sea by the next tide.

[Illustration: SEA-WEED FROND.]

The Sea Lettuce or Green Laver is a common seaweed near the shore. Its
broad, crinkled and bright green leaves are rather like those of a
lettuce. Sometimes it is boiled to a jelly and used for food. Many other
sea-weeds are good to eat, and on some coasts there is a regular
sea-weed harvest.

Now wade into rather deeper water, and you find a great mass of the
Bladder Wrack. Most schoolboys know it, for the little bladders of air
in the leaves explode with a pop if you squeeze them. The Bladder Wrack,
and others of the same kind, are torn up by the fierce waves in a storm,
and tossed on the beach in heaps. They are gathered by the farmer who
knows how to value a cheap manure for his fields. Some kinds are also of
use in packing lobsters so that they come to market nice and fresh.

When you have walked--in your diving dress--to deep water, you find
yourself among a tangle of olive-green weeds. They are below the line of
low tide. All round you is a forest of dark-green ribbons with wavy
edges. The ribbons are tough and very long, and cling tightly to the
rocks. These ribbon-weeds, and others of the same kind, are known as
Tangles. Round some parts of our coast they make wide, thick beds in the
sea. Though the ribbons may be six feet long, they are not so wide as
the palm of your hand.

Another sea plant, which grows in tufts in rather deep water, is called
Irish Moss; it is green, brown or purple in colour. I do not know why it
should be called Irish Moss, for it is not a moss, and it grows all
round the English, as well as the Irish, sea-coast. But sea-weeds have
strange names; indeed, many of them have no everyday names at all. Irish
Moss is used for food, after being boiled to a jelly. It can also be
made into a gum or glue, and has often been so used.

Now, if you were to walk still farther on the bed of the sea, into
deeper water, you would find the prettiest of all the sea plants. These
are the pink and red sea-weeds. You also find them on the beach, but
only after they have been torn from their home in the deep water. They
grow on the rocks, in pretty coloured tufts.

If you dive still farther, into the dark depths of the sea, you find
beds of ooze and slime, and rocks and weird fishes, but no plants. Why
is this? Like the land-plants, these sea-plants must have _light_. They
cannot grow in the blackness of very deep water. Can you guess why some
sea-weeds are green and others red? Those growing in the shallow water
of the shore are green, like land-plants, because the sunlight reaches
them. Only part of the light can pass through deep water; and so, in
these shady places, the sea-weed is reddish in colour.

[Illustration: SEA MAT.]

We see, then, that (1) green sea-weed grows by the shore; (2)
brownish-green sea-weed likes deeper water; (3) red sea-weed grows in
deep water; and (4) in very deep water there is no weed at all.

We must not forget the grass of the sea. It grows in narrow blades,
often a yard in length, and as wide as your thumb. It is not a sea-weed,
but a real flowering plant, which, for some reason or other, loves to
grow under water. It creeps in the sand and mud, with green leaves
growing up as thick as corn in a cornfield.

All these waving green leaves make large meadows in the sea; and
sea-snails, fishes, and crabs hide in it, just as all manner of living
things hide in the grass of our meadows. The proper name of this strange
plant is Sea Wrack. When dried, it is useful for packing up china, and
covering flasks of oil.

Now we come to the real use of sea plants. They are food for all the
hosts of small animals of the sea. These eat it as it grows; or else,
like the mussel and oyster, swallow the tiny scraps of it which float
everywhere like so much dust.

The shell-fish, and other animals which feed on sea plants, are
themselves eaten by other sea creatures, and these in their turn are
eaten by crabs, lobsters and fish, which are eaten by us. It reminds you
of a chain. The first link in the chain is the sea plant, the last links
are the fish and ourselves. So, you see, the weeds and grass of the
ocean are of very great value indeed.


EXERCISES

1. Give the names of three common Sea-weeds.

2. What is the colour of the weed found in deep water?

3. Why cannot Sea-weed grow in very deep water?

4. In what way are sea plants most useful?




LESSON IX.


THE JELLY-FISH.

Or all the queer children of Nature which live in the sea, the
Jelly-fish is one of the queerest. You often find it on the shore,
especially after a severe storm. There it lies, a mass of helpless
jelly, which slips and breaks through your fingers if you try to lift
it.

It cannot move back to its watery home, and in a short time the sun's
warmth will have dried it up, leaving but a mark on the sand, and a few
scraps of animal matter; for these strange creatures are little else but
water. A Jelly-fish, which weighed two pounds when alive, would leave
less than the tenth part of one ounce when dried!

There is a story of a farmer who, on seeing thousands and thousands of
Jelly-fish along the shore, thought he would make use of them. He
decided that they would serve as manure for his fields, and so save him
much money. He went home, and sent men with wagons to be loaded with the
Jelly-fish. This was done, and the Jelly-fish were spread over the soil.
On looking at his fields the next morning, the farmer was astonished to
find that every scrap of his new manure had vanished as if by magic!

[Illustration: WEST PAN SAND BUOY. ONE OF THE MANY BUOYS AT THE MOUTH OF
THE THAMES.]

In the sea the Jelly-fish looks like an umbrella of bluish-white jelly,
from which hang tassels and threads. Look over the side of a boat, or
from the pier, and you often see them drifting by, hundreds of them,
like so many ghosts.

Each one is moving along, with its edges partly opening and shutting. It
is plain that this waving motion causes the creatures to move through
the water. Also, they can rise to the surface, or fall to the depths,
and do not collide with one another. So the Jelly-fish is not at all
helpless.

At night Jelly-fishes sometimes look very beautiful. Each one shines in
the water, with a soft yet strong light, like fairy lamps afloat in the
sea.

They are of all sizes. Some you could put in a small wineglass, others
measure nearly two feet across. Evidently the Jelly-fish grows, and, in
order to live and grow, it must eat; but what does it eat, and how does
it obtain its food?

[Illustration: MEDUSA.]

Before noticing the wonderful way in which this animal finds its dinner,
let us look at its body. In any large Jelly-fish you can see marks which
run from the centre of the body, and another mark round the edge of the
"umbrella." These are really tubes. They all join with a hollow space
inside the body, which is the creature's stomach. The mouth-tube opens
under the body, as can be seen by turning the Jelly-fish on its back,
and moving the lobes of jelly aside. All the food goes up this
tube-mouth, and so into the stomach of the animal. The whole creature is
little more than so many cells of sea-water, the walls of the cells
being a very thin, transparent kind of skin.

Perhaps the strangest thing about it is the way in which it catches
prey. Jelly-fish feed on all kinds of tiny sea animals, such as baby
fish, and the young of crabs, shrimps, and prawns. These small creatures
form part of the usual dinner of many a hungry dweller in the sea, and
the Jelly-fish takes a share of them.

[Illustration: A MEDUSOID.]

From the edge of the "umbrella" there hangs a fringe of long, delicate
hairs, rather like spiders' threads. These are fishing lines, yet much
more deadly. They trail through the water, stretching far from the main
part of the Jelly-fish; and any small creature unlucky enough to touch
them is doomed.

Down each one of these threads there are minute cells, hundreds and
hundreds to every thread; and in each cell there is a dart, coiled up
like the spring of a watch. The tip of the dart is barbed like a
fishhook. Now the cells are so made that they fly open when touched. The
dart then leaps out and buries itself in the skin of the animal which
touched the thread. Not only that, but the darts are poisoned, and soon
kill the small creatures which they pierce.

You see now how this innocent-looking Jelly-fish gets its food. As it
swims along, the threads touch the tiny living things in the sea, the
darts pierce them and poison them. Of course these stinging darts are
very, very small, much too small for our eyes to see.

Sometimes there are numbers of large brownish Jelly-fish in the sea, or
washed up on the shore. If you are paddling or swimming, keep well away
from them. Their poison darts are able to pierce through thin skin, and
may cause you illness and great pain. Remember that the threads are very
long; after you have passed the main body of the animal, you may still
be in danger from the trailing threads.

We noticed these same poison darts when we were dealing with the
flower-like animals, the Anemones. Only, in that case, they were so
fine, so small, that they had no power to harm us, even though they
entered our skin. You may remember that we called the Anemone a cousin
of the Jelly-fish, for they both belong to the same lowly division of
the Animal Kingdom.

Animals have queer ways of getting a living. Who would expect to find
millions of poisoned darts in a Jelly-fish? Who would guess that these
weapons are coiled up, ready to spring out at their prey? Men have made
many weapons for killing, from the bow-and-arrow to the torpedo, but
none of them is more wonderful than the weapon of the Jelly-fish.


EXERCISES

1. Where is the mouth of the Jelly-fish placed?

2. How does the Jelly-fish move through the water?

3. What is the food of the Jelly-fish?

4. How does it obtain its food?

[Illustration: SHELLS.

1. A FRESHWATER TURRET SHELL.

2. EDIBLE MUSSEL.

3. CONE SHELL.

4. SWORD-BLADE RAZOR-SHELL.

5. EAR SHELL, OR ORMER.

6. A TOP SHELL.

7. SCALLOP.

8. SWAN MUSSEL.]




LESSON X.


SHELLS AND THEIR BUILDERS (1).

THE PERIWINKLE, WHELK AND LIMPET.

Most of the shells which you find scattered over the shore are empty.
The little animals which built them are gone; and their empty houses, of
wonderful shapes and colours, are all that you find. Let us look at the
builders of these pretty homes.

The shell-builders have soft, juicy bodies, and they are put in one big
division of the animal kingdom--the _mollusca_, which only means
_soft-bodied_. Some of these molluscs do not build shells. But most of
them build a shelly house for themselves; they do this to defend their
soft bodies from the attacks of a host of enemies. Some build two
shells--the Oyster and Mussel do, as you know. These are called
_bi-valves_; that is, two valves or shells; and others, like the Garden
Snail, the Limpet, and Periwinkle, have one shell only, and so are
called _uni-valves_.

The crab, and other _crustaceans_, also have a hard covering to their
soft bodies; but it is not at all like the shell of a Snail, or other
_mollusc_. The Snail's shell is like the little boy's suit which is
altered and made bigger as the boy grows. The crab's covering is a suit
which cannot be altered. It must be thrown away, and replaced by a
larger one.

The body of the shell-builder is wrapped in a soft covering, a kind of
outer coat, which is called the _mantle_. Now this mantle is one of
Nature's cleverest inventions. It is able to take the substance called
_lime_ from the food of the animal, and to use it as building stuff.

[Illustration: PRECIOUS WENTLETRAP.]

The shell is built to fit the soft body. When a Periwinkle is hatched
from the egg, it is as big as a pin's head. It eats and grows, and the
shell must therefore be made larger. So the mantle is stretched out, and
it puts a film of lime to the edge of the shell. Bit by bit the shell is
thus added to by the wonderful mantle. Look at a snail's shell, and
notice the lines which show how many times the little house has been
made larger.

Each kind of shell-builder has its own style of building. If you go to a
museum and examine the shells gathered from all over the world, you are
surprised at their wonderful shapes, markings and colours. Another
surprising thing is their size. Some are enormous, so large that they
make good washing-basins. Others are so small that you can hardly see
them. Each one was made by the folds of the mantle of the animal that
lived in it.

In our coloured pictures you see many different kinds of shells, some of
them built by uni-valve molluscs and some by bi-valve molluscs.

Wherever there are weeds along the shore you can find whole armies of
the Periwinkle--the "Winkle" we all know so well. It browses there,
among the weeds, just as its cousin, the land Snail, browses on your
cabbages. You must have seen the little door with which the Periwinkle
closes the entrance to his house. The land Snail does not own a door,
but he makes one when he goes to sleep for the winter.

The Periwinkle crawls on a broad, slimy foot, which is put out from the
shell. It is stretched on this side or that, and so draws him and his
home in any direction. There are two sensitive feelers in front of his
head; and behind these are two short stalks, on each of which is a tiny
eye. If alarmed, the Periwinkle can shorten his body, and pull it back
into its shell, closing the entrance with the horny door.

But the strangest part of him is the tongue. It is not for tasting, but
for rasping. It is like a long, narrow ribbon, on which are hundreds of
tiny points, all sloping backwards. They are arranged three in a row.
The Periwinkle rasps the seaweed with his tongue, and so scrapes off his
dinner. Of course the teeth wear away.

[Illustration: COWRIES.]

But only part of the toothed ribbon is used at a time, so there are
plenty of teeth behind the worn ones, ready to take their place.

The shell, as we have seen, is made of _limestone_. But the teeth are
made _of flint_. This is a hard substance, so hard that it is used for
striking sparks.

Now we will look at a shell-builder, the Whelk, who uses his flinty
tongue in quite another fashion. The Whelk does not care for a vegetable
dinner. He prefers to eat other molluscs--he is carnivorous, a
flesh-eater; but these other molluscs do not wait to be eaten. As the
enemy draws near they retire into their shells, and shut themselves up
as tight as they can. The Whelk, however, is a clever burglar; he knows
how to make a way into the hardest of shelly houses.

His front part--we might call it a nose--will stretch out to a fine
point; and it contains a rasping tongue even harder than that of the
Periwinkle. He sets to work. Moving the rasp up and down, he drills a
neat round hole in the shell of the animal he is attacking. No shell is
safe from him; and no tool could make a neater hole.

When you next gather shells on the beach, look at them closely; in some
you will see where Mr. Whelk, the burglar, has been at work. He needs
but a small entrance to enable him to suck out his helpless prey at his
ease. Is it not strange that this creature, with a body as soft as your
tongue, should earn its living by breaking into houses made of hard
shell!

There are other molluscs which find their meals in this strange manner,
and many others which, like the Periwinkle, feed more easily on seaweed.
One of these, the Limpet, you can always be sure of finding at low tide;
indeed, there are so many Limpets on the rocks that it would be hard
_not_ to see them. You will know, if you have tried to force a Limpet
from its hold on the rock, how very tightly it clings. It is as if the
shell were glued or cemented by its edges.

Yet there is no glue or cement used, but only a simple dodge. The Limpet
has a broad "foot," which almost fills up the opening of its shell. Like
the foot of the Snail, it is used when the animal wishes to take a walk;
but it serves another purpose too. It can be used as a sucker; and it is
this which enables the Limpet to cling so firmly to its rock.

When the tide is out, the Limpet clings to the rock, its soft body
tucked safely away in the shell. Its feeding time comes when the water
covers the rocks once more. Then the Limpet's shell may be seen to tilt
up, and a foot, and a head with feelers and eyes, come out. The Limpet
crawls to the seaweed and begins to browse, using a rasp like that of
the Periwinkle. It then crawls back to its own place on the rock. In
time this resting-place becomes hollowed out, and the Limpet's shell
fits into the groove thus made.

Limpets are useful as bait for fish. The Whelk and Periwinkle are
gathered in immense numbers, and are used by us for food. Perhaps you
have seen the egg-bundle of the Whelk. It contains many eggs when first
laid in the sea. Each egg is as big as a pin's head. They swell in the
water, until the yellowish bundle is three times as large as the Whelk
that laid it. You often see the empty bundle blown by the wind along the
shore.


EXERCISES

1. Give the names of two bi-valve molluscs.

2. What is the Periwinkle's shell made of?

3. Describe how the Periwinkle eats seaweed.

4. How does the Whelk obtain its food?

5. Give the names of three one-shelled molluscs.




LESSON XI.


SHELLS AND THEIR BUILDERS (2)

THE MUSSEL AND OYSTER.

As everyone knows, the Mussel and the Oyster live between two hinged
shells. In the last lesson we called them _bi-valve molluscs_, which is
only another way of saying "soft-bodied animals with two shells." Have
you ever opened an Oyster? It is a tug-of-war, your skill and strength
against the muscles of the animal inside the tight shells.

Like the Periwinkle and other shell-builders, these creatures owe their
strong houses to a wonderful _mantle_; but in this case the mantle is in
two pieces instead of one. You can imagine the Periwinkle's mantle as a
tube enclosing the animal's body. The mantle of the Mussel or the Oyster
is in two pieces; and each half forms its own shell.

The Snail, and other one-shelled molluscs, poke their heads out of the
shell when feeding or moving. Oysters and their two-shelled cousins
cannot do this, for the simple reason that they have no heads!

In some places you see that the rocks at low tide are covered with
Mussels. In dense black masses they cling to the rocks; and, though
heavy waves bang them like so many hammers, they stick tight. Little
Mussels and big ones, they form a mass so thick that baby crabs and
other creatures use them as a hiding-place. On the piers and groynes,
and the woodwork of the harbour, you can see other clusters of Mussels;
they are placed where the high tide covers them.

Have you noticed how the Mussel anchors himself? He uses a bunch of
threads, like so many cables or tiny ropes. It is interesting to know
how these threads are made.

The Mussel is, as a rule, a stay-at-home, but he can move from place to
place if he likes. He has a long, slender foot which can be pushed out
of the shells. Now the threads are fixed by the foot, just where the
Mussel wishes to anchor himself. They are made from a liquid which forms
in the body of the creature. This liquid hardens in the water so that it
can be pulled out into long, fine threads.

Our ordinary Mussels do not make very long threads, but those of some
kinds are so long that they can be woven into silky purses or stockings.
The Mussel which makes such long anchor-threads might be called "the
silkworm of the sea."

If the Mussel is such a stay-at-home, how does he find his food? The
answer is, that the food comes to him, brought by the ever-moving water.
There are countless specks floating in the sea, mostly specks of
vegetable stuff. These settle on the floor of the sea, just as dust
settles on our house-floors; and the waves wash this "sea-dust" hither
and thither. The Mussel or Oyster, with shells gaping wide open, is
bound to get some of this food with the water which enters the shells.

The Oyster has no "foot," and is fixed in one place nearly all its life.
It is an interesting animal; and one of such value as food, that
hundreds of thousands of Oysters are reared in special "beds," and sent
to the market at the proper season. Our British Oysters were famous even
in the time of the Romans; they were carefully packed and sent to Rome,
and, at the Roman feasts, surprising quantities of them were eaten.

Many sea-animals have wonderfully large families, but the Oyster, with
its millions and millions of eggs, beats most of them. Strangely enough,
its eggs are not sent into the sea at once, but are kept between the
Oyster's shells until they hatch. Needless to say, these babies are very
small indeed, else their nursery could not contain them all Though so
small that thousands of them together look more like a pinch of dust
than anything else, yet each one has two thin shells; so that, if you
eat the parent Oyster, they grate on your teeth like sand. Oysters, at
this time, are "out of season"--that is, unfit for food.

At the right moment, the Oyster gets rid of its numerous family. It
opens its shells, then shuts them rapidly; and, each time this happens,
a cloud of young Oysters is puffed out like smoke. Now these mites must
fend for themselves in a sea full of foes.

They have no defence, and countless numbers of them are gobbled up by
crabs, anemones, and others. If this did not happen, the sea would soon
be paved with Oysters.

For a time, the baby Oysters--which are known as "spat"--are able to
swim here and there. In rough weather they are driven far into the deeps
of the ocean, and lost. The rest of them, before they have been free for
two days, settle on the bed of the sea--sometimes on their own parents;
and there they remain for life. Only a very few out of each million
become "grown-ups"--the rest are eaten by enemies, or smothered in mud
or sand. In a year or so they are as big as half-a-crown. In five years
they are fine, fat grown-up Oysters--that is to say, if they have not
been dredged up from their bed and sent to market.

Their shells open and shut like a trap. You may have seen a picture of
an inquisitive mouse trapped by an Oyster. Thinking to have a nice taste
of Oyster, the mouse had poked its head into the open shells, but they
were snapped together, and the mouse was firmly held in the trap.

Between the hinge of the two shells there is a pad, which acts like an
elastic spring, and forces the shells open. The Oyster can close them by
means of a strong muscle. They are its only defence, so it closes them
at the least hint of danger.

Even these thick walls are sometimes of no avail, as we saw in our talk
on "Five-fingered Jack." We saw how the starfish forces the shells open
with the help of its strong tube-feet. The whelk and his cousins know
how to bore a hole in the shell, and suck out the helpless Oyster. Then
there are certain sponges, with the strange habit of making holes in
shells, and living in and on them. Sometimes the Oysters are stifled in
their "beds" by other Oysters settling and growing over them. Thick
masses of Mussels may cling to them and suffocate them. And grains of
sand sometimes get in the hinges of their shells, so that they cannot
close up the house when they wish.

Like the other animals which are useful as food, Oysters have been
carefully studied and cultivated by man for many, many years. The story
of the Oyster-beds is a long and interesting one.

Oysters feed in rather a strange way. You may have looked inside the
shells and seen two delicate dark-edged fringes, known as the "beard."
This fringe is the Oyster's gills or breathing arrangement. Trace the
"beard" as far as the hinge of the shells, and you see the mouth with
its white lips. If you could watch the creature having its dinner, you
would see a constant stream of water flowing over the gills and towards
the mouth.

What makes the water move in that way? The gills are covered with very
tiny lashes, like little hairs. There are so many of them that, as they
keep moving, they force the water along, over the gills and towards the
mouth. In this way the Oyster breathes the air which is in the water;
but not only that. As we have already noticed, there is a kind of
"vegetable dust" in the sea. This is driven to the Oyster's mouth and
swallowed. The Oyster, fixed in its "bed," unable to hunt for food, thus
makes its dinner come to it. What a strange use for a "beard"! It not
only serves as lungs, but also helps the animal to catch its "daily
bread"!

Another mollusc used as food is the Cockle, and its shell is one of the
commonest found along the shore, especially near sandy places. It lives
in sand, and can bury itself so quickly that you would have to use your
spade with all your might in order to keep pace with this little
shell-fish. Where Cockles have buried themselves you will see spurts of
water and sand, showing where they are busy down below in the wet sand.

Besides being so skilful at digging, the Cockle is a first-rate jumper.
If left on the beach, it jumps over the sand, towards the sea, in the
funniest way. It is strange to see a quiet-looking shell suddenly take
to hopping and jumping like an acrobat.

To perform this astonishing feat the Cockle makes use of its foot, which
is worked by very strong muscles. It is large and pointed, and bent: if
the Cockle wishes to move quickly, it stretches out its foot from
between the shells, as far as it will go. Then, by using all its power,
it leaps backwards or forwards in a surprising manner.

There are many other interesting molluscs, besides those we have looked
at. The Piddock, or Pholas, is a smallish, rather delicate one, with a
soft foot. But this foot is a most wonderful boring tool, fitted with a
hard file. Hard rocks and wood are perforated by these little molluscs.
Indeed, they are a positive danger, for they pierce the wooden piles of
piers, and weaken them. They cannot pierce through iron, however, and so
iron plates or nails are used to protect the piles from their
onslaughts. You will often see stones and rocks riddled by the Piddock
as if they were as soft as cheese. Chalk, sandstone, or oak, it is all
the same to the Piddock, which rasps them away with its file. When the
points of this strange instrument are worn out with all this hard wear,
a new set takes their place.


EXERCISES

1. How does the Mussel anchor itself?

2. Describe how the shells of the Oyster are opened and closed.

3. What is the food of the Mussel?

4. Of what use is the "beard" of the Oyster?

5. Why is the Oyster called a bi-valve?

6. Why is the Oyster sometimes unfit for use as food?

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10513 ***
eailverInrlhe Project Gutenberg eBook of Novelas de Voltaire — Tomo Primero
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Novelas de Voltaire — Tomo Primero

Author: Voltaire

Release date: February 1, 2006 [eBook #9895]
                Most recently updated: December 27, 2020

Language: Spanish

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Melville L. King and PG Distributed Proofreaders


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOVELAS DE VOLTAIRE — TOMO PRIMERO ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Melville L. King and PG
Distributed Proofreaders











Novelas de Voltaire Tomo Primero




Contents:

  Como Anda el Mundo, Vision de Babuco
  Memnon, o La Cordura Humana
  Micromegas,
  Historia Filosofica
  Historia de un Buen Brama,
  Los Dos Consolados






COMO ANDA EL MUNDO, VISION DE BABUCO,

ESCRITA POR ÉL PROPIO.

Entre los genios que á los imperios del mundo presiden, ocupa Ituriel
uno de los primeros puestos, y tiene á su cargo el departamento de la
alta Asia. Baxó una mañana á la mansion del Escita Babuco, á orillas
del Oxô, y le dixo así: Babuco, los Persas han incurrido en nuestro
enojo por sus excesos y sus desvaríos, y ayer se celebró una junta de
genios de la alta Asia para decidir si habian de castigar ó destruir á
Persepolis. Vete á este pueblo, examínalo todo; me darás cuenta, y por
tu informe determinaré si he de castigar ó exterminar la ciudad. Yo,
señor, respondió humildemente Babuco, ni he estado nunca en Persia, ni
conozco en todo aquel imperio á ninguno. Mas vale así, dixo el ángel,
que no serás parcial. Del cielo recibiste sagacidad, y yo añado el don
de inspirar confianza: ve, mira, escucha, observa, y nada temas, que
en todas partes serás bien visto.

Montó pues Babuco en su camello, y se marchó con sus sirvientes. Al
cabo de algunas jornadas, encontró en los valles de Senaar el exército
persa que iba á pelear con el exército indio; y dirigiéndose á un
soldado que halló en un parage remoto, le preguntó qual era el motivo
de la guerra. Por los Dioses celestiales, que no lo sé, dixo el
soldado, ni me importa; mi oficio es matar ó que me maten para ganar
mi vida: servir aquí ó allí, es para mí todo uno; y aun puede ser que
me pase mañana al campo de los Indios, que dicen que dan á los
soldados cerca de media-dracma de cobre al dia mas que en este maldito
servicio de Persia. Si quereis saber porque pelean, hablad con mi
capitan. Babuco, despues de haber hecho un regalejo al soldado, entró
en el campo, y habiendo hecho conocimiento con el capitan le preguntó
el motivo de la guerra. ¿Cómo quereis que lo sepa yo? ¿y qué me
importa, sea el que quiera? Yo resido á doscientas leguas de distancia
de Persepolis; me dicen que se ha declarado la guerra, y al punto dexo
mi familia, y, como es costumbre, voy á buscar fortuna ó la muerte,
porque no tengo otra cosa que hacer. ¿Y vuestros camaradas, dixo
Babuco, no estan tampoco mas instruidos que vos? No, dixo el oficial:
solamente nuestros principales sátrapas son los que á punto fixo saben
porque nos degollamos.

Atónito Babuco se introduxo con los generales, y se insinuó en su
familiaridad. Al fin le dixo uno de ellos: La causa de la guerra que
asuela veinte años ha el Asia, procede en su orígen de una contienda
de un eunuco de una de las mugeres del gran rey de Persia, con un
oficinista del gran rey de las Indias. Tratábase de un derecho que
producia con corta diferencia un triésimo de darico; y como tanto el
primer ministro de Indias como el nuestio sustentáron con dignidad los
derechos de su amo respectivo, se inflamáron los ánimos, y saliéron á
campaña de cada parte un millon de soldados. Cada año es necesario
reclutar estos exércitos con quatrocientos mil hombres. Crecen las
muertes, los incendios, las ruinas y las talas; padece el universo, y
sigue la enemiga. Nuestro ministro y el de Indias protestan con mucha
freqüencia que no les mueve otra cosa que la felicidad del linage
humano; y á cada protesta se destruye alguna ciudad, ó se asuelan
algunas provincias.

Habiéndose al otro dia esparcido la voz de que se iba á firmar la paz,
dieron el general indio y el persa á toda priesa la batalla, que fue
sangrienta. Vió Babuco todos los yerros y todas las abominaciones que
se cometiéron, y fué testigo de las maquinaciones de los principales
sátrapas, que hiciéron quanto estuvo en su mano para que la perdiera
su general: vió oficiales muertos por su propia tropa; vió soldados
que acababan de matar á sus moribundos camaradas, por quitarles
algunos andrajos ensangrentados, rotos y cubiertos de inmundicia;
entró en los hospitales adonde llevaban á los heridos, que perecían
casi todos por la inhumana negligencia de los mismos que pagaba á peso
de oro el rey de Persia para que los socorriesen. ¿Son hombres estos,
exclamaba Babuco, ó son fieras? Ha, bien veo que ha de ser destruida
Persepolis.

Preocupado con esta idea pasó al campo de los Indios, donde, conforme
á lo que se le habia pronosticado, le recibiéron con tanto agasajo
como en el de los Persas, y donde presenció los mismos excesos que le
habian llenado de horror. Ha, ha, dixo para sí, si quiere el ángel
Ituriel exterminar á los Persas, también tiene que exterminar á los
Indios el ángel de las Indias. Habiéndose informado luego mas
menudamente de quanto en ambos exércitos habia sucedido, supo acciones
magnánimas, generosas y humanas, que le pasmáron y le embelesáron.
Inexplicables mortales, exclamó, ¿cómo podéis juntar con tanta torpeza
tanta elevacion, y tantas virtudes con tantos delitos?

Declaróse en breve la paz, y los caudillos de ambos exércitos, que por
solo su interes habian hecho verter la sangre de tantos semejantes
suyos, se fuéron á solicitar el premio á su corte respectiva, puesto
que ninguno habia ganado la victoria. Celebróse la paz en escritos
públicos que anunciaban el reyno de la virtud y de la felicidad en la
tierra. Loado sea Dios, dixo Babuco; Persepolis va á ser la mansion de
la mas acendrada inocencia, y no será destruida, como querian aquellos
malditos genios: vamos sin mas tardanza á ver esta capital del Asia.

Llegó á esta inmensa ciudad por la antigua entrada, aun sumida en la
barbarie, y que inspiraba asco por su rudo desaliño. Sentíase toda
esta porcion del pueblo del tiempo en que se habia edificado; que
hemos de confesar, sea qual fuere el empeño de exâltar lo antiguo á
costa de lo moderno, que en todas cosas las primeras pruebas siempre
son toscas.

Metióse Babuco entre una muchedumbre de gentío compuesto de quanto mas
puerco y mas feo en ámbos sexôs pueda hallarse, la qual entraba á toda
priesa en un obscuro y tenebroso recinto. El continuo zumbido, el
movimiento que notaba, y el dinero que en un platillo algunas personas
echaban, le dió á entender que estaba en un público mercado; pero
quando vió que muchas mugeres se hincaban de rodillas, mirando al
parecer á lo que tenian enfrente, y en realidad á los hombres de lado,
echó de ver que se hallaba en un templo. Unas voces ásperas,
carrasqueñas, desentonadas y gangosas hacian que en mal articulados
sonidos la bóveda resonara, parecidas á la voz de los animales
cerdudos que en las llanuras de la Mancha responden al corvo y agudo
instrumento que los llama. Tapábase los oídos; mas tuvo luego que
taparse ojos y narices, quando vió que entraban en el templo unos
zafios con palas y azadones. Levantaron estos una ancha piedra;
tiráron á mano derecha y á mano izquierda una tierra que exhalaba un
hedor intolerable; pusieron luego un muerto en el hueco que habían
hecho, y volviéron á sentar la piedra. ¡Con que entierran estas
gentes, exclamó Babuco, á sus muertos en los sitios mismos donde
adoran la divinidad! ¡con que estan empedrados con cadáveres sus
templos! Ya no me espanto de las pestilenciales dolencias que con
tanta freqüencia afligen á Persepolis; capaz es de envenenar todo el
globo terraqüeo la podredumbre de tantos muertos y de tantos vivos
apeñuscados en un mismo sitio. ¡Ha, qué sucio pueblo es Persepolis!
Sin duda que la quieren destruir los ángeles, para edificar otra
Ciudad mas hermosa, y poblarla de gentes mas aseadas, y que mejor
canten: la Providencia sabe lo que se hace; no nos metamos en quitarle
su idea.

Acercábase ya el sol á la mitad de su carrera, y tenia Babuco que ir á
comer al otro extremo del pueblo, á casa de una dama para quien le
habia dado carta de recomendacion su marido que era oficial en el
exército. Anduvo por mil y mil calles de Persepolis; vió otros templos
mas bien adornados, adonde concurria gente mas culta, y donde se oía
una harmónica música; reparó en fuentes públicas, que aunque
defectuosas hacian maravilloso efecto; vió frescas y amenas calles de
árboles, jardines donde se respiraban los mas exquisitos olores, y se
vían reunidas plantas de los mas remotos pueblos. Maravillóse al ver
magníficos puentes, puesto que estaban destinados á pasar un arroyuelo
que sin mojarse los piés se vadea las quatro quintas partes del año;
pasó por calles anchas y magníficas, llenas de palacios á una y otra
acera, y entró por fin en casa de la dama que con una sociedad de
personas decentes le esperaba á comer. Estaba su casa limpia y bien
adornada; la señora era moza, hermosa, discreta y cortés, y la
sociedad amable; y decia Babuco entre sí: Sin duda que habia perdido
el juicio el ángel Ituriel, quando queria destruir una ciudad tan
cumplida. Mas advirtió muy breve que la señora, que al principio le
habia pedido amorosamente nuevas de su marido, al fin de la comida
hablaba mas amorosamente á un mago mozo. Luego vió que un magistrado
delante de su propia muger hacia mil halagos á una viuda, la qual
estrechaba con una mano el cuello del magistrado, y daba la otra á un
mozo muy lindo y modesto. La primera que se levantó de la mesa fué la
muger del magistrado, que se encerró en un gabinete inmediato para
conferenciar con su director de almas, hombre eloqüentísimo, que con
tal energía hubo de discurrir con ella, que volvió abochornado el
rostro, humedecidos los ojos, la voz trémula, y los pasos vacilantes.

Babuco entónces se empezó á rezelar de que tenia razon el genio
Ituriel. Con el dote que tenia de grangearse la confianza, supo aquel
dia mismo los secretos de la dama, la qual le fió su cariño al mago
mozo, asegurándole que en todas las casas de Persepolis encontraria lo
mismo que en la suya habia visto. Infirió Babuco que no podia durar
semejante sociedad; que todas las casas habian de estar asoladas por
zelos, venganzas y rencillas; que sin cesar habian de verterse
lágrimas y sangre; que infaliblemente habian de matar los maridos á
los cortejos de sus mugeres, ó de ser muertos por ellos; finalmente
que hacia Ituriel muy bien en destruir de una vez un pueblo abandonado
á horrendos desórdenes.

Fuése despues de comer á uno de los mas soberbios templos de la
ciudad, y se sentó en medio de una muchedumbre de hombres y mugeres
que habian ido allí á matar el tiempo. Subió un mago á una máquina
alta, y discurrió largo tiempo acerca del vicio y la virtud; y
habiendo dividido en varias partes lo que no era menester dividir,
probó metódicamente las cosas mas claras, enseñó lo que sabia todo el
mundo, se exaltó sin motivo, y salió sudando y sin respiracion.
Despertóse entonces la gente, y creyó que habia asistido á una
instruccion. Babuco dixo: Este buen hombre ha hecho quanto ha podido
por fastidiar á doscientos ó trescientos conciudadanos suyos; pero su
intencion era buena, y esto no es motivo para destruir á Persepolis.

Lleváronle, al salir de esta asamblea, á que viera una fiesta pública
que se celebraba todos los dias del año en una especie de basílica, en
cuya parte interior se vía un palacio. Formaban tan hermoso
espectáculo las ciudadanas mas hermosas de Persepolis, y los
principales sátrapas colocados en órden, que al principio creyó Babuco
que se reducia á esto la fiesta. En breve se dexáron ver en el
vestíbulo de este palacio dos ó tres personas que parecian reyes y
reynas; su idioma era muy distinto del que estilaba el vulgo, y tenia
ritmo, harmonía y sublimidad. No se dormia nadie, que todos en alto
silencio escuchaban, y si le interrumpian, era para dar pruebas de
admiracion y ternura general; y con tan vivos y bien sentidos términos
se hablaba de las obligaciones de los reyes, del amor de la virtud, y
de los riesgos de las pasiones, que arrancáron lágrimas á Babuco: el
qual no dudó que fuesen los predicadores del imperio aquellos héroes y
heroinas y aquellos reyes y reynas que acababa de oir, y hasta hizo
propósito de persuadir á Ituriel que los viniese á escuchar, cierto de
que semejante espectáculo le reconciliaria con Persepolis para
siempre.

Concluida la fiesta, quiso visitar á la reyna principal que en aquel
hermoso palacio habia anunciado tan sublime y acendrada moral. Hizo
que le introduxeran en casa de su magestad; y le lleváron por una mala
escalerilla á un segundo piso, donde halló en un aposento pobremente
alhajado una muger mal vestida, que con noble y patético ademan le
dixo: Mi oficio no me da para vivir; uno de los príncipes que habeis
visto me ha hecho un hijo: estoy para parir: no tengo dinero, y sin
dinero todo parto es un mal parto. Babuco le dió cien daricos de oro,
diciendo: Si no hubiera cosas peores en la ciudad, poco motivo tuviera
Ituriel para estar tan enojado.

Fué de allí á pasar la tarde á las tiendas de mercaderes de
magnificencias superfluas. Llevóle un sugeto inteligente que se habia
hecho amigo suyo, compró lo que halló de su gusto, y con muchas
cortesías se lo vendiéron mucho mas caro de lo que valia. Quando hubo
vuelto á casa, le hizo ver su amigo que le habian estafado; y apuntó
Babuco en su libro de memoria el nombre del mercader, para que el dia
del castigo de la ciudad no le echara Ituriel en olvido. Estando
escribiendo, llamáron á la puerta, y entró el mercader que le traía á
Babuco su bolsillo que se habia dexado olvidado encima del mostrador.
¿Cómo es posible, dixo Babuco, que seais tan generoso y escrupuloso,
despues de haber tenido cara para venderme vuestras buxerías quatro
tanto mas de lo que valen? No hay en toda la ciudad, le respondió el
mercader, negociante ninguno algo conocido, que no hubiese venido á
traeros el bolsillo; mas quando os han dicho que os he vendido lo que
en mi tienda habeis comprado el quadruplo de su valor, os han
engañado, porque os lo he vendido diez veces mas de lo que ello vale;
y esto es tan cierto, que si dentro de un mes os quereis deshacer de
ello, no os darán ni el diezmo: y no hay empero cosa mas conforme á
razon, porque siendo el antojo de los hombres lo que da valor á estas
fruslerías, ese mismo antojo da de comer á cien obreros que empleo yo,
y á mí me da una casa bien puesta, un buen coche, y buenos caballos.
Este antojo es quien vivifica la industria, y mantiene el fino gusto,
la circulacion y la abundancia. A las naciones comarcanas les vendo
mucho mas caras que á vos esas mismas frioleras, y de este modo sirvo
con provecho al imperio. Paróse Babuco pensativo un, rato, y le borró
luego de su libro.

No sabiendo que pensar de Persepolis, se determinó á visitar á los
magos y á los literatos, lisonjeándose de que alcanzarian estos el
perdon de todo lo restante del pueblo, porque unos se aplican á la
sabiduría, y á la religion los otros. La mañana siguiente fué á
visitar un colegio de magos, y le confesó el archimandrita que tenia
trescientos mil escudos de renta por haber hecho voto de pobreza, y
que exercia una vasta jurisdiccion en virtud de otro voto de humildad.
Dicho esto, dexó á Babuco en manos de un aprendiz de mago, para que le
obsequiase.

Enseñábale este las preciosidades de esta casa de penitencia, quando
se esparció la voz de que traía comision de hacer reformas. Al punto
le diéron memoriales de cada una, que todos en sustancia venian á
decir: _Conservadnos á nosotros, y suprimid todos los demas_. Si daba
crédito á sus propias apologías, todas estas congregaciones eran
necesarias; si atendia á sus recíprocas acusaciones, todas merecian
ser destruidas. Pasmábase Babuco de que no hubiese ninguna que, por
edificar al universo, no quisiese ser árbitro de él. Presentósele
entónces un hombrecillo que era semi-mago, el qual le dixo: La grande
obra se va á cumplir, y Zerdust ha vuelto á la tierra; por tanto os
rogamos que nos ampareis contra el Gran Lama. ¿Con que contra el
pontífice monarca, respondió Babuco, que reside en el Tibet?--Contra
ese mismo.--¿Pues qué? le hacéis guerra, y alistais contra él un
exército?--No es eso; pero dice que el hombre es libre, y nosotros no
lo creemos: escribimos contra él libracos que no lee; y apénas si nos
ha oido mentar, puesto que nos acaba de condenar, como un propietario
que manda extirpar las orugas de su huerto. Asombróse Babuco de la
locura de hombres que profesan la sabiduría, de las marañas de los que
habian renunciado del mundo, de la ambicion y altiva codicia de los
que predicaban humildad y desinteres; y coligió que sobraban razones
valederas á Ituriel para destruir toda esta raza.

Retiróse á su casa, mandó que le compraran libros nuevos para calmar
su enfado, y convidó á comer á varios literatos para su recreo.
Llegáron mas del doble de los que habia llamado, como acuden las
avispas á la miel. No se daban vado estos gorreros á hablar y á
engullir, y elogiaban dos clases de hombres, los muertos y ellos
propios, mas nunca á sus coetáneos, exceptuando el amo de casa. Si
decia uno un dicho agudo, baxaban los demas los ojos, y se mordian la
lengua de sentimiento de no ser ellos los autores. Eran ménos
cautelosos que los magos porque no aspiraba su ambicion á tan altos
objetos, solicitando cada uno un empleo de sirviente y la reputacion
de grande hombre. Decíanse en su cara denuestos, que se les figuraban
agudos epigramas. Habíaseles traslucido algo de la comision de Babuco,
y uno de ellos en voz baxa le suplicó que exterminase á un autor que
no le habia dado suficientes elogios; otro lo pidió la pérdida de un
ciudadano que en sus comedias nunca se reía; y otro la extincion de la
academia, porque jamas habia podido conseguir ser su individuo.
Acabada la comida, se fueron solos todos, porque en toda esta caterva
no habia dos que se pudieran sufrir, ni se hablaban mas que en las
casas de los ricos que á su mesa los convidaban. Creyó Babuco que
poquísimo se perdia con que pereciese toda esta landre en la general
destruccion.

Apénas se zafó de ellos, se puso á leer algunos de los libros que
acababan de publicarse, y advirtió en ellos el carácter de sus
convidados. Indignáronle mas que todo las gacetillas de calumnias, y
los archivos de mal gusto dictados por la envidia, la hambre y la
torpeza; viles sátiras que respetan los buytres y despedazan las
palomas; novelas faltas de imaginacion, donde se ven mil retratos
ideales de sugetos que sus autores no conocen. Tiró al fuego todos
estos detestables escritos, y salió aquella tarde de casa, para ir al
paseo. Presentáronle á un literato anciano que no habia venido á
aumentar el número de sus pegotes. Esquivaba este la muchedumbre,
conocia á los hombres, sabia servirse de ellos, y se explicaba con
cordura. Hablóle Babuco con mucho sentimiento de quanto habia visto y
leido. Cosas muy despreciables habeis leido, le dixo el cuerdo
letrado; pero en todos tiempos y en todo pais es muy comun lo malo, y
rarísimo lo bueno. Habeis dado acogida en vuestra mesa á las heces de
la pedantería, porque en toda profesion lo que siempre se presenta con
mas descaro es lo que ménos merece salir á la plaza. Viven unos con
otros, sosegados y en el retiro, los verdaderos sabios, y aun no nos
faltan libros y autores que son acreedores á vuestra atencion.
Miéntras que estaba hablando, llegó otro literato, y fuéron sus
razonamientos tan instructivos y agradables, tan superiores á las
preocupaciones, y tan conformes con la virtud, que confesó Babuco que
nunca habia oido semejante cosa. Hombres son estos, decia para sí, á
quien no se atreverá el ángel Ituriel á hacer mal, á ménos que sea muy
despiadado.

No conservaba ménos enojo contra lo demas de la nacion, puesto que se
habia reconciliado con los literatos. Sois un extrangero, le dixo el
hombre juicioso que le hablaba, y se os presentan de tropel los
abusos, miéntras que se os esconde el bien oculto, y que no pocas
veces de estos mismos abusos resulta. Supo entónces que habia entre
los literatos muchos que no eran envidiosos, y hasta entre los magos
algunos que eran virtuosos. Al fin entendió que estos grandes cuerpos,
que con sus choques preparaban al parecer su ruina común, eran en la
realidad fundaciones provechosas; que cada asociacion de magos era un
freno para sus émulas; que si á veces estas diferian de opinion, todas
enseñaban una moral misma; que instruían el pueblo, y sujetas á las
leyes: semejantes á los preceptores que zelan los hijos de casa,
miéntras que á ellos los zela el amo. Trató á muchos, y encontró entre
ellos almas celestiales; y supo que entre aquellos mismos locos que
querian poner guerra al Gran Lama, habia varones eminentes. Sospechó
al cabo que podian ser lo mismo las costumbres de Persepolis que sus
edificios, que unos le habian parecido dignos de lástima, y otros le
habian sobrecogido en admiracion.

Dixo un dia al literato: Ahora conozco que los magos, que por tan
peligrosos habia tenido, pueden ser muy provechosos, especialmente
quando un prudente gobierno estorba que se grangeen sobrado influxo:
¿pero qué utilidades, pueden resultar de las colosales riquezas de los
asentistas y agentes del fisco? Aquel mismo dia vió que la opulencia
de estos, que tanto le habia repugnado, producia á veces mucho fruto,
porque habiendo necesitado dinero el soberano, halló en una hora por
su medio lo que por las vias ordinarias no hubiera en seis meses
encontrado; y se convenció de que estas pardas nubes, alimentadas con
el rocío de la tierra, le restituían en lluvias lo que de ellas
recibian: aparte de que los hijos de estos hombres nuevos, por lo
comun mas bien educados que los de las mas antiguas familias, valian
mucho mas que estos; porque tener por padre un buen calculador no
quita que sea uno juez recto, valiente soldado, ó hábil estadista.

Poco á poco perdonaba Babuco la codicia del asentista, que en la
realidad no es ni mas ni ménos codicioso que los demas, y que es
indispensable; disculpaba la locura de disipar su caudal por hacer la
guerra, que era orígen de tantas bélicas proezas; y perdonaba los
zelos de los literatos, entre quienes se hallaban sugetos que
ilustraban el mundo: se reconciliaba con los magos ambiciosos y
tramoyistas, que con pequeños vicios juntaban grandes virtudes; puesto
que le quedaban no pocos escrúpulos, especialmente sobre los galanteos
de las damas, y las horrendas conseqüencias que infaliblemente habian
de producir, y que le llenaban de horror y sustos.

Queriendo exâminar todos los estados, hizo que le llevaran á casa de
un ministro, y en el camino iba temblando de ver alguna muger
asesinada por su marido en presencia suya. Llegó á la antesala del
hombre de estado, y estuvo dos horas aguardando á que dixeran que
estaba allí, y otras dos despues que lo hubiéron dicho, haciendo en
este tiempo firmísimo propósito de recomendar al ministro y sus
insolentes concierges al enojo del ángel Ituriel. Estaba la antesala
atestada de damas de todas clases, de magos de todos colores, de
jueces, mercaderes, oficiales y pedantes, que todos estaban quejosos
del ministro. Decian el avariento y el logrero: No hay duda de que
roba este hombre las provincias; afeaba sus rarezas el extravagante;
decia el sensual que solo con sus gustos tenia cuenta; y esperaban las
mugeres que en breve le sustituiria otro ministro mas mozo.

Oía Babuco todas estas razones, y no pudo ménos de decir: ¡Qué hombre
tan dichoso es este! Todos sus enemigos los tiene en su antesala; su
potencia abruma á sus envidiosos, y mira á sus plantas á quantos le
detestan. Al fin entró en su gabinete, y vió á un viejecito agobiado
de años y quehaceres, pero vivo todavia, y muy inteligente. Gustóle
Babuco, y á Babuco le pareció un sugeto muy digno de estimacion. Fue
muy interesante la conferencia: el ministro le confesó que era el
hombre mas desgraciado; que le tenian por rico, y era pobre; que le
creían omnipotente, y para todo encontraba impedimentos; que todos sus
beneficios habian sido pagados con ingratitudes, y que en quarenta
años de continuas faenas habia tenido apénas un rato de satisfaccion.
Enternecióse Babuco, y dixo entre sí que si habia cometido algunos
yerros este hombre, y por ellos le queria castigar el ángel Ituriel,
bastaba con dexarle su cargo, sin exterminarle.

Estaba razonando con el ministro, quando entró desatentada la hermosa
dama en cuya casa habia comido Babuco, manifestando su rostro y sus
ojos los síntomas del dolor y el enojo. Prorumpió en amargas quejas
contra el hombre de estado; vertió lágrimas; se lamentó amargamente de
que hubieran negado á su marido un cargo á que podia aspirar por su
cuna, y de que le hacian acreedor sus heridas y servicios; y habló con
tanta energía, se quejó con tal gracia, desvaneció con tal maña los
reparos, con tal eloqüencia esforzó sus razones, que no salió del
gabinete hasta haber conseguido la fortuna de su marido.

Salió Babuco dándole la mano, y le dixo: ¿Es posible, señora, que os
hayais tomado tanto trabajo por un hombre que no quereis, y que tanto
teneis por que temer? ¿Cómo es eso que no le quiero? replicó la dama:
sabed que mi marido es el mejor amigo que tengo en este mundo, y que
sacrificaré por él todo quanto tengo, como no sea mi amante; lo mismo
que hiciera él, ménos sacrificar á su querida. Quiero que la
conozcais, que es una muy linda señora, muy discreta, y de excelente
genio; esta noche cenamos juntos con mi marido y mi amiguito el mago:
venid á participar nuestro gusto.

Llevóse la dama consigo á Babuco, y el marido que estaba sumido en el
mas hondo dolor recibió á su muger con raptos de gratitud y alborozo,
dando mil abrazos á su muger, á su dama, al mago, y á Babuco. El
banquete le animáron el contento, las gracias y los donayres. Sabed,
le dixo la hermosa dama con quien cenaba, que las que á veces
califican de mugeres sin honra casi siempre poseen las virtudes de un
hombre honrado; y en prueba de ello, venid mañana á comer conmigo en
casa de la hermosa Teone. Algunas vestales viejas murmuran de ella,
pero mas obras de beneficencia hace ella sola que todas juntas las que
la muerden; no cometiera la mas leve injusticia por todos los
intereses del mundo; á su amante le da siempre consejos generosos;
solo su gloria la ocupa, y se sonrojaria él si en su presencia
malograra una sola ocasion de obrar bien; porque no hay mayor estímulo
para virtuosas acciones, que tener por juez y testigo de su conducta
una amada cuyo aprecio anhela uno á merecer.

No faltó Babuco á la cita, y vió una casa que era el emporio de los
placeres. En ellos reynaba Teone; con cada uno hablaba el idioma que
entendia: su natural entendimiento dexaba explayarse el de los demas;
agradaba casi sin querer; tan amable era como benéfica; y para dar mas
lustre á todas sus dotes, era muy hermosa.

Conoció Babuco, puesto que era Escita y enviado por un genio, que si
se detenia mas tiempo en Persepolis, le haria Teone olvidarse de
Ituriel. Cogia cariño á la ciudad cuyos vecinos eran afables, corteses
y benéficos, aunque murmuradores, insustanciales y vanidosos. Temia ya
que fuese condenada Persepolis, y hasta temia la cuenta que á dar iba.
Así para darla hizo lo siguiente: mandó al mejor estatuario del
pueblo, que le fundiera una estatua pequeña, compuesta de todos
metales, y de las tierras y piedras mas preciosas y mas viles; y se la
llevó á Ituriel. ¿Haréis pedazos, le dixo, esta linda estatua, porque
no es toda ella de oro y diamantes? Comprendió Ituriel el emblema, y
se determinó á no tratar ni siquiera de enmendar á Persepolis, y dexar
que anduviera el mundo como anda, diciendo: _Si no todo es bueno, á lo
ménos todo es tolerable_. Subsistió pues Persepolis; y Babuco estuvo
muy distante de quejarse, como hizo Jonas que se enfadó porque no fué
destruida Ninive. Verdad es que quien ha pasado tres dias en el
vientre de una ballena, no gasta tan buen humor como el que ha estado
en la ópera, en la comedia, y ha cenado con gente de fino trato.

_Fin de la vision de Babuco_.

       *       *       *       *       *




MEMNON,

ó LA CORDURA HUMANA.

Pusósele en la cabeza á Memnon un dia la desatinada idea de ser
completamente cuerdo: que pocos hombres hay á quien no haya pasado por
la cabeza semejante locura. Memnon discurria así: Para ser muy cuerdo,
y á conseqüencia muy feliz, basta con no dexarse arrastrar de las
pasiones: cosa muy fácil, como nadie ignora. Lo primero, nunca he de
querer á muger ninguna, y en viendo una beldad acabada diré en mi
interior: Un dia se ha de arrugar ese semblante; ese turgente y
redondo pecho se ha de tornar fofo y lacio; esa tan bien poblada
cabeza ha de quedarse calva: y me basta con mirarla desde ahora como
la he de ver entónces, para que esa linda cabeza no me haga perder la
mia.

Lo segundo, siempre seré sobrio, por mas que me tiente la golosina,
los exquisitos vinos, y el incentivo de la sociedad. Me figuraré las
resultas de la glotonería, la cabeza cargada, el estómago
descompuesto, perdida la razon, la salud y el tiempo; y así solo
comeré lo que necesite, disfrutaré sana salud, y tendré siempre claras
y luminosas las ideas. Cosa es esta tan fácil, que no es meritorio
salirse con ella.

Luego, continuaba Memnon, es necesario no descuidar su caudal: mis
deseos son moderados; tengo mi dinero que me produce buenos réditos y
con buenas fianzas en poder del tesorero general de Ninive, y me basta
para vivir sin depender de nadie, que es la mayor fortuna, porque
nunca me veré en la cruel precision de ir á besar manos de palaciegos;
á nadie tendré envidia, y de nadie seré envidiado: cosa no ménos
fácil. Amigos tengo, dixo en fin, y los conservaré, porque nunca les
haré mal tercio; no se enfadarán jamas conmigo, ni yo con ellos:
tampoco en esto se ofrece dificultad.

Formado así su planecico de moderacion dando paseos por su quarto, se
asomó Memnon á la ventana, y vió dos señoras que iban por unas calles
de plátanos, que inmediatas á su casa habia. Era vieja la una, y no la
aquejaba al parecer nada; la otra era moza, linda, y tenia trazas de
estar muy apesadumbrada: suspiraba, y lloraba, y eso mismo le daba mas
gracia. Movióse mucho nuestro sabio, no con la beldad de la dama
(porque estaba seguro de no rendirse á tal flaqueza), mas sí por el
desconsuelo en que la vía. Baxó, y se acercó á la Ninivita jóven, con
ánimo de darle prudentes consuelos. Contóle esta hermosa con la mas
ingenua y tierna expresion los perjuicios que le hacia un tio que no
tenia, con que artificio la habia privado de un caudal que nunca habia
poseido, y los temores que le causaban sus arrebatos. Vos me pareceis
hombre discreto, le dixo, y si me hiciérais el favor de venir hasta mi
casa, y exâminar mis asuntos, estoy cierta de que me sacaríais del
cruel apuro en que me veo. No tuvo reparo Memnon en acompañarla, para
examinar con madurez sus asuntos, y darle buenos consejos.

Llevóle la afligida señora á un retrete bien aromado, y le obligó con
mucha cortesía á sentarse en un muelle sofá, donde estaban las piernas
cruzadas uno enfrente de otro. Hablaba la dama con los ojos baxos; de
quando en quando se le iban las lágrimas, y quando los levantaba,
siempre topaba con las miradas del cuerdo Memnon. Eran sus razones
cariñosas en demasía, y mucho mas quando ámbos se miraban. Memnon
tomaba muy á pechos sus asuntos, y á cada instante crecia en él el
anhelo de servir á tan hermosa y desdichada persona. Con el calor de
la conversacion dexáron poco á poco de encontrarse uno enfrente de
otro, y de tener cruzadas las piernas, aconsejándola Memnon tan de
cerca, y siendo tan cariñosos sus consejos, que ni uno ni otro podian
hablar de asuntos, ni sabian donde estaban.

Estando en esto, llega, como ya el lector se ha podido imaginar, el
tío, el qual venia armado de punta en blanco; y lo primero que dixo
fué que iba á matar, como era justo, al sabio Memnon y á su sobrina; y
lo último, que podria perdonarlos, si le daban mucho dinero. Vióse
precisado Memnon á darle quanto tenia, y gracias á que en aquellos
venturosos tiempos no habia peores resultas que temer; que aun no
estaba descubierta la América, ni eran las hermosas damas afligidas
tan peligrosas como ahora.

Confuso y desesperado Memnon se volvió á su casa, donde encontró una
esquela convidándole á comer con unos amigos íntimos. Si me quedo solo
en casa, dixo, tendré preocupado el ánimo con mi triste aventura, no
comeré, y caeré malo; mas vale hacer una frugal comida con mis amigos
íntimos, y con su amena compañía olvidarme del disparate que esta
mañana he cometido. Fuése al convite; y viendo que estaba algo triste,
le obligáron á que bebiese para disipar su melancolía. El vino usado
con moderacion es medicina para el ánimo y para el cuerpo: así pensaba
el sabio Memnon, y se emborrachó. Propónenle jugar una mano de
sobremesa: un juego, donde se atraviesa poco, es una inocente
diversion. Juega, y le ganan quanto traía en el bolsillo, y quatro
veces mas sobre su palabra. Origínase una contienda sobre el juego,
irrítanse los ánimos, le tira uno de sus íntimos amigos á la cabeza un
cubilete que le saca un ojo, y traen á casa al sabio Memnon borracho,
sin dinero, y con un ojo ménos.

Habiendo dormido un poco el lobo, envia á su criado á casa del
tesorero general de rentas de Ninive, á que le diera dinero para pagar
á sus íntimos amigos; y le trae el criado la nueva de que aquella
mañana habia hecho una quiebra de mala fé su deudor, con la qual
dexaba por puertas á cien familias. Despechado Memnon se va á palacio
con un parche en el ojo y un memorial en la mano, pidiendo justicia al
rey del fallido; y encuentra en una sala á muchas damas, todas como
peonzas al reves, con elegantes tontillos de veinte piés de
circunferencia, y batas de treinta de cola. Una que le conocia algo,
dixo mirándole al soslayo: ¡Jesus, qué horror! Y otra que le conocia
mas: Buenas tardes, señor Memnon; de veras, señor Memnon que me alegro
mucho de veros: ¿cómo es que estais tuerto, señor Memnon? y dicho
esto, se fué sin aguardar respuesta. Agazapóse Memnon en un rincon,
esperando á poderse echar á los pies del monarca. Llegó su magestad,
besó Memnon tres veces el suelo, y le dió su memorial, que tomó el
soberano con mucha afabilidad, y se le alargó á uno de sus sátrapas,
para que le diera cuenta. Llama el sátrapa á Memnon aparte, y le dice
con tono de mofa y ademan de insulto: Donoso tuerto sois, pues os
atreveis á dar al rey un memorial que no ha pasado por mi mano, y
cometeis con eso el atentado de pedir justicia de un fallido muy
honrado, que está baxo mi amparo, y es sobrino de una doncella de
servicio de mi querida. No deis mas paso en el asunto, si no quereis
perder el ojo sano que os queda.

De esta suerte, habiendo Memnon renunciado por la mañana de mozas, de
comilonas, de juego, de contiendas, y sobretodo de palacio, ántes de
anochecer habia sido engañado y estafado por una herniosa dama, se
habia emborrachado, habia jugado, le habian sacado un ojo, y habia ido
á palacio donde se habian reido de él.

Confuso, absorto, y rendido al peso de su sentimiento, se volvia medio
muerto á su casa, y al ir á entrar, la encontró llena de alguaciles y
escribanos que cargaban con los muebles á nombre de sus acreedores.
Paróse casi sin sentido debaxo de un plátano, y se encuentra con la
linda dama de aquella mañana, que se andaba paseando con su amado tio,
y que no se pudo tener de risa al ver á Memnon con su parche. Cerró la
noche, y se acostó Memnon sobre un monton de paja, cerca de las
paredes de su casa: entróle calentura, se aletargó con la fuerza de
ella, y se le apareció en sueños un espíritu celestial; el qual era
resplandeciente como el Sol, y tenia seis hermosas alas, pero sin
piés, ni cabeza, ni cola, y no se parecia á cosa ninguna. ¿Quién eres?
le dixo Memnon. Tu genio bueno, le respondió. Pues vuélveme, repuso
Memnon, mi ojo, mi salud, mi caudal, mi cordura; y de seguida le contó
de qué modo todo lo habia perdido aquel dia. Aventuras son esas,
replicó el espíritu, que nunca suceden en el mundo donde nosotros
vivimos. ¿En qué mundo vivis? le dixo el hombre afligido. Mi patria,
respondió el genio, dista quinientos millones de leguas del Sol, y es
aquella estrellita junto á Sirio, que estás viendo desde aquí. ¡Lindo
pais! dixo Memnon. ¿Con que no teneis bribonas que engañan á los
hombres de bien, ni amigos íntimos que les estafan su dinero y les
sacan un ojo, ni deudores que quiebren, ni sátrapas que se rian de
vosotros quando os niegan justicia? No, le dixo el morador de la
estrella, nada de eso: no nos engañan las mugeres, porque no las hay;
no hacemos excesos de glotonería, porque no comemos; ni hay deudores
que quiebren, porque no tenemos plata ni oro; no nos pueden sacar los
ojos, porque no se parece nuestro cuerpo al vuestro; ni los sátrapas
cometen injusticias, porque todos somos iguales.

Díxole entónces Memnon: Señor ilustrísimo, ¿sin mozas y sin comer, en
qué pasais el tiempo? En cuidar, dixo el genio, de los demas globos
que estan á nuestro cargo, y yo soy venido á consolarte. ¡Ay! replicó
Memnon, ¿porqué no habéis venido la noche pasada, y me hubiérais
estorbado hacer tanto disparate? Porque estaba con Asan, tu hermano
mayor, le dixo el morador de los cielos, el qual es mas desventurado
que tú, habiendo su magestad el clemente rey de las Indias, en cuyo
palacio tiene la honra de estar empleado, mandádole sacar ámbos ojos
por una leve falta, y teniéndole en un calabozo, amarrado de piés y
manos. Pardios, exclamó Memnon, que estamos medrados con tener un
genio bueno en nuestra familia, si de dos hermanos uno está ciego, y
otro tuerto, uno acostado sobre paja, y otro en una cárcel. Tu suerte
se mudará, replicó el animal de la estrella: verdad es que toda la
vida serás tuerto; pero, como no sea eso, vivirás bastante feliz, con
tal que nunca hagas el desatinado propósito de ser completamente
cuerdo. ¿Con que eso es cosa que no es posible conseguir? replicó
Memnon arrancando un sollozo. Como no es posible, respondió el otro,
ser completamente inteligente, completamente fuerte, completamente
poderoso, ó completamente feliz. Nosotros mismos estamos muy distantes
de serlo; un globo hay á la verdad donde todo eso se encuentra; pero
todo va por grados en los cien mil millones de mundos sembrados en el
espacio. En el segundo hay ménos placer y ménos sabiduría que en el
primero; en el tercero ménos que en el segundo; y así se sigue hasta
el postrero, donde todo el mundo es enteramente loco. Mucho me temo,
dixo Memnon, que nuestro globo sea justamente esa casa de orates del
universo, que vos decis. No tanto como eso, dixo el espíritu, pero le
anda cerca; y es preciso que cada cosa ocupe su sitio señalado. En tal
caso, dixo Memnon, muy descaminados van ciertos poetas, y ciertos
filósofos, que dicen que _todo está bien_. Razon llevan, dixo el
filósofo del otro mundo, si contemplan la colocacion del universo
entero. ¡Ha! replicó el pobre Memnon, eso no lo creeré miéntras fuere
tuerto.

_Fin de Memnon_.

       *       *       *       *       *




LOS DOS CONSOLADOS.

Decia un dia el gran filósofo Citofilo á una dama desconsolada, y que
tenia sobrado motivo para estarlo: Señora, la reyna de Inglaterra,
hija del gran Henrique quarto, no fué ménos desgraciada que vos: la
echáron de su reyno; se vió á pique de perecer en el océano en un
naufragio, y presenció la muerte del rey su esposo en un patíbulo.
Mucho lo siento, dixo la dama; y volvió á llorar sus desventuras
propias.

Acordaos, dixo Cilofilo, de María Estuardo, que estaba honradamente
prendada de un guapo músico que tenia excelente voz de sochantre. Su
marido mató al músico; y luego su buena amiga y pariente, la reyna
Isabel, que se decia doncella, le mandó cortar la cabeza en un
cadahalso colgado de luto, después de haberla tenido diez y ocho años
presa. ¡Cruel suceso! respondió la señora; y se entregó de nuevo á su
afliccion.

Bien habréis oido mentar, siguió el consolador, á la hermosa Juana de
Nápoles, que fué presa y ahorcada. Una idea confusa tengo de eso, dixo
la afligida.

Os contaré, añadió el otro, la aventura sucedida en mi tiempo de una
soberana destronada despues de cenar, y que ha muerto en una isla
desierta. Toda esa historia la sé, respondió la dama.

Pues os diré lo sucedido á otra gran princesa, mi discípula de
filosofía. Tenia su amante, como le tiene toda hermosa y gran
princesa: entró un dia su padre en su aposento, y cogió al amante con
el rostro encendido y los ojos que como dos carbunclos resplandecian,
y la princesa tambien con la cara muy encarnada. Disgustó tanto al
padre el rostro del mancebo, que le sacudió la mas enorme bofetada que
hasta el dia se ha pegado en toda su provincia. Cogió el amante las
tenazas, y rompió la cabeza al padre de la dama, que estuvo mucho
tiempo á la muerte, y aun tiene la señal de la herida: la princesa
desatentada se tiró por la ventana, y se estropeó una pierna, de modo
que aun el dia de hoy se le conoce que coxea, aunque tiene hermoso
cuerpo. Su amante fué condenado á muerte, por haber roto la cabeza á
tan alto príncipe. Ya podeis pensar en qué estado estaria la princesa,
quando sacaban á ahorcar á su amante; yo la iba á ver con freqüencia,
quando estaba ella en la cárcel, y siempre me hablaba de sus
desdichas.

¿Pues porqué no quereis que me duela yo de las mias? le dixo la dama.
Porque no es acertado dolerse de sus desgracias, y porque habiendo
habido tantas principales señoras tan desventuradas, no parece bien
que os desespereis. Contemplad á Hecuba, contemplad á Niobe. Ha, dixo
la señora, si hubiera vivido yo en aquel tiempo, ó en el de tantas
hermosas princesas, y para su consuelo les hubiérais contado mis
desdichas, ¿os habrian acaso escuchado?

Al dia siguiente perdió el filósofo á su hijo único, y faltó poco para
que se muriese de sentimiento. Mandó la señora hacer una lista de
todos los monarcas que habian perdido á sus hijos, y se la llevó al
filósofo, el qual la leyó, la encontró muy puntual, y siguió llorando.
Al cabo de tres meses se volviéron á ver, y se pasmáron de hallarse
muy contentos. Levantáron entónces una hermosa estatua al tiempo, con
este rótulo:

AL CONSOLADOR.

_Fin de los dos Consolados_.

        *       *       *       *       *




HISTORIA

DE LOS VIAGES

DE ESCARMENTADO,

ESCRITA POR ÉL PROPIO.

En la ciudad de Candía vine yo al mundo el año de 1600. Era su
gobernador mi padre, y me acuerdo que un poeta ménos que mediano,
aunque no fuese medianamente desaliñado su estilo, llamado Azarria,
hizo unas malas coplas en elogio mio, en las quales me calificaba de
descendiente de Minos en línea recta; mas habiendo luego quitado el
gobierno á mi padre, compuso otras en que me trataba de nieto de
Pasifae y su amante. Mal sugeto era de veras el tal Azarria, y el
bribon mas fastidioso que en toda la isla habia.

Quince años tenia quando me envió mi padre á estudiar á Roma, y yo
llegué con la esperanza de aprender todas las verdades, porque hasta
entónces me habian enseñado todo lo contrario de la verdad, según es
uso en este mundo, desde la China hasta los Alpes. Monsiñor Profondo,
á quien iba recomendado, era sugeto raro, y uno de los mas terribles
sabios que en el mundo habia. Quísome instruir en las categorías de
Aristóteles, y por poco me pone en la de sus gitones: de buena me
libré. Ví procesiones, exôrcismos, y no pocos robos. Decian, aunque
contra toda verdad, que la siñora Olimpia, dama muy prudente, vendia
ciertas cosas que no suelen venderse. De mi edad todo esto me parecia
muy gracioso. Ocurrióle á una señora moza, y de muy suave condicion,
llamada la siñora Fatelo, prendarse de mí: obsequiábanla el
reverendísimo padre Puñalini, y el reverendísimo padre Aconiti,
religiosos de una congregacion que ya no exîste, y los puso de acuerdo
á entrámbos dándome sus favores; pero me ví á peligro de ser
envenenado y excomulgado. Dexé á Roma muy satisfecho con la
arquitectura de San Pedro.

Viajé por Francia, donde reynaba á la sazon Luis el justo; y lo
primero que me preguntáron fué si queria para mi almuerzo un trozo del
mariscal de Ancre, que habia asado la gente, y le vendian muy barato á
los que querian comprar su carne para regalarse.

Era este estado un continuo teatro de guerras civiles, unas veces por
una plaza en el consejo, y otras por dos páginas de controversias
teológicas. Mas de sesenta años hacia que estaban asolados estos
hermosos climas por este volcan que unas veces se amortiguaba, y otras
ardia con violencia; y eso eran las libertades de la iglesia galicana.
¡Ay! dixe, este pueblo es de natural apacible: ¿quién le ha sacado así
de su índole? Dice chufletas, y hace el degüello de San Bartolomé.
¡Venturoso tiempo aquel en que no haga mas que decir donayres!

Pasé á Inglaterra, donde las mismas contiendas ocasionaban los mismos
horrores. Unos santos católicos, en obsequio de la iglesia, habian
determinado volar con pólvora el rey, la familia real, y todo el
parlamento, y librar la Inglaterra de tanto herege. Enseñáronme el
sitio donde habia hecho quemar á mas de quinientos de sus vasallos la
bienaventurada reyna María, hija de Henrique octavo; y me aseguró un
clérigo hiberno que fué accion de mucho mérito para con Dios: lo
primero porque los quemados eran todos ingleses, y lo segundo porque
nunca tomaban agua bendita, ni creían en la cueva de San Patricio;
pasmándose de que aun no hubiesen canonizado á la reyna María, bien
que abrigaba la esperanza de que no se tardaria en ponerla en los
altares, así que tuviera un poco de lugar el cardenal nepote.

Fuíme á Holanda, donde esperaba encontrar mas sosiego en un pueblo mas
flemático. Quando llegué á La Haya, estaban cortando la cabeza á un
anciano venerable, y era la cabeza calva del primer ministro
Barnevelt. Movido á compasion, pregunté qué delito era el suyo, y si
habia sido traydor al estado. Mucho peor que eso, me respondió un
predicante de capa negra; que es hombre que cree que puede uno
salvarse por sus buenas obras lo mismo que por la fé: y bien veis que
si se acreditaran semejantes opiniones, no podria subsistir la
república; por eso es menester leyes severas para poner freno á
escándalos tan horrorosos. Díxome luego suspirando un político
profundo: ¡Ha, señor! este buen tiempo no ha de durar siempre; este
pueblo se muestra tan zeloso por mero acaso: su verdadero carácter se
inclina al abominable dogma de la tolerancia, y un dia le abrazará;
cosa que me estremece. Yo empero, miéntras no llegaba esta fatal época
de indulgencia y moderacion, dexé á toda priesa un pais donde ningun
contento templaba su severidad, y me embarqué para España.

Estaba la corte en Sevilla, habian llegado los galeones, y en la mas
hermosa estacion del año todo respiraba abundancia y alegría. Al cabo
de una calle de naranjos y limones, ví un palenque inmenso rodeado de
gradas cubiertas de preciosos texidos. Baxo un soberbio dosel estaban
el rey, la reyna, los infantes y las infantas. Enfrente de la augusta
familia habia un trono todavía mas alto. Dixe, volviéndome á uno de
mis compañeros de viage: Como no esté aquel trono reservado para Dios,
no sé para quien pueda ser. Oyó un grave Español estas imprudentes
palabras, y me saliéron caras. Yo me figuraba que íbamos á ver un
torneo ó una corrida de toros, quando subió el Inquisidor general al
trono, y desde él bendixo al monarca y al pueblo.

Vino luego un exército de frayles en filas de dos en dos, blancos,
negros, pardos, calzados, descalzos, con barba, imberbes, con capilla
puntiaguda, y sin capilla; iba luego el verdugo; y detras, en medio de
alguaciles y duques, cerca de quarenta personas cubiertas con sacos
donde habia llamas y diablos pintados. Eran estos, ó judíos que se
habian empeñado en no renegar de Moisés, ó cristianos que se habían
casado con sus comadres, ó no habian sido devotos de Nuestra Señora de
Atocha, ó no habian querido dar dinero á los padres capuchinos.
Cantáronse unas devotísimas oraciones, y luego fuéron quemados vivos,
á fuego lento, todos los reos; con lo qual quedó muy edificada la
familia real.

Aquella noche, quando me iba á meter en la cama, entráron dos
familiares de la inquisicion, acompañados de una ronda bien armada;
diéronme un cariñoso abrazo, y me lleváron, sin hablarme palabra, á un
calabozo muy fresco, donde habia una esterilla para acostarse, y un
soberbio crucifixo. Aquí estuve seis semanas, pasadas las quales me
mandó á pedir por favor el señor inquisidor que me viese con él.
Estrechóme en sus brazos con paternal cariño, y me dixo que sentia muy
de veras que estuviese tan mal alojado, pero que estaban ocupados
todos los quartos de aquella santa casa, y que esperaba otra vez darme
mejor habitacion. Preguntóme luego con no ménos amor, si sabia porque
estaba allí. Respondí al varon santo, que sin duda por mis pecados.
Eso es, hijo mió: ¿pero por qué pecados? habladme sin rezelo. Por mas
que me mataba, no atinaba, hasta que la caridad del piadoso inquisidor
me dió alguna luz. Acordéme al fin de mis imprudentes palabras, y no
fuí condenado mas que á exercicios, la disciplina, y treinta mil
reales de multa. Lleváronme á dar las gracias al inquisidor general,
sugeto muy afable, que me preguntó que tal me habia parecido su
fiesta. Rospondíle que era deliciosísima, y fui á dar priesa á mis
compañeros á que saliésemos del pais, puesto que es tan ameno. Habian
estos tenido lugar para informarse de todas las grandes proezas
executadas por los Españoles en obsequio de la religion, y leido las
memorias del célebre obispo de Chiapa, donde cuenta que degolláron,
quemáron ó ahogáron unos diez millones de idólatras Americanos por
convertirlos á nuestra santa fé. Bien creo que pondera algo el obispo;
pero aunque se rebaxe la mitad de las víctimas, todavía queda
acreditado un zelo portentoso.

Atormentábame sin cesar el ardor de viajar, y estaba resuelto á
concluir mi peregrinacion de Europa por la Turquía. Encaminéme á esta,
con firme propósito de no decir otra vez mi parecer acerca de las
fiestas que viese. Estos Turcos, dixe á mis compañeros, son unos
paganos que no han recibido el santo bautismo, y sin duda han de ser
mas crueles que los santos inquisidores; callémonos pues, miéntras
vivamos entre Moros.

Con este ánimo iba; pero quedé atónito al ver en Turquía muchos mas
templos cristianos que en la isla donde habia nacido, y hasta crecidas
congregaciones de frayles, á quienes dexaban en paz rezar á la virgen
María, y maldecir á Mahoma, unos en griego, otros en latin, y otros en
armenio. ¡Qué honrada gente son los Turcos! exclamé. Los cristianos
griegos y los latinos eran irreconciliables enemigos en
Constantinopla, y se perseguían estos esclavos unos á otros como
perros que se muerden en la calle, y que separan á palos sus amos.
Entónces el gran visir protegia á los Griegos: el patriarca griego me
acusó de que habia cenado con el patriarca latino, y fui condenado por
el diván á cien palos en la planta de los pies, que rescaté á precio
de quinientos zequíes. Al otro dia ahorcáron al gran visir; y al
tercero su sucesor, que no fue ahorcado hasta de allí á un mes, me
condenó á la misma multa por haber cenado con el patriarca griego: de
suerte que me ví en la triste precision de no freqüentar la iglesia
griega ni la latina. Por consolarme arrendé una hermosa circasiana,
que era la mas cariñosa persona á solas con un hombre, y la mas devota
en la mezquita. Una noche, entre los suaves gustos de amor, exclamó
dándome un abrazo: _Alah, Ilah, Aláh_, que son las palabras
sacramentales de los Turcos; yo pensé que fuesen las del amor, y dixe
con mucho cariño: _Aláh, Ilah, Aláh_. Ha, dixo la mora, loado sea Dios
misericordioso; ya sois Turco. Respondíle que daba las gracias al
Señor que me habia dado fuerza para serlo, y creí que era muy dichoso.
Por la mañana vino á circuncidarme el iman; y poniendo yo alguna
dificultad, me propuso el cadí del barrio, hombre de buena
composicion, que me mandaria empalar. Por fin libré mi prepucio y mi
trasero por mil zequíes, y me escapé corriendo á Persia, resuelto á no
oir en Turquía misa griega ni latina, y á no decir nunca _Aláh, Ilah,
Aláh_ en los ratos de los gustos de amor.

Así que llegué á Ispahan, me preguntáron si era del partido del
carnero negro ó del carnero blanco. Respondí que lo mismo me daba uno
que otro, con tal que fuera tierno. Se ha de notar que todavía estaba
dividida la Persia en dos facciones, la del carnero negro y la del
blanco. Creyéron que hacia yo burla de ámbos partidos, y me encontré
en un terrible compromiso á la puerta misma de la ciudad, del qual
salí pagando una buena cantidad de zequíes, por no tener que ver con
carneros.

No paré hasta la China, donde llegué con un intérprete que me dixo que
era el pais donde se podia vivir alegre y libre: los Tártaros que le
habian invadido todo lo ponian á sangre y fuego, miéntras que los
reverendos padres jesuitas por una parte, y los reverendos padres
domínicos por otra, decian que ganaban almas para el cielo, sin que
nadie lo advirtiese. Nunca se han visto convertidores mas zelosos;
unos á otros se perseguían con el mas fervoroso ahinco, escribian á
Roma tomos enteros de calumnias, y se trataban de infieles y
prevaricadores por un alma. Habia entre ellos una horrorosa disputa
acerca del modo de hacer la cortesía; los jesuitas querian que los
Chinos saludaran á sus padres y madres á la moda de la China, y los
domínicos que fuera á la moda de Roma. Sucedióme que los jesuítas
creyéron que yo era un domínico, y le dixéron á Su Magestad Tártara
que era espía del Papa. Dió comision el consejo supremo á un primer
mandarín para que me arrestara; el qual mandó á un alguacil, que tenia
á sus órdenes quatro corchetes, que me prendiesen, y me atasen con
toda ceremonia. Conduxéronme, despues de ciento y quarenta
genuflexîones, ante Su Magestad, que me preguntó si era yo espía del
Papa, y si era cierto que hubiese de venir este príncipe en persona á
destronarle. Respondíle que el Papa era un clérigo de mas de setenta
años; que distaban sus estados mas de quatro mil leguas de los de su
Sacra Magestad Tártaro-China; que su exército era de dos mil soldados
que montaban la guardia con un para-aguas; que no destronaba á nadie,
y que podia Su Magestad dormir sin miedo. Esta fué la ménos fatal
aventura de mi vida, pues no hiciéron mas que enviarme á Macao, donde
me embarqué para Europa.

Fué preciso calafatear el navío en la costa de Golconda, y me
aproveché de la oportunidad para ver la corte del gran Aurengzeb, de
quien se contaban entónces mil portentos. Estaba este monarca en Deli,
y gocé el gusto imponderable de contemplarle facha á facha el dia de
la pomposa ceremonia en que recibió la celestial dádiva que le enviaba
el cherif de la Meca, y era la escoba con que se habia barrido la
santa casa, la _caaba_, la _belh-Alah_: escoba que es el símbolo que
alimpia todas las suciedades del alma. Parece que no la necesitaba
Aurengzeb, que era el varon mas religioso de todo el Indostan, puesto
que habia degollado á uno de sus hermanos, y dado veneno á su padre, y
habia hecho perecer en un patíbulo á veinte rajaes y otros tantos
omraes; pero no queria decir eso nada, y no se hablaba de otra cosa
que de su devocion, á la qual la de ningun otro era comparable, como
no fuese la de la sacra magestad, del serenísimo emperador de
Marruecos, Mulcy Ismael, el qual cortaba unas quantas cabezas todos
los viernes, despues de hacer oracion.

No articulé yo palabra, que me habian escarmentado los viages, y sabia
que no era juez competente para fallar entre estos dos augustos
soberanos. Confieso empero que un francés mozo, con quien estaba
alojado, faltó al respeto debido á los emperadores de Indias y de
Marruceos, diciendo con mucha imprudencia que en Europa habia
soberanos muy píos que gobernaban con acierto sus estados, y
freqüentaban tambien las iglesias, sin quitar por eso la vida á sus
padres y hermanos, ni cortar la cabeza á sus vasallos. Nuestro
intérprete dio cuenta en lengua india de las expresiones impías de
este mozo. Instruido yo con lo que en otras ocasiones me habia
sucedido, mandé ensillar mis camellos, y me fui con el francés. Luego
supe que aquella misma noche habian venido á prendernos los oficiales
del gran Aurengzeb; y no habiendo encontrado mas que al intérprete,
fue este ajusticiado en la plaza mayor, confesando sin lisonja todos
los palaciegos que era muy justa su muerte.

Quedábame por ver la Africa para disfrutar de todas las delicias de
nuestro hemisferio, y con efecto la ví. Unos corsarios negros
apresaron mi embarcacion. Quejóse amargamente mi patron, y les
preguntó por qué violaban las leyes de las naciones. Fuéle respondido
por el capitán negro: Vuestra nariz es larga, y la nuestra chata;
vuestro cabello es liso, y nuestra lana riza; vuestra cutis es de
color ceniciento, y la nuestra de color de ébano; por consiguiente, en
virtud de las sacrosantas leyes de naturaleza, siempre debemos ser
enemigos. En las ferias de Guinea nos compráis, como si fuéramos
acémilas, para forzarnos á que trabajemos en no sé qué faenas tan
penosas como ridiculas; á vergajazos nos haceis horadar los montes
para sacar una especie de polvo amarillo que para nada es bueno, y que
no vale, ni con mucha, un cebollino de Egipto. Así quando os
encontramos nosotros, y podemos mas, os obligamos á que labreis
nuestras tierras, y de lo contrario os cortamos las narices y las
orejas.

No habia réplica á tan discreto razonamiento. Fuí á labrar el campo de
una negra vieja por conservar mis orejas y mi nariz, y al cabo de un
año me rescatáron. Habiendo visto todo quanto bueno, hermoso y
admirable hay en la tierra, me determiné á no ver mas que mis dioses
penates: me casé en mi pais, fuí cornudo, y ví que era la mas grata
condicion de la vida humana.

_Fin de los viages de Escarmentado_.

       *       *      *       *       *




MICROMEGAS,

HISTORIA FILOSOFICA.

       *       *       *       *       *



CAPITULO PRIMERO.

_Viage de un morador del mundo de la estrella Sirio al planeta de
Saturno_.

Habia en uno de los planetas que giran en torno de la estrella llamada
Sirio, un mozo de mucho talento, á quien tuve la honra de conocer en
el postrer viage que hizo á nuestro mezquino hormiguero. Era su nombre
Micromegas, nombre que cae perfectamente á todo grande, y tenia ocho
leguas de alto; quiero decir veinte y quatro mil pasos geométricos de
cinco piés de rey.

Algún algebrista, casta de gente muy útil al público, tomará á este
paso de mi historia la pluma, y calculará que teniendo el Señor Don
Micromegas, morador del pais de Sirio, desde la planta de los piés al
colodrillo veinte y quatro mil pasos, que hacen ciento y veinte mil
piés de rey, y nosotros ciudadanos de la tierra no pasando por lo
común de cinco piés, y teniendo nuestro globo nueve mil leguas de
circunferencia, es absolutamente indispensable que el planeta dónde
nació nuestro héroe tenga cabalmente veinte y un millones y
seiscientas mil veces mas circunferencia que nuestra tierra. Pues no
hay cosa mas comun ni mas natural; y los estados de ciertos
principillos de Alemania ó de Italia, que pueden andarse en media
hora, comparados con la Turquía, la Rusia, ó la América española, son
una imágen, todavía muy distante de la realidad, de las diferencias
que ha establecido la naturaleza entre los seres.

Es la estatura de Su Excelencia la que llevamos dicha, de donde
colegirán todos nuestros pintores y escultores, que su cuerpo podia
tener unos cincuenta mil piés de rey de circunferencia, porque es muy
bien proporcionado. Su entendimiento es de los mas perspicaces que se
puedan ver; sabe una multitud de cosas, y algunas ha inventado: apénas
rayaba con los doscientos y cincuenta años, siendo estudiante en el
colegio de jesuitas de su planeta, como es allí estilo comun, adivinó
por la fuerza de su inteligencia mas de cincuenta proposiciones de
Euclides, que son diez y ocho mas que hizo Blas Pascal, el qual
habiendo adivinado, segun dice su hermana, treinta y dos jugando,
llegó á ser, andando los años, harto mediano geómetra, y malísimo
metafísico. De edad de quatrocientos y cincuenta años, que no hacia
mas que salir de la niñez, disecó unos insectos muy chicos que no
llegaban á cien piés de diámetro, y se escondían á los microscopios
ordinarios, y compuso acerca de ellos un libro muy curioso, pero que
le traxo no pocos disgustos. El muftí de su pais, no ménos cosquilloso
que ignorante, encontró en su libro proposiciones sospechosas,
mal-sonantes, temerarias, heréticas, _ó que olian á heregía_, y le
persiguió de muerte: tratábase de saber si la forma substancial de las
pulgas de Sirio era de la misma naturaleza que la de los caracoles.
Defendióse con mucha sal Micromegas; se declaráron las mugeres en su
favor, puesto que al cabo de doscientos y veinte años que habia durado
el pleyto, hizo el muftí condenar el libro por calificadores que ni le
habian leido, ni sabian leer, y fue desterrado de la corte el autor
por tiempo de ochocientos años.

No le afligió mucho el salir de una corte llena de enredos y chismes.
Compuso unas décimas muy graciosas contra el muftí, que á este no le
importáron un bledo, y se dedicó á viajar de planeta en planeta, para
acabar de perfeccionar su razon y su corazon, como dicen. Los que
están acostumbrados á caminar en coche de colleras, ó en silla de
posta, se pasmarán de los carruages de allá arriba, porque nosotros,
en nuestra pelota de cieno, no entendemos de otros estilos que los
nuestros. Sabia completamente las leyes de la gravitacion y de las
fuerzas atractivas y repulsivas nuestro caminante, y se valia de ellas
con tanto acierto, que ora montado en un rayo del sol, ora cabalgando
en un cometa, andaban de globo en globo él y sus sirvientes, lo mismo
que revolotea un paxarillo de rama en rama. En poco tiempo hubo
corrido la vía láctea; y siento tener que confesar que nunca pudo
columbrar, por entre las estrellas de que está sembrada, aquel
hermosísimo cielo empíreo, que con su anteojo de larga vista descubrió
el ilustre Derham, teniente cura [Footnote: Sabio Inglés, autor de la
Teología astronómica, y otras obras, en que se esfuerza á probar la
exîstencia de Dios por la contemplacion de las maravillas de la
naturaleza.]. No digo yo por eso que no le haya visto muy bien el
Señor Derham; Dios me libre de cometer tamaño yerro; mas al cabo
Micromegas se hallaba en el país, y era buen observador: yo no quiero
contradecir á nadie.

Despues de muchos viages llegó un dia Micromegas al globo de Saturno;
y si bien estaba acostumbrado á ver cosas nuevas, todavía le paró
confuso la pequeñez de aquel planeta y de sus moradores, y no pudo
ménos de soltar aquella sonrisa de superioridad que los mas cuerdos no
pueden contener á veces. Verdad es que no es Saturno mas grande que
novecientas veces la tierra, y los habitadores del pais son enanos de
unas dos mil varas, con corta diferencia, de estatura. Rióse al
principio de ellos con sus criados, como hace un músico italiano de la
música de Lulli, quando viene á Francia; mas era el Sirio hombre de
razon, y presto reconoció que podia muy bien un ser que piensa no
tener nada de ridículo, puesto que no pasara de seis mil piés su
estatura. Acostumbróse á los Saturninos, despues de haberlos pasmado,
y se hizo íntimo amigo del secretario de la academia de Saturno,
hombre de mucho talento, que á la verdad nada habia inventado, pero
que daba muy lindamente cuenta de las invenciones de los demas, y que
hacia regularmente coplas chicas y cálculos grandes. Pondré aquí, para
satisfaccion de mis lectores, una conversacion muy extraña que con el
señor secretario tuvo un dia Micromegas.



CAPITULO II.

_Conversacion del morador de Sirio con el de Saturno_.

Acostóse Su Excelencia, acercóse á su rostro el secretario, y dixo
Micromegas: Confesemos que es muy varia la naturaleza. Verdad es, dixo
el Saturnino; es la naturaleza como un jardin, cuyas flores.... Ha,
dixo el otro, dexaos de jardinerías. Pues es, siguió el secretario,
como una reunion de rubias y pelinegras, cuyos atavíos..... ¿Qué me
importan vuestras pelinegras? interrumpió el otro. O bien como una
galería de quadros, cuyas imágenes...... No, Señor, no, replicó el
caminante, la naturaleza es como la naturaleza. ¿A qué diablos andais
buscando esas comparaciones? Por recrearos, respondió el secretario.
Si no quiero yo que me recreen, lo que quiero es que me instruyan,
repuso el caminante. Decidme lo primero quantos sentidos tienen los
hombres de vuestro globo. Nada mas que setenta y dos, dixo el
académico, y todos los dias nos lamentamos de tanta escasez; que
nuestra imaginacion se dexa atras nuestras necesidades, y nos parece
que con nuestros setenta y dos sentidos, nuestro anulo, y nuestras
cinco lunas, no tenemos lo suficiente; y es cierto que no obstante
nuestra mucha curiosidad y las pasiones que de nuestros setenta y dos
sentidos son hijas, nos sobra tiempo para aburrirnos. Bien lo creo,
dixo Micromegas, porque en nuestro globo tenemos cerca de mil
sentidos, y todavía nos quedan no sé qué vagos deseos, no sé qué
inquietud, que sin cesar nos avisa que somos chica cosa, y que hay
otros seres mucho mas perfectos. He hecho algunos viages, y he visto
otros mortales muy inferiores á nosotros, y otros que nos son muy
superiores; mas ningunos he visto que no tengan mas deseos que
verdaderas necesidades, y mas necesidades que satisfacciones. Acaso
llegaré un dia á un pais donde nada haga falta, pero hasta ahora no he
podido saber del tal pais. Echáronse entónces á formar conjeturas el
Saturnino y el Sirio; pero despues de muchos raciocinios no ménos
ingeniosos que inciertos, fué forzoso volver á sentar hechos. ¿Quanto
tiempo vivís? dixo el Sirio. Ha, muy poco, replicó el hombrecillo de
Saturno. Lo mismo sucede en nuestro pais, dixo el Sirio, siempre nos
estamos quejando de la cortedad de la vida. Menester es que sea esta
universal pension de la naturaleza. ¡Ay! nuestra vida, dixo el
Saturnino, se ciñe á quinientas revoluciones solares (que vienen á ser
quince mil años, ó cerca de ellos, contando como nosotros). Ya veis
que eso casi es morirse así que uno nace: es nuestra exîstencia un
punto, nuestra vida un momento, nuestro globo un átomo; y apénas
empieza uno á instruirse algo, quando le arrebata la muerte, ántes de
adquirir experiencia. Yo por mí no me atrevo á formar proyecto
ninguno, y me encuentro como la gota de agua en el inmenso océano; y
lo que mas sonroxo me causa en vuestra presencia, es contemplar quan
ridícula figura hago en este mundo. Replicóle Micromegas: Si no
fuérais filósofo, tendria, rezelo de desconsolaros, diciéndoos que es
nuestra vida setecientas veces mas dilatada que la vuestra; pero bien
sabeis que quando se ha de restituir el cuerpo á los elementos, y
reanimar baxo distinta forma la naturaleza, que es lo que llaman
morir; quando es llegado, digo, este momento de metamorfósis, poco
importa haber vivido una eternidad ó un dia solo, que uno y otro es lo
mismo. Yo he estado en paises donde viven las gentes mil veces mas que
en el mio, y he visto que todavía se quejaban; pero en todas partes se
encuentran sugetos de razon, que saben resignarse, y dar gracias al
autor de la naturaleza, el qual con una especie de maravillosa
uniformidad ha esparcido en el universo las variedades con una
profusion infinita. Así por exemplo, todos los seres que piensan son
diferentes, y todos se parecen en el don de pensar y desear. En todas
partes es la materia extensa, pero en cada globo tiene propiedades
distintas. ¿Quantas de estas propiedades tiene vuestra materia? Si
hablais de las propiedades sin las quales creemos que no pudiera
subsistir nuestro globo como él es, dixo el Saturnino, no pasan de
trescientas, conviene á saber la extension, la impenetrabilidad, la
mobililad, la gravitacion, la divisibilidad, etc. Sin duda, replicó el
caminante, que basta ese corto número para el plan del criador en
vuestra estrecha habitacion, y en todas cosas adoro su sabiduría,
porque si en todas veo diferencias, tambien contemplo en todas
proporciones. Vuestro globo es chico, y tambien lo son sus moradores;
teneis pocas sensaciones, y goza vuestra materia de pocas propiedades:
todo eso es disposicion de la Providencia. ¿De qué color es vuestro
sol bien exâminado? Blanquecino muy ceniciento, dixo el Saturnino, y
quando dividimos uno de sus rayos, hallamos que tiene siete colores.
El nuestro tira á encarnado, dixo el Sirio, y tenemos treinta y nueve
colores primitivos. En todos quantos he exâminado, no he hallado un
sol que se parezca á otro, como no se vé en vuestro planeta una cara
que no se diferencie de todas las demás.

Despues de otras muchas qüestiones análogas, se informó de quantas
substancias distintas se conocian en Saturno, y le fué respondido que
habia hasta unas treinta: Dios, el espacio, la materia, los seres
extensos que sienten, los seres extensos que sienten y piensan, los
seres que piensan y no son extensos, los que se penetran, y los que no
se penetran, etc. El Sirio, en cuyo planeta hay trescientas, y que
habia en sus viages descubierto hasta tres mil, dexó  extraordina-
riamente asombrado al filósofo de Saturno. Finalmente, habiéndose
comunicado uno á otro casi todo quanto sabian y muchas cosas que no
sabian, y habiendo discurrido por espacio de toda una revolucion
solar, se determináron á hacer juntos un corto viage filosófico.



CAPITULO III.

_Viage de los dos habitantes de Sirio y Saturno_

Ya estaban para embarcarse nuestros dos caminantes en la atmósfera de
Saturno con muy decente provision de instrumentos de matemáticas,
quando la dama del Saturnino, que lo supo, le vino á dar amargas
quejas. Era esta una morenita muy agraciada, que no tenia mas que mil
y quinientas varas de estatura, pero que con sus gracias reparaba lo
chico de su cuerpo. ¡Ha cruel! exclamó, despues que te he resistido
mil y quinientos años, quando apénas me habia rendido, no habiendo
pasado arriba de cien años en tus brazos, ¡me abandonas por irte á
viajar con un gigante del otro mundo! Anda, que no eres mas que un
curioso, y nunca has estado enamorado; que si fueras Saturnino
legítimo, mas constante serias. ¿Adonde vas? ¿qué quieres? ménos
errantes son que tú nuestras cinco lunas, y ménos mudable nuestro
anulo. Esto se acabó; nunca mas he de querer. Abrazóla el filósofo,
lloró con ella, puesto que filósofo; y la dama, despues de haberse
desmayado, se fué á consolar con un petimetre.

Partiéronse nuestros dos curiosos, y saltáron primero al anulo que
encontráron muy aplastado, como lo ha adivinado un ilustre habitante
de nuestro glóbulo; y desde allí anduviéron de luna en luna. Pasó un
cometa por junto á la última, y se tiráron á él con sus sirvientes y
sus instrumentos. Apénas hubiéron andado ciento y cincuenta millones
de leguas, se topáron con los satélites de Júpiter. Apeáronse en este
planeta, donde se detuviéron un año, y aprendiéron secretos muy
curiosos, que se habrian dado á la imprenta, si no hubiese sido por
los señores inquisidores que han encontrado proposiciones algo duras
de tragar; pero yo logré leer el manuscrito en la biblioteca del
Ilustrísimo Señor Arzobispo de ... que me permitió registrar sus
libros, con toda la generosidad y bondad que á tan ilustre prelado
caracterizan.

Volvamos empero á nuestros caminantes. Al salir de Júpiter,
atravesáron un espacio de cerca de cien millones de leguas, y
costeáron el planeta Marte, el qual, como todos saben, es cinco veces
mas pequeño que nuestro glóbulo; y viéron dos lunas que sirven á este
planeta, y no han podido descubrir nuestros astrónomos. Bien sé que el
abate Ximenez escribirá con mucho donayre contra la existencia de
dichas lunas, mas yo apelo á los que discurren por analogía; todos
excelentes filósofos que saben muy bien que no le seria posible á
Marte vivir sin dos lunas á lo ménos, estando tan distante del sol.
Sea como fuere, á nuestros caminantes les pareció cosa tan chica, que
se temiéron no hallar posada cómoda, y pasáron adelante como hacen dos
caminantes quando topan con una mala venta en despoblado, y siguen
hasta el pueblo inmediato. Pero luego se arrepintiéron el Sirio y su
compañero, que anduviéron un largo espacio sin hallar albergue. Al
cabo columbráron una lucecilla, que era la tierra, y que pareció muy
mezquina cosa á gentes que venian de Júpiter. No obstante, rezelando
arrepentirse otra vez, se determináron á desembarcar en ella. Pasáron
á la cola del cometa, y hallando una aurora boreal á mano, se metiéron
dentro, y aportáron en tierra á la orilla septentrional del mar
Báltico, á cinco de Julio de mil setecientos treinta y siete.



CAPITULO IV.

_Que da cuenta de lo que les sucedió en el globo de la tierra_.

Habiendo descansado un poco, se almorzáron dos montañas que les
guisáron sus criados con mucho aseo. Quisiéron luego reconocer el
mezquino pais donde se hallaban, y se dirigiéron de Norte á Sur. Cada
paso ordinario del Sirio y su familia era de unos treinta mil piés de
rey: seguíale de léjos el enano de Saturno, que perdia el aliento,
porque tenia que dar doce pasos miéntras alargaba el otro la pierna,
casi como un perrillo faldero que sigue, si se me permite la
comparacion, á un capitán de guardias del rey de Prusia.

Como andaban de priesa estos extrangeros, diéron la vuelta al globo en
treinta y seis horas: verdad es que el sol, ó por mejor decir la
tierra, hace el mismo viage en un dia; pero hemos de reparar que es
cosa mas fácil girar sobre su exe que anclar á pié. Volviéron al cabo
al sitio donde etaban primero, habiendo visto la balsa, casi
imperceptible para ellos, que llaman el Mediterráneo, y el otro
estanque chico que con nombre de grande Océano rodea nuestra
madriguera; al enano le daba el agua á media pierna, y apénas si se
habia mojado el otro los talones. Fuéron y viniéron arriba y abaxo,
haciendo quanto podian por averiguar si estaba ó no habitado este
globo: baxáronse, acostáronse, tentáron por todas partes; pero eran
tan desproporcionados sus ojos y manos con los mezquinos seres que
andan arrastrando acá baxo, que no tuviéron la mas leve sensacion por
donde pudiesen caer en sospecha de que exîstimos nosotros y nuestros
hermanos los demas moradores de este globo.

El enano, que á veces fallaba con alguna precipitacion, decidió luego
que no habia vivientes en la tierra, y su razon primera fué que no
habia visto ninguno. Micromegas le dió á entender con mucha urbanidad,
que no era fundada la conseqüencia; porque, le dixo, con vuestros ojos
tan chicos no veis ciertas estrellas de quinquagésima magnitud, que
distingo yo con mucha claridad. ¿Colegis por eso que no haya tales
estrellas? Si lo he tentado todo, dixo el enano. ¿Y si no habeis
sentido lo que hay? dixo el otro. Si está tan mal compaginado este
globo, replicó el enano; si es tan irregular, y de una configuracion
que parece tan ridicula, que todo él se me figura un caos. ¿No veis
esos arroyuelos, que ninguno corre derecho; esos estanques que ni son
redondos, ni quadrados, ni ovalados, ni de figura regular ninguna;
todos esos granillos puntiagudos de que está erizado, y se me han
entrado en los piés? (y queria hablar de las montañas). ¿No notais la
forma de todo el globo, aplastado por los polos, y girando en torno
del sol con tan desconcertada direccion, que por necesidad los climas
de ámbos polos han de estar incultos? Lo que me fuerza á creer de
veras que no hay vivientes en él, es que ninguno que tuviese razon
querria habitarle. ¿Qué importa? dixo Micromegas, acaso no tienen
sentido comun los habitantes, pero al cabo no es de presumir que se
haya hecho esto sin algun fin. Decis que aquí todo os parece
irregular, porque está todo tirado á cordel en Júpiter y Saturno. Pues
por esa misma razon acaso hay aquí algo de confusion. ¿No os he dicho
ya que siempre habia notado variedad en mis viages? Replicó el
Saturnino á estas razones, y no se hubiera concluido la disputa, si en
el calor de ella no hubiese roto Micromegas el hilo de su collar de
diamantes, y caídose estos; que eran unos brillantes muy lindos,
aunque pequeñitos y desiguales, que los mas gruesos pesaban
quatrocientas libras, y cincuenta los mas menudos. Cogió el enano
algunos, y arrimándoselos á los ojos vió que del modo que estaban
abrillantados, eran microscopios excelentes: cogió pues un microscopio
chico de ciento y sesenta piés de diámetro, y se le aplicó á un ojo,
miéntras que se servia Micromegas de otro de dos mil y quinientos
piés. Al principio no viéron nada con ellos, puesto que eran
aventajados; fué preciso ponerse en la posicion que se requeria. Al
cabo vió el morador de Saturno una cosa imperceptible que se meneaba
entre dos aguas en el mar Báltico, y era una ballena: púsola
bonitamente encima del dedo, y colocándola en la uña del pulgar, se la
enseñó al Sirio, que por la segunda vez se echó á reir de la enorme
pequeñez de los moradores de nuestro globo. Convencido el Saturnino de
que estaba habitado nuestro mundo, se imaginó luego que solo por
ballenas lo estaba; y como era gran discurridor, quiso adivinar de
donde venia el movimiento á un átomo tan ruin, y si tenia ideas,
voluntad y libre albedrío. Micromegas no sabia que pensar; mas
habiendo exâminado con mucha paciencia el animal, sacó de su exâmen
que no podia residir un alma en cuerpo tan chico. Inclinábanse pues
nuestros dos caminantes á creer que no hay razon en nuestra
habitacion, quando, con el auxîlio del microscopio, distinguiéron otro
bulto mas grueso que una ballena, que en el mar Báltico andaba
fluctuando. Ya sabemos que hácia aquella época volvia del círculo
polar una bandada de filósofos, que habian ido á hacer observaciones
en que nadie hasta entónces habia pensado. Traxéron los papeles
públicos que habia zozobrado su embarcacion en las costas de Botnia, y
que les habia costado mucho trabajo el salir á salvamento; pero nunca
se sabe en este mundo lo que hay por debaxo de cuerda. Yo voy á contar
con ingenuidad el suceso, sin quitar ni añadir nada: esfuerzo que de
parte de un historiador es sobremanera meritorio.



CAPITULO V.

_Experiencias y raciocinios de ámbos caminantes_.

Tendió Micromegas con mucho tiento la mano al sitio donde se vía el
objeto, y alargando y encogiendo los dedos de miedo de equivocarse, y
abriéndolos luego y cerrándolos, agarró con mucha maña el navío donde
iban estos señores, y se le puso sobre la uña, sin apretarle mucho,
por no estruxarle. Hete aquí un animal muy distinto del otro, dixo el
enano de Saturno; y el Sirio puso el pretenso animal en la palma de la
mano. Los pasageros y marineros de la tripulacióon, que se creían
arrebatados por un huracán, y que pensaban haber barado en un baxío,
estan todos en movimiento; cogen los marineros toneles de vino, los
tiran á la mano de Micromegas, y ellos se tiran despues; agarran los
geómetras de sus quartos de círculo, sus sectores, y sus muchachas
laponas, y se apean en los dedos del Sirio: por fin tanto se afanáron,
que sintió que se meneaba una cosa que le escarabajeaba en los dedos,
y era un garrote con un hierro á la punta que le clavaban hasta un pié
en el dedo índice: esta picazon le hizo creer que habia salido algo
del cuerpo del animalejo que en la mano tenia; mas no pudo sospechar
al principio otra cosa, pues su microscopio, que apénas bastaba para
distinguir un navío de una ballena, no podia hacer visible un
entecillo tan imperceptible como un hombre. No quiero zaherir aquí la
vanidad de ninguno; pero ruego á la gente vanagloriosa que paren la
consideracion en este lugar, y contemplen que suponiendo la estatura
ordinaria de un hombre de cinco piés de rey, no hacemos mas bulto en
la tierra que el que en una bola de diez piés de circunferencia
hiciera un animal que tuviese un seiscientos mil avos de pulgada de
alto. Figurémonos una substancia que pudiera llevar el globo
terraqúüeo en la mano, y que tuviese órganos análogos á los nuestros,
y es cosa muy factible que haya muchas de estas substancias; y
colijamos que es lo que de las funciones de guerra, en que hemos
ganado dos ó tres lugarejos que luego ha sido fuerza restituir,
pensarian.

No me queda duda de que si algun capitán de granaderos leyere esta
obra, haga á su tropa que se ponga gorras dos piés mas altas; pero le
advierto que, por mas que haga, siempre serán él y sus soldados unos
infinitamente pequeños.

¡Qué maravillosa maña hubo de necesitar nuestro filósofo de Sirio para
atinar á columbrar los átomos de que acabo de hablar! Quando
Leuwenhoek y Hartsoeker viéron, ó creyéron que vian, por la vez
primera, la simiente de que somos formados, no fué, ni con mucho, tan
asombroso su descubrimiento. ¡Qué gusto el de Micromegas quando vió
estas maquinillas menearse, quando examinó sus movimientos todos, y
siguió todas sus operaciones! ¡Cómo clamaba! ¡con qué júbilo alargó á
su compañero de viage uno de sus microscopios! Viéndolos estoy, decian
ámbos juntos; contemplad como se cargan, como se baxan y se alzan. Así
decian, y les temblaban las manos de gozo de ver objetos tan nuevos, y
de temor de perderlos de vista. Pasando el Saturnino de un extremo de
confianza al opuesto de credulidad, se figuró que los estaba viendo
ocupados en la propagacion. Ha, dixo el Saturnino, cogida tengo la
naturaleza "con las manos en la masa." Engañábanle empero las
apariencias, y así sucede muy freqüentemente, quando uno usa y quando
no usa microscopios.



CAPITULO VI.

_De lo que les aconteció con unos hombres_.

Muy mejor observador Micromegas que su enano, vió claramente que se
hablaban los átomos, y se lo hizo notar á su compañero, el qual con la
vergüenza de haberse engañado acerca del artículo de la generacion, no
quiso creer que semejante especie de bichos se pudieran comunicar
ideas. Tenia el don de lenguas no ménos que el Sirio; y no oyendo
hablar á nuestros átomos, suponia que no hablaban: y luego ¿cómo
habian de tener los órganos de la voz unos entes tan imperceptibles,
ni qué se habian de decir? Para hablar es indispensable pensar; y si
pensaban, tenian algo que equivalia al alma: y atribuir una cosa
equivalente al alma á especie tan ruin, se le hacia mucho disparate.
Díxole el Sirio: ¿Pues no creíais, poco hace, que se estaban
enamorando? ¿pensais que enamora nadie sin pensar, y sin hablar
palabra, ó á lo ménos sin darse á entender? ¿ó suponeis que es cosa
mas fácil hacer un chiquillo que un silogismo? A mí uno y otro me
parecen impenetrables misterios. No me atrevo ya, dixo el enano, á
creer ni á negar cosa ninguna; procuremos examinar estos insectos, y
discurrirémos luego. ¡Que me place! respondió Micromegas; y sacando
unas tixeras, se cortó las uñas, y con lo que cortó de la uña de su
dedo pulgar hizo al punto una especie de bocina grande, como un embudo
inmenso, y puso el cañon al oido: la circunferencia del embudo cogia
el navío y toda su tripulacion, y la mas débil voz se introducia en
las fibras circulares de la uña, de suerte que, merced de su
industria, el filósofo de allá arriba oyó perfectamente el zumbido de
nuestros insectos de acá abaxo, y en pocas horas logró distinguir las
palabras, y entender al cabo el francés. Lo mismo hizo el enano,
aunque no con tanta facilidad. Crecia por puntos el asombro de los dos
viageros, al oir unos aradores hablar con bastante razon, y les
parecia inexplicable este juego de la naturaleza. Bien se discurre que
se morian el enano y el Sirio de deseos de entablar conversacion con
los átomos; mas se temia el enano que su tenante voz, y mas aun la de
Micromegas, atronara á los aradores sin que la oyesen. Tratáron, pues
de disminuir su fuerza, y para ello se pusiéron en la boca unos
mondadientes muy menudos, cuya punta muy afilada iba á parar junto al
navío. Puso el Sirio al enano sobre sus rodillas, y encima de una uña
el navío con la tripulacion; baxó la cabeza y habló muy quedo, y
despues de todas estas precauciones y otras muchas mas, dixo lo
siguiente: Invisibles insectos que la diestra del Criador se plugo en
producir en el abismo de los infinitamente pequeños, yo le bendigo
porque se dignó manifestarme impenetrables secretos. Acaso nadie se
dignará de miraros en mi corte, pero yo á nadie desprecio, y os brindo
con mi proteccion.

Si ha habido asombros en el mundo, ninguno ha llegado al de los que
estas razones oyéron decir, sin poder atinar de donde salian. Rezó el
capellan las preces de conjuros, votáron y renegáron los marineros, y
fraguáron un sistema los filósofos del navío; pero, por mas sistemas
que imagináron, no les fué posible atinar quien era el que les
hablaba. Entónces les contó en breves palabras el enano de Saturno,
que tenia ménos recia la voz que Micromegas, con que gente estaban
hablando, y su viage de Saturno: les informó de quien era el señor
Micromegas, y habiéndose compadecido de que fueran tan chicos, les
preguntó si habian vivido siempre en un estado tan rayano de la nada,
y qué era lo que hacian en un globo que al parecer era peculio de
ballenas; si eran dichosos, si tenian alma, si multiplicaban, y otras
mil preguntas de este jaez.

Enojado de que dudasen si tenia alma, un raciocinador de la banda, mas
osado que los demas, observó al interlocutor con unas pínulas
adaptadas á un quarto de círculo, midió dos triángulos, y al tercero
le dixo así: ¿Con que creeis, señor caballero, que porque teneis dos
mil varas de piés á cabeza, sois algun?... ¡Dos mil varas! exclamó el
enano, pues no se equivoca ni en una pulgada. ¡Con que me ha medido
este átomo! ¡con que es geómetra, y sabe mi tamaño; y yo que no le
puedo ver sin auxîlio de un microscopio, no sé aun el suyo! Si, que os
he medido, dixo el físico, y tambien mediré al gigante compañero
vuestro. Admitióse la propuesta, y se acostó Su Excelencia por el
suelo, porque estando en pié su cabeza era muy mas alta que las nubes;
y nuestros filósofos le plantáron un árbol muy grande en cierto sitio
que Torres ó Quevedo hubiera nombrado por su nombre, pero que yo no me
atrevo á mentar, por el mucho respeto que tengo á las damas; y luego
por una serie de triángulos, conexôs unos con otros, coligiéron que la
persona que median era un mancebito de ciento y veinte mil piés de
rey.

Prorumpió entónces Micromegas en estas razones: Ya veo que nunca se
han de juzgar las cosas por su aparente magnitud. O Dios, que diste la
inteligencia á unas substancias que tan despreciables parecen, lo
infinitamente pequeño no cuesta mas á tu omnipotencia que lo
infinitamente grande; y si es dable que haya otros seres mas chicos
que estos, acaso tendrán una inteligencia superior á la de aquellos
inmensos animales que he visto en el cielo, y que con un pié cubririan
el globo entero donde ahora me encuentro.

Respondióle uno de los filósofos que bien podia creer, sin que le
quedase duda, que habia seres inteligentes mucho mas chicos que el
hombre, y le contó, no las fábulas que nos ha dexado Virgilio sobre
las abejas, sino lo que Swammerdam ha descubierto, y lo que ha
disecado Reaumur. Instruyóle luego de que hay animales que son, con
respecto á las abejas, lo que son las abejas con respecto al hombre, y
lo que era el Sirio propio con respecto á aquellos animales tan
corpulentos de que hablaba, y lo que son estos grandes animales con
respecto á otras substancias ante las quales parecen imperceptibles
átomos. Poco á poco fué haciéndose interesante la conversacion, y dixo
así Micromegas.



CAPITULO VII.

_Conversacion con los hombres_.

O átomos inteligentes, en quien se plugo el eterno Ser en manifestar
su arte y su potencia, sin duda que en vuestro globo disfrutais
contentos purísimos; pues teniendo tan poca materia y pareciendo todos
espíritu, debeis emplear vuestra vida en amar y pensar, que es la
verdadera vida de los espíritus. En parte ninguna he visto la
verdadera felicidad, mas estoy cierto de que esta es su mansion.
Encogiéronse de hombros al oir este razonamiento los filósofos todos;
y mas ingenuo uno de ellos confesó sinceramente que, exceptuando un
cortísimo número de moradores poquisimo apreciados, todo lo demas es
una cáfila de locos, de perversos y desdichados. Mas materia tenemos,
dixo, de la que es menester para obrar mal, si procede el mal de la
materia, y mas inteligencia, si proviene de la inteligencia. ¿Sabeis
por exemplo que á la hora esta cien mil locos de nuestra especie, que
llevan sombreros, estan matando á otros cien mil animales cubiertos de
un turbante, ó muriendo á sus manos, y que así es estilo en toda la
tierra, de tiempo inmemorial acá? Horrorizóse el Sirio, y preguntó el
motivo de tan horribles contiendas entre animalejos tan ruines.
Trátase, dixo el filósofo, de unos pedacillos de tierra tamaños como
vuestro pié, y no porque ni uno de los millones de hombres que pierden
la vida solicite un terron siquiera de dicho pedazo; que se trata de
saber si ha de pertenecer á cierto hombre que llaman Sultan, ó á otro
que apellidan César, no sé por qué. Ninguno de los dos ha visto ni
verá nunca el rinconcillo de tierra que está en litigio; ni ménos casi
ninguno de los animales que recíprocamente se asesinan ha visto
tampoco al animal por quien asesina.

¡Desventurados! exclamó indignado el Sirio: ¿cómo es posible imaginar
tan furioso frenesí? Arranques me vienen de dar tres pasos, y con tres
patadas estruxar todo ese hormiguero de ridículos asesinos. No os
toméis ese trabajo, le respondiéron, que sobrado se afanan ellos en
labrar su ruina. Sabed que dentro de diez años no quedará en vida el
diezmo de estos miserables; y que, aun sin sacar la espada, casi todos
se los lleva la hambre, la fatiga, ó la destemplanza, aparte de que no
son ellos los que merecen castigo, sino los ociosos despiadados, que
metidos en su gabinete mandan, miéntras digieren la comida, degollar
un millon de hombres, y dan luego solemnes acciones de gracias á Dios.
Sentíase el caminante movido á piedad del mezquino linage humano, en
el qual tantas contradicciones descubria. Siendo vosotros, dixo á
estos señores, del corto número de sabios que sin duda á nadie matan
por dinero, os ruego que me digais quales son vuestras ocupaciones.
Disecamos moscas, respondió el filósofo, medimos líneas, combinamos
números, estamos conformes acerca de dos ó tres puntos que entendemos,
y divididos sobre dos ó tres mil que no entendemos. Ocurrióles al
Sirio y al Saturnino hacer preguntas á los átomos pensadores, para
saber sobre qué estaban acordes. ¿Qué distancia hay, dixo este, desde
la estrella de la Canícula hasta la grande de Géminis? Respondiéronle
todos juntos: Treinta y dos grados y medio.--¿Quanto dista de aquí la
luna?--Sesenta semi-diámetros de la tierra.--¿Quanto pesa vuestro
ayre? Creía haberlos cogido; pero todos le dixéron que pesaba
novecientas veces ménos que el mismo volumen del agua mas ligera, y
diez y nueve mil veces ménos que el oro. Atónito el enanillo de
Saturno con sus respuestas, estaba tentado á creer que eran mágicos
aquellos mismos á quienes un quarto de hora ántes les habia negado la
inteligencia.

Díxoles finalmente Micromegas: Una vez que tan puntualmente sabeis lo
que hay fuera de vosotros, sin duda que mejor todavía sabréis lo que
hay dentro: decidme pues qué cosa es vuestra alma, y cómo se forman
vuestras ideas. Los filósofos habláron todos á la par, como ántes,
pero todos fuéron de distinto parecer. Citó el mas anciano á
Aristóteles, otro pronunció el nombre de Descartes, este el de
Malebranche, aquel el de Leibnitz, y el de Locke otro. El anciano
peripatético dixo con toda confianza: El alma es una _entelechîa_, una
razon en virtud de la qual tiene la potencia de ser lo que es; así lo
dice expresamente Aristóteles, pág. 633 de la edicion del Louvre:
_Entelexeia esti_, etc. No entiendo el griego, dixo el gigante. Ni yo
tampoco, respondió el arador filosófico. ¿Pues á qué citais, replicó
el Sirio, á ese Aristóteles en griego? Porque lo que uno no entiende,
repuso el sabio, lo ha de citar en lengua que no sabe.

Tomó el hilo el cartesiano, y dixo: Es el alma un espíritu puro que en
el vientre de su madre ha recibido todas las ideas metafísicas, y que
así que sale de él se vé precisada á ir á la escuela, y aprender de
nuevo lo que tan bien sabia y que nunca volverá á saber. Pues estás
medrado, respondió el animal de ocho leguas, con que supiera tanto tu
alma quando estabas en el vientre de tu madre, si habia de ser tan
ignorante quando fueras tú hombre con barba. ¿Y qué entiendes por
espíritu? ¿Qué es lo que me preguntais? dixo el discurridor, no tengo
idea ninguna de él: dicen que lo que no es materia.--¿Y sabes lo que
es materia? Eso sí, respondió el hombre. Esa piedra por exemplo es
parda, y de tal figura, tiene tres dimensiones, y es grave y
divisible. Así es, dixo el Sirio; ¿pero esa cosa que te parece
divisible, grave y parda, me dirás qué es? Algunos atributos vés, pero
¿el sosten de estos atributos le conoces? No, dixo el otro. Luego no
sabes qué cosa sea la materia.

Dirigiéndose entónces el señor Micromegas á otro sabio que encima de
su dedo pulgar tenia, le preguntó qué era su alma, y qué hacia. Cosa
ninguna, respondió el filósofo malebranchista; Dios es quien lo hace
todo por mí; en él lo veo todo, en él lo hago todo, y él es quien todo
lo hace sin cooperacion mia. Tanto monta no exîstir, replicó el
filósofo de Sirio. ¿Y tú, amigo, le dixo á un leibniziano que allí
estaba, qué dices? ¿qué es tu alma? Un puntero de relox, dixo el
leibniziano, que señala las horas miéntras las toca mi cuerpo; ó bien,
si os parece, el alma las toca miéntras el cuerpo las señala; ó mi
alma es el espejo del universo, y mi cuerpo el marco del espejo: todo
esto es claro.

Estábalos oyendo un sectario de Locke, y quando le tocó hablar, dixo:
Yo no sé como pienso, lo que sé es que nunca he pensado como no sea
por medio de mis sentidos. Que haya substancias inmateriales é
inteligentes, no pongo duda; pero que no pueda Dios comunicar la
inteligencia á la materia, eso lo dudo mucho. Respeto el eterno poder,
y sé que no me compete limitarle; no afirmo nada, y me ciño á creer
que hay muchas mas cosas posibles de lo que se piensa.

Sonrióse el animal de Sirio, y le pareció que no era este el ménos
cuerdo; y si no hubiera sido por la mucha desproporcion, hubiera dado
un abrazo el enano de Saturno al sectario de Locke. Por desgracia se
encontraba en la banda, un animalucho con un bonete en la cabeza, que
cortando el hilo á todos los filósofos dixo que él sabia el secreto,
que se hallaba en la Suma de Santo Tomas; y mirando de pies á cabeza á
los dos moradores celestes, les sustentó que sus personas, sus mundos,
sus soles y sus estrellas, todo habia sido criado para el hombre. Al
oir tal sandez, nuestros dos caminantes hubiéron de caerse uno sobre
otro, pereciéndose de aquella inextinguible risa que, segun Hornero,
cupo en suerte á los Dioses; iba y venia su barriga y sus espaldas, y
en estas idas y venidas se cayó el navio de la uña del Sirio en el
bolsillo de los calzones del Saturnino. Buscáronle ámbos mucho tiempo;
al cabo topáron la tripulacion, y la metiéron en el navio lo mejor que
pudiéron. Cogió el Sirio á los aradorcillos, y les habló con mucha
afabilidad, puesto que estaba algo mohino de ver que unos
infinitamente pequeños tuvieran una vanidad casi infinitamente grande.
Prometióles que compondria un libro de filosofía escrito de letra muy
menuda para su uso, y que en él verian el porque de todas las cosas; y
con efecto ántes de irse les dió el prometido libro, que lleváron á la
academia de ciencias de Paris. Mas quando le abrió el secretario, se
halló con que estaba todo en blanco, y dixo: _ha, ya me lo presumia
yo_.

_Fin de la historia de Micromegas_.

       *       *       *       *       *




HISTORIA

DE UN BUEN BRAMA.

En mis viages encontré un brama anciano, sugeto muy cuerdo, instruido
y discreto, y con esto rico, cosa que le hacia mas cuerdo; porque,
como no le faltaba nada, no necesitaba engañar á nadie. Gobernaban su
familia tres mugeres muy hermosas, cuyo esposo era; y quando no se
recreaba con sus mugeres, se ocupaba en filosofar. Vivia junto á su
casa que era hermosa, bien alhajada y con amenos jardines, una India
vieja, beata, tonta, y muy pobre.

Díxome un dia el brama: Quisiera no haber nacido. Preguntéle porque, y
me respondió: Quarenta años ha que estoy estudiando, y todos quarenta
los he perdido; enseño á los demas, y lo ignoro todo. Este estado me
tiene tan aburrido y tan descontento, que no puedo aguantar la vida:
he nacido, vivo en el tiempo, y no sé qué cosa es el tiempo; me hallo
en un punto entre dos eternidades, como dicen nuestros sabios, y no
tengo idea de la eternidad; consto de materia, pienso, y nunca he
podido averiguar la causa eficiente del pensamiento; ignoro si es mi
entendimiento una mera facultad, como la de andar y digerir, y si
pienso con mi cabeza lo mismo que palpo con mis manos. No solamente
ignoro el principio de mis pensamientos, mas también se me esconde
igualmente el de mis movimientos: no sé porque exîsto, y no obstante
todos los dias me hacen preguntas sobre todos estos puntos; y como
tengo que responder por precision y no sé qué decir, hablo mucho, y
despues de haber hablado me quedo avergonzado y confuso de mí propio.
Peor es todavía quando me preguntan si Brama fué producido por Visnú,
ó si ámbos son eternos. A Dios pongo por testigo de que no lo sé, y
bien se echa de ver en mis respuestas. Reverendo padre, me dicen,
explicadme como el mal inunda la tierra entera. Tan adelantado estoy
yo como los que me hacen esta pregunta: unas veces les digo que todo
está perfectísimo; pero los que han perdido sus caudales y sus
miembros en la guerra no lo quieren creer, ni yo tampoco, y me vuelvo
á mi casa abrumado de mi curiosidad y mi ignorancia. Leo nuestros
libros antiguos, y me ofuscan mas las tinieblas. Hablo con mis
compañeros: unos me aconsejan que disfrute de la vida, y me ría de la
gente; otros creen que saben algo, y se descarrian en sus desatinos; y
todo aumenta la angustia que padezco. Muchas veces estoy á pique de
desesperarme, contemplando que al cabo de todas mis investigaciones no
sé ni de donde vengo, ni qué soy, ni adonde iré, ni qué he de ser.

Causóme lástima de veras el estado de este buen hombre, que no habia
otro de mas razon, ni mas ingenuo; y me convencí de que eso mas era
desdichado que mas entendimiento tenia, y era mas sensible.

Aquel mismo dia visité á la vieja vecina suya, y le pregunté si se
habia apesadumbrado alguna vez por no saber qué era su alma; y ni
siquiera entendió mi pregunta. Ni un instante en toda su vida habia
reflexîonado en uno de los puntos que tanto atormentaban al brama;
creía con toda su alma en las transformaciones de Visnú, y se tenia
por la mas dichosa muger, con tal que de quando en quando tuviese agua
del Ganges para bañarse.

Atónito de la felicidad de esta pobre muger, me volví á ver con mi
filósofo, y le dixe: ¿No teneis vergüenza de vuestra desdicha, quando
á la puerta de vuestra casa hay una vieja autómata que en nada piensa,
y vive contentísima? Razon teneis, me respondió; y cien veces he dicho
para mí, que seria muy feliz si fuera tan tonto como mi vecina, mas no
quiero gozar semejante felicidad.

Mas golpe me dió esta respuesta del brama, que todo quanto primero me
habia dicho; y exâminándome á mí propio, ví que efectivamente no
quisiera yo ser feliz á trueque de ser un majadero. Propuse el caso á
varios filósofos, y todos fuéron de mi parecer. No obstante, decia yo
entre mí, rara contradiccion es pensar así, porque al cabo lo que
importa es ser feliz, y nada monta tener entendimiento, ó ser necio.
Mas digo: los que viven satisfechos con su suerte bien ciertos estan
de que viven satisfechos; y los que discurren no lo estan de que
discurren bien. Luego cosa es clara, añadia yo, que debiera uno
escoger no tener migaja de razon, si en algo contribuye la razon á
nuestra infelicidad. Todo el mundo fué de mi mismo dictámen, mas
ninguno hubo que quisiese entrar en el ajuste de volverse tonto por
vivir contento. De aquí saco que si hacemos mucho aprecio de la
felicidad, mas aprecio hacemos todavía de la razon. Mas,
reflexîonándolo bien, parece que preferir la razon á la felicidad, es
garrafal desatino. ¿Pues cómo hemos de explicar esta contradiccion? Lo
mismo que todas las demas, y seria el cuento de nunca acabar.

_Fin de la historia de un buen Brama_.









End of Project Gutenberg's Novelas de Voltaire Tomo Primero, by Voltaire



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOVELAS DE VOLTAIRE — TOMO PRIMERO ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


eeailverInrlhe Project Gutenberg EBook of Wild Western Scenes, by John Beauchamp Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Wild Western Scenes
       A Narrative Of Adventures In The Western Wilderness, Wherein The
       Exploits Of Daniel Boone, The Great American Pioneer Are
       Particularly         Described
       

Author: John Beauchamp Jones

Release Date: August 1, 2004 [EBook #13077]
Last updated: January 29, 2020

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD WESTERN SCENES ***




Produced by Curtis Weyant, the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
and The Making of America Project

[Illustration]




WILD WESTERN SCENES:

A NARRATIVE OF ADVENTURES IN THE WESTERN WILDERNESS,

WHEREIN

THE EXPLOITS OF DANIEL BOONE, THE GREAT AMERICAN PIONEER ARE
PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED

ALSO,


ACCOUNTS OF BEAR, DEER, AND BUFFALO HUNTS—DESPERATE CONFLICTS WITH THE
SAVAGES—WOLF HUNTS—FISHING AND FOWLING ADVENTURES—ENCOUNTERS WITH
SERPENTS, ETC.


New Stereotype Edition, Altered, Revised, and Corrected

By

J.B. JONES.

Author of "The War Path," "Adventures of a Country Merchant," etc.
Illustrated with Sixteen Engravings from Original Designs
Philadelphia:

J.B. Lippincott & Co.
1875

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by J.B. Jones,
in the Clerk's Office of the District Court
for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.
Stereotyped By L. Johnson & Co.,
Philadelphia.


PREFACE.


When a work of fiction has reached its fortieth edition, one would
suppose the author might congratulate himself upon having contributed
something of an imperishable character to the literature of the
country. But no such pretensions are asserted for this production, now
in its fortieth thousand. Being the first essay of an impetuous youth
in a field where giants even have not always successfully contended, it
would be a rash assumption to suppose it could receive from those who
confer such honors any high award of merit. It has been before the
public some fifteen years, and has never been reviewed. Perhaps the
forbearance of those who wield the cerebral scalpels may not be further
prolonged, and the book remains amenable to the judgment they may be
pleased to pronounce.

To that portion of the public who have read with approbation so many
thousands of his book, the author may speak with greater confidence. To
this class of his friends he may make disclosures and confessions
pertaining to the secret history of the “Wild Western Scenes,” without
the hazard of incurring their displeasure.

Like the hero of his book, the author had his vicissitudes in boyhood,
and committed such indiscretions as were incident to one of his years
and circumstances, but nevertheless only such as might be readily
pardoned by the charitable. Like Glenn, he submitted to a voluntary
exile in the wilds of Missouri. Hence the description of scenery is a
true picture, and several characters in the scenes were real persons.
Many of the occurrences actually transpired in his presence, or had
been enacted in the vicinity at no remote period; and the dream of the
hero—his visit to the haunted island—was truly a dream of the author’s.

But the worst miseries of the author were felt when his work was
completed; he could get no publisher to examine it. He then purchased
an interest in a weekly newspaper, in the columns of which it appeared
in consecutive chapters. The subscribers were pleased with it, and
desired to possess it in a volume; but still no publisher would
undertake it,—the author had no reputation in the literary world. He
offered it for fifty dollars, but could find no purchaser at any price.
Believing the British booksellers more accommodating, a friend was
employed to make a fair copy in manuscript, at a certain number of
cents per hundred words. The work was sent to a British publisher, with
whom it remained many months, but was returned, accompanied by a note
declining to treat for it.

Undeterred by the rebuffs of two worlds, the author had his cherished
production published on his own account, and was remunerated by the
sale of the whole edition. After the tardy sale of several subsequent
editions by houses of limited influence, the book had the good fortune,
finally, to fall into the hands of the gigantic establishment whose
imprint is now upon its title-page. And now, the author is informed, it
is regularly and liberally ordered by the London booksellers, and is
sold with an increasing rapidity in almost every section of the Union.

Such are the hazards, the miseries, and sometimes the rewards, of
authorship.

J.B.J.

Burlington, N.J., _March_, 1856.


CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

Glenn and Joe—Their horses—A storm—A black stump—A rough
tumble—Moaning—Stars—Light—A log fire—Tents, and something to
eat—Another stranger, who turns out to be well known—Joe has a snack—He
studies revenge against the black stump—Boone proposes a bear hunt.

CHAPTER II.

Boone hunts the bear—Hounds and terriers—Sneak Punk, the
hatchet-face—Another stump—The high passes—The bear roused—The chase—A
sight—A shot—A wound—Not yet killed—His meditations—His friend, the
bear—The bear retreats—Joe takes courage—Joe fires—Immense
execution—Sneak—The last struggle—Desperation of the bear—His
death—Sneak’s puppies—Joe.

CHAPTER III.

Glenn’s castle—Mary—Books—A hunt—Joe and Pete—A tumble—An opossum—A
shot—Another tumble—A doe—The return—They set out again—A mound—A
buffalo—An encounter—Night—Terrific
spectacle—Escape—Boone—Sneak—Indians.

CHAPTER IV.

The retreat—Joe makes a mysterious discovery—Mary—A
disclosure—Supper—Sleep—A cat—Joe’s flint—The watch—Mary—The bush—The
attack—Joe’s musket again—The repulse—The starting rally—The desperate
alternative—Relief.

CHAPTER V.

A strange excursion—A fairy scene—Joe is puzzled and frightened—A
wonderful discovery—Navigation of the upper regions—A crash—No bones
broken.

CHAPTER VI.

A hunt—A deer taken—The hounds—Joe makes a horrid discovery—Sneak—The
exhumation.

CHAPTER VII.

Boone—The interment—Startling intelligence—Indians about—A
skunk—Thrilling fears—Boone’s device.

CHAPTER VIII.

Night—Sagacity of the hounds—Reflection—The sneaking savages—Joe’s
disaster—The approach of the foe under the snow—The silent watch.

CHAPTER IX.

Sneak kills a sow that “was not all a swine”—The breathless
suspense—The match in readiness—Joe’s cool demeanour—The match
ignited—Explosion of the mine—Defeat of the savages—The captive—His
liberation—The repose—The kitten—Morning.

CHAPTER X.

The dead removed—The wolves on the river—The wolf hunt—Gum fetid—Joe’s
incredulity—His conviction—His surprise—His predicament—His narrow
escape.

CHAPTER XI.

Mary—Her meditations—Her capture—Her sad condition—Her mental
sufferings—Her escape—Her recapture.

CHAPTER XII.

Joe’s indisposition—His cure—Sneak’s reformation—The pursuit—The
captive Indian—Approach to the encampment of the savages—Joe’s illness
again—The surprise—The terrific encounter—Rescue of Mary—Capture of the
young chief—The return.

CHAPTER XIII.

The return—The young chief in confinement—Joe’s fun—His reward—The
ring—A discovery—William’s recognition—Memories of childhood—A
scene—Roughgrove’s history—The children’s parentage.

CHAPTER XIV.

William’s illness—Sneak’s strange house—Joe’s courage—The bee hunt—Joe
and sneak captured by the Indians—Their sad condition—Preparations to
burn them alive—Their miraculous escape.

CHAPTER XV.

Glenn’s History.

CHAPTER XVI.

Balmy Spring—Joe’s curious dream—He prepares to catch a
fish—Glenn—William and Mary—Joe’s sudden and strange
appearance—La-u-na, the trembling fawn—The fishing sport—The ducking
frolic—Sneak and the panther.

CHAPTER XVII.

The bright morning—Sneak’s visit—Glenn’s heart—The snake hunt—Love and
raspberries—Joe is bitten—His terror and sufferings—Arrival of
Boone—Joe’s abrupt recovery—Preparations to leave the West—Conclusion.



WILD WESTERN SCENES: A NARRATIVE OF ADVENTURES.




CHAPTER I.

Glenn and Joe—Their horses—A storm—A black stump—A rough
tumble—Moaning—Stars—Light—A log fire—Tents, and something to
eat—Another stranger, who turns out to be well known—Joe has a snack—He
studies revenge against the black stump—Boone proposes a bear hunt.


“Do you see any light yet, Joe?”

“Not the least speck that ever was created, except the lightning, and
it’s gone before I can turn my head to look at it.”

The interrogator, Charles Glenn, reclined musingly in a two-horse
wagon, the canvas covering of which served in some measure to protect
him from the wind and rain. His servant, Joe Beck, was perched upon one
of the horses, his shoulders screwed under the scanty folds of an
oil-cloth cape, and his knees drawn nearly up to the pommel of the
saddle, to avoid the thumping bushes and briers that occasionally
assailed him, as the team plunged along in a stumbling pace. Their
pathway, or rather their direction, for there was no beaten road, lay
along the northern bank of the “Mad Missouri,” some two hundred miles
above the St. Louis settlement. It was at a time when there were no
white men in those regions save a few trappers, traders, and emigrants,
and each new sojourner found it convenient to carry with him a means of
shelter, as houses of any description were but few and far between.

Our travellers had been told in the morning, when setting out from a
temporary village which consisted of a few families of emigrants, with
whom they had sojourned the preceding night, that they could attain the
desired point by making the river their guide, should they be at a loss
to distinguish the faintly-marked pathway that led in a more direct
course to the place of destination. The storm coming up suddenly from
the north, and showers of hail accompanying the gusts, caused the poor
driver to incline his face to the left, to avoid the peltings that
assailed him so frequently; and the drenched horses, similarly
influenced, had unconsciously departed far from the right line of
march; and now, rather than turn his front again to the pitiless blast,
which could be the only means of regaining the road, Joe preferred
diverging still farther, until he should find himself on the margin of
the river, by which time he hoped the storm would abate. At all events,
he thought there would be more safety on the beach, which extended out
a hundred paces from the water, among the small switches of cotton-wood
that grew thereon, than in the midst of the tall trees of the forest,
where a heavy branch was every now and then torn off by the wind, and
thrown to the earth with a terrible crash. Occasionally a deafening
explosion of thunder would burst overhead; and Joe, prostrating himself
on the neck of his horse, would, with his eyes closed and his teeth
set, bear it out in silence. He spoke not, save to give an occasional
word of command to his team, or a brief reply to a question from his
master.

It was an odd spectacle to see such a vehicle trudging along at such an
hour, where no carriage had ever passed before. The two young men were
odd characters; the horses were oddly matched, one being a little dumpy
black pony, and the other a noble white steed; and it was an odd whim
which induced Glenn to abandon his comfortable home in Philadelphia,
and traverse such inclement wilds. But love can play the “_wild_” with
any young man. Yet we will not spoil our narrative by introducing any
of it here. Nor could it have been love that induced Joe to share his
master’s freaks; but rather a rare penchant for the miraculous
adventures to be enjoyed in the western wilderness, and the gold which
his master often showered upon him with a reckless hand. Joe’s
forefathers were from the Isle of Erin, and although he had lost the
brogue, he still retained some of their superstitions.

The wind continued to blow, the wolves howled, the lightning flashed,
and the thunder rolled. Ere long the little black pony snorted aloud
and paused abruptly.

“What ails you, Pete?” said Joe from his lofty position on the steed,
addressing his favourite little pet. “Get along,” he continued,
striking the animal gently with his whip. But Pete was as immovable and
unconscious of the lash as would have been a stone. And the steed
seemed likewise to be infected with the pony’s stubbornness, after the
wagon was brought to a pause.

“Why have you stopped, Joe?” inquired Glen.

“I don’t hardly know, sir; but the stupid horses won’t budge an inch
farther!”

“Very well; we can remain here till morning. Take the harness off, and
give them the corn in the box; we can sleep in the wagon till
daylight.”

“But we have no food for ourselves, sir; and I’m vastly hungry. It
can’t be much farther to the ferry,” continued Joe, vexed at the
conduct of the horses.

“Very well; do as you like; drive on, if you desire to do so,” said
Glenn.

“Get along, you stupid creatures!” cried Joe, applying the lash with
some violence. But the horses regarded him no more than blocks would
have done. Immediately in front he perceived a dark object that
resembled a stump and turning the horses slightly to one side,
endeavoured to urge them past it. Still they would not go, but
continued to regard the object mentioned with dread, which was
manifested by sundry restless pawings and unaccustomed snorts. Joe
resolved to ascertain the cause of their alarm, and springing to the
ground, moved cautiously in the direction of the dark obstruction,
which still seemed to be a blackened stump, about his own height, and a
very trifling obstacle, in his opinion, to arrest the progress of his
redoubtable team. The darkness was intense, yet he managed to keep his
eyes on the dim outlines of the object as he stealthily approached And
he stepped as noiselessly as possible, notwithstanding he meditated an
encounter with nothing more than an inanimate object. But his
imagination was always on the alert, and as he often feared dangers
that arose undefinable and indescribable in his mind, it was not
without some trepidation that he had separated himself from the horses
and groped his way toward the object that had so much terrified his
pony. He paused within a few feet of the object, and waited for the
next flash of lightning to scrutinize the thing more closely before
putting his hand upon it. But no flash came, and he grew tired of
standing. He stooped down, so as to bring the upper portion of it in a
line with the sky beyond, but still he could not make it out. He
ventured still nearer, and stared at it long and steadily, but to no
avail: the black mass only was before him, seemingly inanimate, and of
a deeper hue than the darkness around.

[Illustration: A dark encounter.]


“I’ve a notion to try my whip on you,” said he, thinking if it should
be a human being it would doubtless make a movement. He started back
with a momentary conviction that he heard a rush creak under its feet.
But as it still maintained its position, he soon concluded the noise to
have been only imaginary, and venturing quite close gave it a smart
blow with his whip. Instantaneously poor Joe was rolling on the earth,
almost insensible, and the dark object disappeared rushing through the
bushes into the woods. The noise attracted Glenn, who now approached
the scene, and with no little surprise found his servant lying on his
face.

“What’s the matter, Joe?” demanded he.

“Oh, St. Peter! O preserve me!” exclaimed Joe.

“What has happened? Why do you lie there?”

“Oh, I’m almost killed! Didn’t you see him?”

“See what? I can see nothing this dark night but the flying clouds and
yonder yellow sheet of water.”

“Oh, I’ve been struck!” said Joe, groaning piteously.

“Struck by what? Has the lightning struck you?”

“No—no! my head is all smashed up—it was a bear.”

“Pshaw! get up, and either drive on, or feed the horses,” said Glenn
with some impatience.

“I call all the saints to witness that it was a wild bear—a great wild
bear! I thought it was a stump, but just as I struck it a flash of
lightning revealed to my eyes a big black bear standing on his hind
feet, grinning at me, and he gave me a blow on the side of the face,
which has entirely blinded my left eye, and set my ears to ringing like
a thousand bells. Just feel the blood on my face.”

Glenn actually felt something which might be blood, and really had
thought he could distinguish the stump himself when the wagon halted;
yet he did not believe that Joe had received the hurt in any other
manner than by striking his face against some hard substance which he
could not avoid in the darkness.

“You only fancy it was a bear, Joe; so come along back to the horses
and drive on. The rain has ceased, and the stars are appearing.” Saying
this, Glenn led the way to the wagon.

“I’d be willing to swear on the altar that it was a huge bear, and
nothing else!” replied Joe, as he mounted and drove on, the horses now
evincing no reluctance to proceed. One after another the stars came out
and shone in purest brightness as the mists swept away, and ere long
the whole canopy of blue was gemmed with twinkling brilliants. The
winds soon lulled, and the dense forest on the right reposed from the
moaning gale which had disturbed it a short time before; and the waves
that had been tossed into foaming ridges now spent their fury on the
beach, each lashing the bank more gently than the last, until the power
of the gliding current swept them all down the turbid stream. Soon the
space between the water and the forest gradually diminished, and seemed
to join at a point not far ahead. Joe observed this with some concern,
being aware that to meander among the trees at such an hour was
impossible. He therefore inclined toward the river, resolved to defer
his re-entrance into the forest as long as possible. As he drove on he
kept up a continual groaning, with his head hung to one side, as if
suffering with the toothache, and occasionally reproaching Pete with
some petulance, as if a portion of the blame attached to his sagacious
pony.

“Why do you keep up such a howling, Joe? Do you really suffer much
pain?” inquired Glenn, annoyed by his man’s lamentations.

“It don’t hurt as bad as it did—but then to think that I was such a
fool as to go right into the beast’s clutches, when even Pete had more
sense!”

“If it was actually a bear, Joe, you can boast of the thrilling
encounter hereafter,” said Glenn, in a joking and partly consoling
manner.

“But if I have many more such, I fear I shall never get back to relate
them. My face is all swelled—Huzza! yonder is a light, at last! It’s on
this side of the river, and if we can’t get over the ferry to-night, we
shall have something to eat on this side, at all events. Ha! ha! ha! I
see a living man moving before the fire, as if he were roasting meat.”
Joe forgot his wound in the joy of an anticipated supper, and whipping
the horses into a brisk pace, they soon drew near the encampment, where
they discovered numerous persons, male and female, who had been
prevented from crossing the river that day, in consequence of the
violence of the storm, and had raised their tents at the edge of the
woods, preferring to repose thus until the following morning than to
venture into the frail ferry-boat while the waves yet ran so high.

There was no habitation in the immediate vicinity, save a rude hovel
occupied by Jasper Roughgrove and his ferrymen, which was on the
opposite shore in a narrow valley that cleft asunder the otherwise
uniform cliff of rocks.

The creaking of the wheels, when the vehicle approached within a few
hundred paces of the encampment, attracted the watch-dogs, and their
fierce and continued barking drew the attention of the emigrants in the
direction indicated. Several men with guns in their hands came out to
meet the young travellers.

“We are white men, friends, strangers, lost, benighted, and hungry!”
exclaimed Joe, stopping the horses, and addressing the men before he
was accosted.

“Come on, then, and eat and rest with us,” said they, amused at Joe’s
exclamations, and leading the way to the encampment.

When they arrived at the edge of the camp, Glenn dismounted from the
wagon, and directing Joe to follow when he had taken care of the
horses, drew near the huge log fire in company with those who had gone
out to meet him. Several tall and spreading elms towered in majesty
above, and their clustering leaves, yet partially green,
notwithstanding the autumn was midway advanced, were beautifully tinged
by the bright light thrown upward from the glaring flames. The view on
one side was lost in the dark labyrinth of the moss-grown trunks of the
forest. On the other swept the turbid river, bearing downward in its
rapid current severed branches, and even whole trees, that had been
swept away by the continual falling in of the river bank, for the sandy
soil was always subject to the undermining of tho impetuous stream. A
circle of tents was formed round the fire, constructed of thin poles
bent in the shape of an arch, and the ends planted firmly in the earth.
These were covered with buffalo skins, which would effectually shield
the inmates from the rain; and quantities of leaves, after being
carefully dried before the fire, were placed on the ground within, over
which were spread buffalo robes with the hair uppermost, and thus in a
brief space was completed temporary but not uncomfortable places of
repose. The ends of the tents nearest to the fire were open, to admit
the heat and a portion of light, that those who desired it might retire
during their repast, or engage in pious meditation undisturbed by the
more clamorous portion of the company.

Glenn paused when within the circle, and looked with some degree of
interest on the admirable arrangement of those independent and hardy
people. A majority of the emigrants were seated on logs brought thither
for that purpose, and feasting quietly from several large pans and
well-filled camp-kettles, which were set out for all in common. They
motioned Glenn to partake with them; and although many curious looks
were directed toward him, yet he was not annoyed by questions while
eating. Joe came in, and following the example of the rest, played his
part to perfection, without complaining once of his wound.

The feast was just finished, when the dogs again set up a furious
yelping, and ran into the forest. But they returned very quickly, some
of them whining with the hurts received from the strangers they
encountered so roughly; and presently they were followed by several
enormous hounds, and soon after an athletic woodsman was seen
approaching. This personage was a tall muscular man, past the middle
age, but agile and vigorous in all his motions. He was habited in a
buck-skin hunting-shirt, and wore leggins of the same material.
Although he was armed with a long knife and heavy rifle, and the
expression of his brow and chin indicated an unusual degree of firmness
and determination, yet there was an openness and blandness in the
expression of his features which won the confidence of the beholder,
and instantly dispelled every apprehension of violence. All of the
emigrants had either seen or heard of him before, for his name was not
only repeated by every tongue in the territory, but was familiar in
every State in the Union, and not unknown in many parts of Europe. He
was instantly recognised by the emigrants, and crowding round, they
gave him a hearty welcome. They led him to a conspicuous seat, and
forming a circle about him, were eager to catch every word that might
escape his lips, and relied with implicit confidence on every species
of information he imparted respecting the dangers and advantages of the
locations they were about to visit. Boone had settled some three miles
distant from the ferry, among the hills, where his people were engaged
in the manufacture of salt. He had selected this place of abode long
before the general tide of emigration had reached so far up the
Missouri. It was said that he pitched his tent among the barren hills
as a security against the intrusion of other men, who, being swayed by
a love of wealth, would naturally seek their homes in the rich level
prairies. It is true that Boone loved to dwell in solitude. But he was
no misanthrope. And now, although questions were asked without number,
he answered them with cheerfulness; advised the families what would be
necessary to be done when their locations were selected, and even
pressingly invited them to remain in his settlement a few days to
recover from the fatigue of travel, and promised to accompany them
afterward over the river into the rich plains to which they were
journeying.

During the brisk conversation that had been kept up for a great length
of time, Glenn, unlike the rest of the company, sat at a distance and
maintained a strict silence. Occasionally, as some of the extraordinary
feats related of the person before him occurred to his memory, he
turned his eyes in the direction of the great pioneer, and at each time
observed the gaze of the woodsman fixed upon him. Nevertheless his
habitual listlessness was not disturbed, and he pursued his peculiar
train of reflections. Joe likewise treated the presence of the renowned
Indian fighter with apparent unconcern, and being alone in his glory,
dived the deeper into the saucepan.

Boone at length advanced to where Glenn was sitting, and after scanning
his pale features, and his costly though not exquisitely-fashioned
habiliments, thus addressed him:—

“Young man, may I inquire what brings thee to these wilds?”

“I am a freeman,” replied Glenn, somewhat haughtily, “and may be
influenced by that which brings other men hither.”

“Nay, young man, excuse the freedom which all expect to exercise in
this comparative wilderness; but I am very sure there is not another
emigrant on this side of the Ohio who has been actuated by the same
motives that brought thee hither. Others come to fell the forest oak,
and till the soil of the prairie, that they may prepare a heritage for
their children; but thy soft hands and slender limbs are unequal to the
task; nor dost thou seem to have felt the want of this world’s goods;
and thou bringest no family to provide for. Thou hast committed that
which banished thee from society, or found in society that which
disgusted thee—speak, which of these?” said Boone, in accents, though
not positively commanding, yet they produced a sense of reverence that
subdued the rising indignation of Glenn, and looking upon the
interrogator as the acknowledged host of the eternal wilds, and himself
as a mere guest, who might be required to produce his testimonials of
worthiness to associate with nature’s most honest of men, he replied
with calmness, though with subdued emotion—

“You are right, sir—it was the latter. I had heard that you were happy
in the solitude of the mountain-shaded valley, or on the interminable
prairies that greet the horizon in the distance, where neither the
derision of the proud, the malice of the envious, nor the deceptions of
pretended love and friendship, could disturb your peaceful meditations:
and from amid the wreck of certain hopes, which I once thought no
circumstances could destroy, I rose with a determined though saddened
heart, and solemnly vowed to seek such a wilderness, where I could pass
a certain number of my days engaging in the pursuits that might be most
congenial to my disposition. Already I imagine I experience the happy
effects of my resolution. Here the whispers of vituperating foes cannot
injure, nor the smiles of those fondly cherished deceive.”

“Your hand, young man,” said Boone, with an earnestness which convinced
Glenn that his tale was not imprudently divulged.

“Ho! what’s the matter with _you_?” Boone continued, turning to Joe,
who had just arisen from his supper, and was stretching back his
shoulders.

“I got a licking from a bear to-night—but I don’t mind it much since
I’ve had a snack. But if ever I come across him in the daytime, I’ll
show him a thing or two,” said Joe, with his fists doubled up.

“Pshaw! do you still entertain the ridiculous belief that it was really
a bear you encountered?” inquired Glenn, with an incredulous smile.

“I’ll swear to it!” replied Joe.

“Let me see your face,” remarked Boone, turning him to where there was
more light.

“Hollo! don’t squeeze it so hard!” cried Joe, as Boone removed some of
the coagulated blood that remained or the surface.

“There is no doubt about it—it was a bear, most certainly,” said Boone;
and examining the wound more closely, continued: “Here are the marks of
his claws, plain enough: he might easily be captured to-morrow. Who
will hunt him with me?”

“I will!” burst from the lips of nearly every one present.

“Huzza—revenge! I’ll have revenge, huzza!” cried Joe, throwing round
his hat.

“You will join us?” inquired Boone, turning to Glenn.

“Yes,” replied Glenn; “I came hither provided with the implements to
hunt; and as such is to be principally my occupation during my sojourn
in this region, I could not desire a more happy opportunity than the
present to make a beginning. And as it is my intention to settle near
the ferry on the opposite shore, I am pleased to find that I shall not
be far from one whose acquaintance I hoped to make, above all others.”

“And you may not find me reluctant to cultivate a social intercourse,
notwithstanding men think me a crabbed old misanthrope,” replied Boone,
pressing the extended hand of Glenn. They then separated for the night,
retiring to the tents that had been provided for them.

It was not long before a comparative silence pervaded the scene. The
fierce yelpings of the watch-dogs gradually ceased, and the howling
wolf was but indistinctly heard in the distance. The katydid and
whippoorwill still sang at intervals, and these sounds, as well as the
occasional whirlpool that could be heard rising on the surface of the
gliding stream, had a soothing influence, and lulled to slumber the
wandering mortals who now reclined under the forest trees, far from the
homes of their childhood and the graves of their kindred. Glenn gazed
from his couch through the branches above at the calm, blue sky,
resplendent with twinkling stars; and if a sad reflection, that he thus
lay, a lonely being, a thousand miles from those who had been most dear
to him, dimmed his eye for an instant with a tear, he still felt a
consciousness of innocence within, and resolving to execute his vow in
every particular, he too was soon steeped in undisturbed slumber.




CHAPTER II.

Boone hunts the bear—Hounds and terriers—Sneak Punk, the
Hatchet-face—Another stump—The high passes—The bear roused—The chase—A
sight—A shot—A wound—Joe—His meditations—His friend, the bear—The bear
retreats—Joe takes courage—He fires—Immense execution—Sneak—The last
struggle—Desperation of the bear—His death—Sneak’s puppies—Joe.


By the time the first streaks of gray twilight marked the eastern
horizon, Boone, at the head of the party of hunters, set out from the
encampment and proceeded down the river in the direction of the place
where Joe had been so roughly handled by Bruin. All, with the exception
of Glenn and his man, being accustomed to much walking, were on foot.
Glenn rode his white steed, and Joe was mounted on his little black
pony. The large hounds belonging to Boone, and the curs, spaniels, and
terriers of the emigrants were all taken along. As they proceeded down
the river, Boone proposed the plan of operations which was to guide
their conduct in the chase, and each man was eager to perform his part,
whatever it might be. It was arranged that a portion of the company
should precede the rest, and cross the level woodland about two miles
in width, to a range of hills and perpendicular cliffs that appeared to
have once bounded the river, and select such ravines or outlets as in
their opinion the bear would be most likely to pass through, if he were
indeed still in the flat bottom-land. At these places they were to
station themselves with their guns well charged, and either await the
coming of the animal or the drivers; the first would be announced by
the yelping of the dogs, and the last by the hunters’ horns.

Glenn and one or two others remained with Boone to hunt Bruin in his
lair, while Joe and the remainder of the company were despatched to the
passes among the hills. There was a narrow-featured Vermonter in this
party, termed, by his comrades, the Hatchet-face, and, in truth, the
extreme thinness of his chest and the slenderness of his limbs might as
aptly have been called the hatchet-handle. But, so far from being unfit
for the hardy pursuits of a hunter, he was gifted with the activity of
a greyhound, and the swiftness and bottom of a race-horse. His name was
Sneak Punk, which was always abbreviated to merely Sneak, for his
general success in creeping up to the unsuspecting game of whatsoever
kind he might be hunting, while others could not meet with such
success. He had been striding along some time in silence a short
distance in advance of Joe, who, even by dint of sundry kicks and the
free use of his whip, could hardly keep pace with him. The rest were a
few yards in the rear, and all had maintained a strict silence,
implicitly relying on the guidance of Sneak, who, though he had never
traversed these woods before, was made perfectly familiar with the
course he was to pursue by the instructions of Boone.

Although the light of morning was now apparent above, yet the thick
growth of the trees, whose clustering branches mingled in one dense
mass overhead, made it still dark and sombre below; and Joe, to divert
Sneak from his unconscionable gait, which, in his endeavours to keep
up, often subjected him to the rude blows of elastic switches, and many
twinges of overhanging grape vines, essayed to engage his companion in
conversation.

“I say, Mr. Sneak,” observed Joe, with an eager voice, as his pony
trotted along rather roughly through the wild gooseberry bushes, and
often stumbled over the decayed logs that lay about.

“What do you want, stranger?” replied Sneak, slackening his gait until
he fell back alongside of Joe.

“I only wanted to know if you ever killed a bear before,” said Joe,
drawing an easy breath as Pete fell into a comfortable walk.

“Dod rot it, I hain’t killed this one yit,” said Sneak.

“I didn’t mean any offence,” said Joe.

“What makes you think you have given any?”

“Because you said _dod rot it_.”

“I nearly always say so—I’ve said so so often that I can’t help it. But
now, as we are on the right footing, I can tell you that I wintered
once in Arkansaw, and that’s enough to let you know I’m no greenhorn,
no how you can fix it. And moreover, I tell you, if old Boone wasn’t
here hisself, I’d kill this bar as sure as a gun, and my gun is as sure
as a streak of lightning run into a barrel of gunpowder;” and as he
spoke he threw up his heavy gun and saluted the iron with his lips.

“Is your’s a rifle?” inquired Joe, to prolong the conversation, his
companion showing symptoms of a disposition to fall into his habit of
going ahead again.

“Sartainly! Does anybody, I wonder, expect to do any thing with a
shot-gun in sich a place as this?”

“Mine’s a shot-gun,” said Joe.

“Dod—did you ever kill any thing better than a quail with it?” inquired
Sneak, contemptuously.

“I never killed any thing in my life with it—I never shot a gun in all
my life before to-night,” said Joe.

“Dod, you haven’t fired it to-night, to my sartain knowledge.”

“I mean I never went a shooting.”

“Did you load her yourself?” inquired Sneak, taking hold of the musket
and feeling the calibre.

“Yes—but I’m sure I did it right. I put in a handful of powder, and
paper on top of it, and then poured in a handful of balls,” said Joe.

“Ha! ha! ha! I’ll be busted if you don’t raise a fuss if you ever get a
shot at the bar!” said Sneak, with emphasis.

“That’s what I am after.”

“Why don’t you go ahead?” demanded Sneak, as Joe’s pony stopped
suddenly, with his ears thrust forward. “Dod! whip him up,” continued
he, seeing that his companion was intently gazing at some object ahead,
and exhibiting as many marks of alarm as Pete. “It’s nothing but a
stump!” said Sneak, going forwards and kicking the object, which was
truly nothing more than he took it to be. Joe then related to him all
the particulars of his nocturnal affair with the supposed stump,
previous to his arrival at the camp, and Sneak, with a hearty laugh,
admitted that both he and the pony were excusable for inspecting all
the stumps they might chance to come across in the dark in future. They
now emerged into the open space which was the boundary of the woods,
and after clambering up a steep ascent for some minutes, they reached
the summit of a tall range of bluffs. From this position the sun could
be seen rising over the eastern ridges, but the flat woods that had
been traversed still lay in darkness below, and silent as the tomb,
save the hooting of owls as they flapped to their hollow habitations in
the trees.

The party then dispersed to their coverts under the direction of Sneak,
who with a practised eye instantly perceived all the advantageous posts
for the men, and the places where the bear would most probably run. Joe
had insisted on having his revenge, and begged to be stationed where he
would be most likely to get a shot. He was therefore permitted to
remain at the head of the ravine they had just ascended, through which
a deer path ran, as the most favourable position. After tying Pete some
paces in the rear, he came forwards to the verge of the valley and
seated himself on a dry rock, where he could see some distance down the
path under the tall sumach bushes. He then commenced cogitating how he
would act, should Bruin have the hardihood to face him in the daytime.

Boone and his party drew near the spot where the bear had been seen the
previous night. The two large hounds, Ringwood and Jowler, kept at
their master’s heels, being trained to understand and perform all the
duties required of them, while the curs and terriers were running
helter-skelter far ahead, or striking out into the woods without aim,
and always returning without effecting any thing. At length the two
hounds paused, and scented the earth, giving certain information that
they had arrived at the desired point. The curs and terriers had
already passed far beyond the spot, being unable to decide any thing by
the nose, and always relying on their swiftness in the chase when they
should be in sight of the object pursued.

Now, Glenn perceived to what perfection dogs could be trained, and
learned, what had been a matter of wonder to him, how Boone could keep
up with them in the chase. The hounds set off at a signal from their
master, not like an arrow from the bow, but at a moderate pace, ever
and anon looking back and pausing until the men came up; while the
erratic curs flew hither and thither, chasing every hare and squirrel
they could find. As they pursued the trail they occasionally saw the
foot-print of the animal, which was broad and deep, indicating one of
enormous size. Presently they came to a spot thickly overgrown with
spice-wood bushes and prickly vines, where he had made his lair, and
from the erect tails of Ringwood and Jowler, and the intense interest
they otherwise evinced, it was evident they were fast approaching the
presence of Bruin. Ere long, as they ran along with their heads up, for
the first time that morning, they commenced yelping in clear and
distinct tones, which rang musically far and wide through the woods.
The curs relinquished their unprofitable racing round the thickets,
attracted by the hounds, and soon learned to keep in the rear,
depending on the unerring trailing of the old hunters, as the object of
pursuit was not yet in sight. The chase became more animated, and the
men quickened their pace as the inspiring notes of the hounds rang out
at regular intervals. Glenn soon found he possessed no advantage over
those on foot, who were able to run under the branches of the trees,
and glide through the thickets with but little difficulty, while the
rush of his noble steed was often arrested by the tenacious vines
clinging to the bushes abreast, and he was sometimes under the
necessity of dismounting to recover his cap or whip.

It was not long before the notes of Ringwood and Jowler suddenly
increased in sharpness and quickness, and the curs and terriers,
hitherto silent, set up a confused medley of sounds, which reverberated
like one continuous scream. They had pounced upon the bear, and from
the stationary position of the dogs for a few minutes, indicated by
their peculiar baying, it was evident Bruin had turned to survey the
enemy, and perhaps to give them battle; but it seemed that their number
or noise soon intimidated him, and that he preferred seeking safety in
flight. How Boone could possibly know beforehand which way the bear
would run, was a mystery to Glenn; but that he often abandoned the
direction taken by the dogs, turning off at almost right angles, and
still had a sight of him was no less true. No one had yet been near
enough to fire with effect. The bear, notwithstanding his many feints
and novel demonstrations to get rid of his persecutors, had continued
to make towards the hills where the standers were stationed. Boone
falling in with Glenn, from whom he had been frequently separated, they
continued together some time, following the course of the sounds
towards the east.

“This sport is really exciting and noble!” exclaimed Glenn, as the deep
and melodious intonations of Ringwood and Jowler fell upon his ear.

“Excellent! excellent!” replied Boone, listening intently, and pausing
suddenly, as the discharge of a gun in the direction of the hills
sounded through the woods.

“He has reached the standers,” remarked Glenn, reining up his steed at
Boone’s side.

“No; it was one of our men who has not followed him in all his
deviations,” replied Boone, still marking the notes of the hounds.

“I doubt not our company is sufficiently scattered in every direction
through the forest to force him into the hills very speedily, if,
indeed, that shot was not fatal,” remarked Glenn.

“He is not hurt—perhaps it was not fired at him, but at a bird—nor will
he yet leave the woods,” said Boone, still listening to the hounds. “He
comes!” he exclaimed a moment after, with marks of joy in his face; “he
will make a grand circle before quitting the lowland.” And now the dogs
could be heard more distinctly, as if they were gradually approaching
the place from which they first started.

“If you will remain here,” continued Boone, “it is quite likely you
will have a shot as he makes his final push for the hills.”

“Then here will I remain,” replied Glenn; and fixing himself firmly in
the saddle, resolved to await the coming of Bruin, having every
confidence in the intimation of his friend. Boone selected a position a
few hundred paces distant, with a view of permitting Glenn to have the
first fire.

The bear took a wide circuit towards the river, pausing at times until
the foremost of the dogs came up, which he could easily manage to keep
at bay; but when all of them (and the curs did good service now)
surrounded him, he found it necessary to set forward again. When he had
run as far as the river, and turned once more towards the hills, his
course seemed to be in a direct line with Glenn, and the young man’s
heart fluttered with anticipation as he examined his gun, and turned
his horse (which had been accustomed to firearms) in a favourable
position to give the enemy a salute as he passed. Nearer they came, the
dogs pursuing with redoubled fierceness, their blood heated by the
exercise, and their most sanguine passions roused by their frequent
severe skirmishes with their huge antagonist. As they approached, the
strange and simultaneous yelpings of the curs and terriers resembled an
embodied roar, amid which the flute-like notes of Ringwood and Jowler
could hardly be heard. Glenn could now distinctly hear the bear rushing
like a torrent through the bushes, almost directly towards the place
where he was posted, and a moment after it emerged from a dense thicket
of hazel, and the noble steed, instead of leaping away with affright,
threw back his ears and stood firm, until Glenn fired. Bruin uttered a
howl, and halting with a fierce growl, raised himself on his haunches,
and displaying his array of white teeth, prepared to assail our hero.
Glenn proceeded to reload his rifle with as much expedition as was in
his power, though not without some tremor, notwithstanding he was
mounted on his tall steed, whose nostrils dilated, and eyes flashing
fire, indicated that he was willing to take part in the conflict. The
bear was preparing for a dreadful encounter, and on the very eve of
springing towards his assailant, when the hounds coming up admonished
him to flee his more numerous foes, and turning off, he continued his
route towards the hills. Glenn perceived that he had not missed his aim
by the blood sprinkled on the bushes, and being ready for another fire,
galloped after him. Just when he came in sight, Boone’s gun was heard,
and Bruin fell, remaining motionless for a moment; but ere Glenn
arrived within shooting distance, or Boone could reload, he had risen
and again continued his course, as if in defiance of everything that
man could do to oppose him.

“Is it possible he still survives!” exclaimed Glenn, joining his
companion.

“There is nothing more possible,” replied Boone; “but I saw by his
limping that your shot had taken effect.”

“And I saw him fall when you fired,” said Glenn; “but he still runs.”

“And he _will_ run for some time yet,” remarked Boone, “for they are
extremely hard to kill, when heated by the pursuit of dogs. But we have
done our part, and it now remains for those at the passes to finish the
work so well begun.”

Joe’s imagination had several times worked him into a fury, which had
as often subsided in disappointment, during the chase below, every
particle of which could be distinctly heard from his position. More
than once, when a brisk breeze swept up the valley, he was convinced
that his enemy was approaching him, and, every nerve quivering with the
expectation of the bear coming in view the next instant, he stood a
spectacle of eagerness, with perhaps a small portion of apprehension
intermingled. At length, from the frequent deceptions the distance
practiced upon him, he grew composed by degrees, and resuming his seat
on the stone, with his musket lying across his knees, thus gave vent to
his thoughts: “What if an Indian were to pounce upon me while I’m
sitting here?” Here he paused, and looked carefully round in every
direction. “No!” he continued; “if there were any at this time in the
neighbourhood, wouldn’t Boone know it? To be sure he would, and here’s
my gun—I forgot that. Let them come as soon as they please! I wonder if
the bear _will_ come out here? Suppose he does, what’s the danger?
Didn’t I grapple with him last night? And couldn’t I jump on Pete and
get away from him! But—pshaw! I keep forgetting my gun—I wish he
_would_ come, I’d serve him worse than he served me last night! My face
feels very sore this morning. There!” he exclaimed, when he heard the
fire of Glenn’s gun, and the report that succeeded from Boone’s,
“they’ve floored him as dead as a nail, I’ll bet. Hang it! I should
like to have had a word or two with him myself, to have told him I
hadn’t forgotten his ugly grin. The men must have known I would stand
no chance of killing him when they placed me up here. I should like to
know what part of the sport _I’ve_ had—ough!” exclaimed he, his hair
standing upright, as he beheld the huge bear, panting and bleeding,
coming towards him, and not twenty paces distant!

Bruin had eluded the dogs a few minutes by climbing a bending tree at
the mouth of the valley, from which he passed to another, and
descending again to the earth, proceeded almost exhausted up the
ravine. Joe’s eyes grew larger and larger as the monster approached,
and when within a few feet of him he uttered a horrible unearthly
sound, which attracted the bear, and fearing the fatal aim of man more
than the teeth of the dogs, he whirled about, with a determination to
fight his way back, in preference to again risking the murderous lead.
No sooner was the bear out of sight, and plunging down the dell amid
the cries of the dogs, which assailed him on all sides, than Joe
bethought him of his gun, and becoming valorous, ran a few steps down
the path and fired in the direction of the confused melée. The moment
after he discharged his musket, the back part of his head struck the
earth, and the gun made two or three end-over-end revolutions up the
path behind him. Never, perhaps, was such a rebound from overloading
known before. Joe now thought not of the bear, nor looked to see what
execution he had done. He thought of his own person, which he found
prostrate on the ground. When somewhat recovered from the blow, he rose
with his hand pressed to his nose, while the blood ran out between his
fingers. “Oh! my goodness!” he exclaimed, seating himself at the root
of a pecan tree, and rocking backwards and forwards.

“What’s your gun doing up here?” exclaimed Sneak, coming down the path.
Joe made no answer, but continued to rock backwards and forwards most
dolefully.

“Why don’t you speak? Where’s the bar?”

“I don’t know. Oh!” murmured Joe.

“What’s the matter?” inquired Sneak, seeing the copious effusion of
blood.

“I shot off that outrageous musket, and it’s kicked my nose to pieces!
I shall faint!” said Joe, dropping his head between his knees.

“Faint? I never saw a _man_ faint!” said Sneak, listening to the chase
below.

“Oh! can’t you help me to stop this blood?”

“Don’t you hear _that_, down there?” replied Sneak, his attention
entirely directed to that which was going on in the valley.

“My ears are deafened by that savage gun! I can’t hear a bit, hardly!
Oh, what shall I do, Mr. Sneak?” continued Joe.

“Dod rot it!” exclaimed Sneak, leaping like a wild buck down the path,
and paying no further attention to the piteous lamentations of his
comrade.

Ere the bear reached the mouth of the glen, the hunters generally had
come up, and poor Bruin found himself hemmed in on all sides. He could
not ascend on either hand, the loss of blood having weakened him too
much to climb over the almost precipitous rocks, and he made a final
stand, determined to sell his life as dearly as possible. The dogs
sprang upon him in a body, and it was soon evident that his desperate
struggles were not harmless. He grasped one of the curs in his deadly
hug, and with his teeth planted in its neck, relinquished not his hold
until it fell from his arms a disfigured and lifeless object. He boxed
those that were tearing his hams with his ponderous claws, sending them
screaming to the right and left. He then stood up on his haunches, with
his back against a rock, and with a snarl of defiance resolved never to
retreat “from its firm base.” Never were blows more rabidly dealt. When
attacked on one side, he had no sooner turned to beat down his sanguine
foe than he was assailed on the other. Thus he fought alternately from
right to left, his mouth gaping open, his tongue hanging out, and his
eyes gleaming furiously as if swimming in liquid fire. At times he was
charged simultaneously in front and flank, when for an instant the
whole group seemed to be one dark writhing mass, uttering a medly of
discordant and horrid sounds. But determined to conquer or die on the
spot he occupied, Bruin never relaxed his blows, until the bruised and
exhausted dogs were forced to withdraw a moment the combat, and rush
into the narrow rivulet. While they lay panting in the water, the bear
turned his head back against the rocks, and lapped in the dripping
moisture without moving from his position. But he was fast sinking
under his wounds: a stream of blood, which constantly issued from his
body and ran down and discoloured the water, indicated that his career
was nearly finished. Yet his spirit was not daunted; for while the
canine assailants he had withstood so often were bathing preparatory
for a renewal of the conflict, Boone and Glenn, who had approached the
immediate vicinity, fired, and Bruin, echoing the howl of death as the
bullets entered his body, turned his eyes reproachfully towards the men
for an instant, and then, with a growl of convulsed, expiring rage,
plunged into the water, and, seizing the largest cur, crushed him to
death. Ringwood and Jowler, whose sagacity had hitherto led them to
keep in some measure aloof, knowing their efforts would be unavailing
against so powerful an enemy without the fatal aim of their master, now
sprang forward to the rescue, both seizing the prostrate foe by the
throat. But he could not be made to relinquish his victim, nor did he
make resistance. Boone, advancing at the head of the hunters, (all of
whom, with the exception of Joe and Sneak, being there assembled,) with
some difficulty prevented his companions from discharging their guns at
the dark mass before them. He struck up several of their guns as they
were endeavouring to aim at the now motionless bear, fearing that his
hounds might suffer by their fire, and stooping down, whence he could
distinctly see the pale gums and tongue, as his hounds grappled the
neck of the animal, announced the death of Bruin, and the termination
of the hunt. The hounds soon abandoned their inanimate victim, and its
sinewy limbs relaxing, the devoted cur rolled out a lifeless body.

“How like you this specimen of our wild sports?” inquired Boone,
turning to Glenn, as the rest proceeded to skin and dress the bear
preparatory for its conveyance to the camp.

“It is exciting, if not terrific and cruel,” replied Glenn, musing.

“None could be more eager than yourself in the chase,’ said Boone.

“True,” replied Glenn; “and notwithstanding the uninitiated may for an
instant revolt at the spilling of blood, yet the chase has ever been
considered the noblest and the most innocent of sports. The animals
hunted are often an evil while running at large, being destructive or
dangerous; but even if they were harmless in their nature, they are
still necessary or desirable for the support or comfort of man. Blood
of a similar value is spilt everywhere without the least compunction.
The knife daily pierces the neck of the swine, and the kitchen wench
wrings off the head of the fowl while she hums a ditty. This is far
better than hunting down our own species on the battle-field, or
ruining and being ruined at the gaming-table. I think I shall be
content in this region.”

“And you will no doubt be an expert hunter, if I have any judgment in
such matters,” replied Boone.

“I wonder that Joe has not yet made his appearance,” remarked Glenn,
approaching the bear; “I expected ere this to have seen him triumphing
over his fallen enemy.”

“What kind of a gun had he?” inquired Boone.

“A large musket,” said Glenn, recollecting the enormous explosion that
seemed to jar the whole woods like an earthquake; “it must have been
Joe who fired—he had certainly overcharged the gun, and I fear it has
burst in his hands, which may account for his absence.”

“Be not uneasy,” replied Boone; “for I can assure you from the peculiar
sound it made that it did nothing more than rebound violently; besides,
those guns very rarely burst. But here comes Sneak, (I think they call
him so,) no doubt having some tidings of your man. It seems he has not
been idle. He has a brace of racoons in his hands.”

The tall slim form of Sneak was seen coming down the path. Ever and
anon he cast his eyes from one hand to the other, regarding with no
ordinary interest the dead animals he bore.

“I did not hear him fire,” remarked Glenn.

“He may have killed them with stones,” said Boone; and as Sneak drew
near, he continued, with a smile, “they are nothing more than a brace
of his terriers, that doubtless Bruin dispatched, and which may well be
spared, notwithstanding Sneak’s seeming sorrow.”

Sneak approached the place where Boone and Glenn were standing, with
the gravest face that man ever wore. His eyes seemed to be set in his
head, for not once did they wink, nor did his lips move for some length
of time after he threw down the dogs at the feet of Glenn, although
several men addressed him. He stood with his arms folded, and gazed
mournfully at his dead dogs.

“The little fellows fought bravely, and covered themselves with glory,”
said Glenn, much amused at the solemn demeanour of Sneak.

“If there ain’t more blood spilt on the strength of it, I wish I may be
smashed!” said Sneak, compressing his lips.

“What mean you? what’s the matter?” inquired Boone, who best understood
what the man was meditating.

“I’ve got as good a gun as anybody here! And I’ll have revenge, or
pay!” replied Sneak, turning his eyes on Glenn.

“If your remarks are intended for me,” said Glenn, “rely upon it you
shall have justice.”

“Tell us all about it,” said Boone.

“When I heard that fool up the valley shoot off his forty-four pounder,
I ran to see what he had done, and when I came near to where he was,
his gun was lying up the hill behind him, and he setting down whining
like a baby, and a great gore of blood hanging to his nose. I wish it
had blowed his head off! I got tired of staying with the tarnation
fool, who couldn’t tell me a thing, when I heard you shooting, and the
horn blowing for the men; and knowing the bar was dead, I started off
full tilt. I hadn’t gone fifty steps before I began to see where his
bullets had spattered the trees and bushes in every direction.
Presently I stumbled over these dogs, my own puppies—and there they lay
as dead as door nails. I whistled, and they didn’t move; I then stooped
down to see how the bear had killed ’em, and I found these bullet holes
in ’em!” said Sneak, turning their limber bodies over with his foot,
until their wounds were uppermost. “I’ll be shot if I don’t have pay,
or revenge!” he continued, with tears in his eyes.

“What were they worth?” demanded Glenn, laughing.

“I was offered two dollars a-piece for ’em as we came through Indiana,”
replied Sneak.

“Here’s the money,” said Glenn, handing him the amount. After receiving
the cash, Sneak turned away perfectly satisfied, and seemed not to
bestow another thought upon his puppies.

This affair had hardly been settled before Joe made his appearance on
Pete. He rode slowly along down the path, as dolefully as ever man
approached the graveyard. As he drew near, all eyes were fixed upon
him. Never were any one’s features so much disfigured. His nose was as
large as a hen’s egg, and as purple as a plum. Still it was not much
disproportioned to the rest of his swollen face; and the whole
resembled the unearthly phiz of the most bloated gnome that watched
over the slumbers of Rip Van Winkle.




CHAPTER III.

Glenn’s castle—Mary—Books—A hunt—Joe and Pete—A tumble—An opossum—A
shot—Another tumble—A doe—The return—They set out again—A mound—A
buffalo—An encounter—Night—Terrific
spectacle—Escape—Boone—Sneak—Indians.


Some weeks had passed since the bear hunt. The emigrants had crossed
the river, and selected their future homes in the groves that bordered
the prairie, some miles distant from the ferry. Glenn, when landed on
the south side of the Missouri, took up his abode for a short time with
Jasper Roughgrove, the ferryman, while some half dozen men, whose
services his gold secured, were building him a novel habitation. And
the location was as singular as the construction of his house. It was
on a peak that jutted over the river, some three hundred feet high,
whence he had a view eight or ten miles down the stream, and across the
opposite bottom-land to the hills mentioned in the preceding chapter.
The view was obstructed above by a sudden bend of the stream; but on
the south, the level prairie ran out as far as the eye could reach,
interrupted only by the young groves that were interspersed at
intervals. His house, constructed of heavy stones, was about fifteen
feet square, and not more than ten in height. The floor was formed of
hewn timbers, the walls covered with a rough coat of lime, and the roof
made of heavy boards. However uncouth this abode appeared to the eye of
Glenn, yet he had followed the instructions of Boone, (to whom he had
fully disclosed his plan, and repeated his odd resolution,) and reared
a tenement not only capable of resisting the wintry winds that were to
howl around it, but sufficiently firm to withstand the attacks of any
foe, whether the wild beast of the forest or the prowling Indian. The
door was very narrow and low, being made of a solid rock full six
inches in thickness, which required the strength of a man to turn on
its hinges, even when the ponderous bolt on the inside was unfastened.
There was a small square window on each side containing a single pane
of glass, and made to be secured at a moment’s warning, by means of
thick stone shutters on the inside. The fire-place was ample at the
hearth, but the flue through which the smoke escaped was small, and ran
in a serpentine direction up through the northern wall; while the
ceiling was overlaid with smooth flat stones, fastened down with huge
iron spikes, and supported by strong wooden joists. The furniture
consisted of a few trunks, (which answered for seats,) two camp beds,
four barrels of hard biscuit, a few dishes and cooking utensils, and a
quantity of hunting implements. Many times did Joe shake his head in
wonderment as this house was preparing for his reception. It seemed to
him too much danger was apprehended from without, and it too much
resembled a solitary, and secure prison, should one be confined within.
Nevertheless, he was permitted to adopt his own plan in the
construction of a shelter for the horses. And the retention of these
animals was some relief to his otherwise gloomy forebodings, when he
beheld the erection of his master’s suspicious tenement. He
superintended the building of a substantial and comfortable stable. He
had stalls, a small granary, and a regular rack made for the
accommodation of the horses, and procured, with difficulty and no
little expense, a supply of provender. The space, including the
buildings, which had been cleared of the roots and stones, for the
purpose of cultivating a garden, was about one hundred feet in
diameter, and enclosed by a circular row of posts driven firmly in the
ground, and rising some ten feet above the surface. These were planted
so closely together that even a squirrel would have found it difficult
to enter without climbing over them. Indeed, Joe had an especial eye to
this department, having heard some awful tales of the snakes that
somewhat abounded in those regions in the warm seasons.

One corner of the stable, wherein a quantity of straw was placed, was
appropriated for the comfort of the dogs, Ringwood and Jowler, which
had been presented to Glenn by his obliging friend, after they had
exhibited their skill in the bear hunt.

When every thing was completed, preparatory for his removal thither,
Glenn dismissed his faithful artisans, bestowing upon them a liberal
reward for their labour, and took possession of his castle. But,
notwithstanding the strange manner in which he proposed to spend his
days, and his habitual grave demeanour and taciturnity, yet his kind
tone, when he uttered a request, or ventured a remark, on the
transactions passing around him, and his contempt for money, which he
squandered with a prodigal hand, had secured for him the good-will of
the ferrymen, and the friendship of the surrounding emigrants. But
there was one whose esteem had no venal mixture in it. This was Mary,
the old ferryman’s daughter, a fair-cheeked girl of nineteen, who never
neglected an opportunity of performing a kind office for her father’s
temporary guest; and when he and his man departed for their own
tenement, not venturing directly to bestow them on our hero, she
presented Joe with divers articles for their amusement and comfort in
their secluded abode, among which were sundry live fowls, a pet fawn,
and a kitten.

The first few days, after being installed in his solitary home, our
hero passed with his books. But he did not realize all the satisfaction
he anticipated from his favourite authors in his secluded cell. The
scene around him contrasted but ill with the creations of Shakspeare;
and if some of the heroes of Scott were identified with the wildest
features of nature, he found it impossible to look around him and enjoy
the magic of the page at the same time.

Joe employed himself in attending to his horses, feeding the fowls and
dogs, and playing with the fawn and a kitten. He also practiced loading
and shooting his musket, and endeavoured to learn the mode of doing
execution on other objects without committing violence on himself.

“Joe,” said Glenn, one bright frosty morning, “saddle the horses; we
will make an excursion in the prairie, and see what success we can have
without the presence and assistance of an experienced hunter. I
designed awaiting the visit of Boone, which he promised should take
place about this time; but we will venture out without him; if we kill
nothing, at least we shall have the satisfaction of doing no harm.”

Joe set off towards the stable, smiling at Glenn’s joke, and heartily
delighted to exchange the monotony of his domestic employment, which
was becoming irksome, for the sports of the field, particularly as he
was now entirely recovered from the effects of his late disasters, and
began to grow weary of wasting his ammunition in firing at a target,
when there was an abundance of game in the vicinity.

“Whoop! Bingwood—Jowler!” cried he, leading the horses briskly forth.
The dogs came prancing and yelping round him, as well pleased as
himself at the prospect of a day’s sport; and when Glenn came out they
exhibited palpable signs of recognition and eagerness to accompany
their new master on his first deer-hunt. Glenn stroked their heads,
which were constantly rubbed against his hands, and his caresses were
gratefully received by the faithful hounds. He had been instructed by
Boone how to manage them, so as either to keep them at his side when he
wished to approach the game stealthily, or to send them forth when
rapid pursuit was required, and he was now anxious to test their
sagacity.

When mounted, the young men set forward in a southern direction, the
valley in which the ferryman’s cabin was situated on one hand, and one
about the same distance above on the other. But the space between them
gradually widened as they progressed, and in a few minutes both
disappeared entirely, terminating in scarcely perceptible rivulets
running slowly down from the high and level prairie. Here Glenn paused
to determine what course he should take. The sun shone brightly on the
interminable expanse before him, and not a breeze ruffled the long dry
grass around, nor disturbed the few sear leaves that yet clung to the
diminutive clusters of bushes scattered at long intervals over the
prairie. It was a delightful scene. From the high position of our hero,
he could distinguish objects miles distant on the plain; and if the
landscape was not enlivened by houses and domestic herds, he could at
all events here and there behold parties of deer browsing peacefully in
the distance. Ringwood and Jowler also saw or scented them, as their
attention was pointed in that direction; but so far from marring the
sport by prematurely running forward, they knew too well their duty to
leave their master, even were the game within a few paces of them,
without the word of command.

“I see a deer!” cried Joe, at length, having till then been employed
gathering some fine wild grapes from a neighbouring vine.

“I see several,” replied Glenn; “but how we are to get within gun shot
of them, is the question.”

“I see them, too,” said Joe, his eyes glistening.

“I have thought of a plan, Joe; whether right or wrong, is not very
material, as respects the exercise we are seeking; but I am inclined to
believe it is the proper one. It will at all events give you a fair
opportunity of killing a deer, as you will have to fire as they run,
and the great number of bullets in your musket will make you more
certain to do execution than if you fired a rifle. You will proceed to
yon thicket, about a thousand yards distant, keeping the bushes all the
time between you and the deer. When you arrive at it dismount, and
after tying your pony in the bushes where he will be well hid, select a
position whence you can see the deer when they run; I think they will
go within reach of your fire. I will make a detour beyond them, and
approach from the opposite side.”

“I’d rather not tie my pony,” said Joe.

“Why? he would not leave you, even were he to get loose,” replied
Glenn.

“I don’t think he would—but I’d rather not leave him yet awhile, till I
get a little better used to hunting,” said Joe, probably thinking there
might be some danger to himself on foot in a country where bears,
wolves, and panthers were sometimes seen.

“Can you fire while sitting on your pony?” inquired Glenn.

“I suppose so,” said Joe; “though I never thought to try it yet.”

“Suppose you try it now, while I watch the deer, and see if what I have
been told is true, that the mere report of a gun will not alarm them.”

“Well, I will,” said Joe. “I think Pete knows as well as the steed,
that shooting on him won’t hurt him.”

“Fire away, then,” said Glenn, looking steadfastly at the deer. Joe
fired, and none of the deer ran off. Some continued their playful
sports, while others browsed along without lifting their heads; in all
likelihood the report did not reach them. But Glenn heard a tremendous
thumping behind, and on turning round, beheld his man quietly lying on
the ground, and the pony standing about ten paces distant, with his
head turned towards Joe, his ears thrust forwards, his nostrils
distended and snorting, and his little blue eyes ready to burst out of
his head.

[Illustration: Glenn heard a tremendous thumping behind.]


“How is this, Joe?” inquired Glenn, scarce able to repress a smile at
the ridiculous posture of his man.

“I hardly know myself,” replied Joe, casting a silly glance at his
treacherous pony; and after examining his limbs and finding no injury
had been sustained, continued, “I fired as you directed, and when the
smoke cleared away, I found myself lying just as you see me here. I
don’t know how Pete contrived to get from under me, but there he
stands, and here I lie.”

“Load your gun, and try it again,” said Glenn.

“I’d rather not,” said Joe.

“Then I will,” replied Glenn, whose horsemanship enabled him to retain
the saddle in spite of the straggles of Pete, who, after several
discharges, submitted and bore it quietly.

Joe then mounted and set out for the designated thicket, while Glenn
galloped off in another direction, followed by the hounds.

When Joe arrived at the hazel thicket, he continued in the saddle, and
otherwise he would not have been able to see over the prairie for the
tall grass which had grown very luxuriantly in that vicinity. There was
a path, however, running round the edge of the bushes, which had been
made by the deer and other wild animals, and in this he cautiously
groped his way, looking out in every direction for the deer. When he
had progressed about halfway round, he espied them feeding composedly,
about three hundred paces distant, on a slight eminence. There were at
least fifteen of them, and some very large ones. Fearful of giving the
alarm before Glenn should fire, he shielded himself from view behind a
cluster of persimmon bushes, and tasted the ripe and not unpalatable
fruit. And here he was destined to win his first trophy as a hunter.
While bending down some branches over head, without looking up, an
opossum fell upon his hat, knocking it over his eyes, and springing on
the neck of Pete, thence leaped to the ground. But before it
disappeared Joe had dismounted, and giving it a blow with the butt of
his musket it rolled over on its side, with its eyes closed and tongue
hanging out, indicating that the stroke had been fatal.

“So much for you!” said Joe, casting a proud look at his victim; and
then leaping on his pony, he gazed again at the deer. They seemed to be
still entirely unconscious of danger, and several were now lying in the
grass with their heads tip, and chewing the cud like domestic animals.
Joe drew back once more to await the action of Glenn, and turning to
look at the opossum, found to his surprise that it had vanished!

“Well, I’m the biggest fool that ever breathed!” said he, recollecting
the craftiness imputed to those animals, and searching in vain for his
game. “If ever I come across another, he’ll not come the ’possum over
me, I’ll answer for it!” he continued, somewhat vexed. At this juncture
Glenn’s gun was heard, and Joe observed a majority of the deer leaping
affrighted in the direction of his position. The foremost passed within
twenty yards of him, and, his limbs trembling with excitement, he drew
his gun up to his shoulder and pulled the trigger. It snapped, perhaps
fortunately, for his eyes were convulsively closed at the moment; and
recovering measurably by the time the next came up, this trial the gun
went off, and he found himself once more prostrate on the ground.

“What in the world is the reason you won’t stand still!” he exclaimed,
rising and seizing the pony by the bit. The only answer Pete made was a
snort of unequivocal dissatisfaction. “Plague take your little _hide_
of you! I should have killed that fellow to a certainty, if you hadn’t
played the fool!” continued he, still addressing his pony while he
proceeded to load his gun. When ready for another fire, he mounted
again, in quite an ill humour, convinced that all chance of killing a
deer was effectually over for the present, when, to his utter
astonishment, he beheld the deer he had fired at lying dead before him,
and but a few paces distant. With feelings of unmixed delight he
galloped to where it lay, and springing to the earth, one moment he
whirled round his hat in exultation, and the next caressed Pete, who
evinced some repugnance to approach the weltering victim, and snuffed
the scent of blood with any other sensation than that of pleasure. Joe
discovered that no less than a dozen balls had penetrated the doe’s
side, (for such it was,) which sufficiently accounted for its immediate
and quiet death, that had so effectually deceived him into the belief
that his discharge had been harmless. He now blew his horn, which was
answered by a blast from Glenn, who soon came up to announce his own
success in bringing down the largest buck in the party, and to
congratulate his man on his truly remarkable achievement.

An hour was consumed in preparing the deer to be conveyed to the house,
and by the time they were safely deposited in our hero’s diminutive
castle, and the hunters ready to issue forth in quest of more sport,
the day was far advanced, and a slight haziness of the atmosphere
dimmed in a great measure the lustre of the descending sun.

Animated with their excellent success, they anticipated much more
sport, inasmuch as neither themselves nor the hounds (which hitherto
were not required to do farther service than to watch one of the deer
while the men were engaged with the other) were in the slightest degree
fatigued. The hours flew past unnoticed, while the young men proceeded
gayly outward from the river in quest of new adventures.

Glenn and his man rode far beyond the scene of their late success
without discovering any new object to gratify their undiminished zest
for the chase. It seemed that the deer which had escaped had actually
given intelligence to the rest of the arrival of a deadly foe in the
vicinity, for not one could now be seen in riding several miles. The
sun was sinking low and dim in the west, and Glenn was on the eve of
turning homeward, when, on emerging from the flat prairie to a slight
eminence that he had marked as boundary of his excursion, he beheld at
no great distance an enormous mound, of pyramidical shape, which, from
its isolated condition, he could not believe to be the formation of
nature. Curious to inspect what he supposed to be a stupendous specimen
of the remains of former generations of the aborigines, he resolved to
protract his ride and ascend to the summit. The mound was some five
hundred feet in diameter at the base, and terminated at a peak about
one hundred and fifty feet in height. As our riders ascended, with some
difficulty keeping in the saddle, they observed the earth on the sides
to be mixed with flint-stones, and many of them apparently having once
been cut in the shape of arrow-heads; and in several places where
chasms had been formed by heavy showers, they remarked a great many
pieces of bones, but so much broken and decayed they could not be
certain that they were particles of human skeletons. When they reached
the summit, which was not more than twenty feet in width and entirely
barren, a magnificent scene burst in view. For ten or fifteen miles
round on every side, the eye could discern oval, oblong, and circular
groves of various dimensions, scattered over the rich virgin soil. The
gentle undulations of the prairie resembled the boundless ocean
entranced, as if the long swells had been suddenly abandoned by the
wind, and yet remained stationary in their rolling attitude.

“What think you of the view, Joe?” inquired Glenn, after regarding the
scene many minutes in silence.

“I’ve been watching a little speck, way out toward the, sun, which
keeps bobbing up and down, and gets bigger and bigger,” said Joe.

“I mean the prospect around,” said Glenn. I can’t form an opinion,
because I can’t see the end of it,” replied Joe, still intently
regarding the object referred to.

“That is an animal of some kind,” observed Glenn, marking the object
that attracted Joe.

“And a wapper, too; when I first saw it I thought it was a rabbit, and
now it’s bigger than a deer, and still a mile or two off,” said Joe.

“We’ll wait a few minutes, and see what it is,” replied Glenn, checking
his steed, which had proceeded a few steps downward. The object of
their attention held its course directly towards them, and as it drew
nearer it was easily distinguished to be a very large buffalo, an
animal then somewhat rare so near the white man’s settlement, and one
that our hero had often expressed a wish to see. Its dark shaggy sides,
protuberant back and bushy head, were quite perceptible as it careered
swiftly onward, seemingly flying from some danger behind.

“Down, Ringwood! Jowler!” exclaimed Glenn, preparing to fire.

“Down, Joe, too,” said Joe, slipping down from his pony, preferring not
to risk another fall, and likewise preparing to fire.

When the buffalo reached the base of the mound, it saw for the first
time the objects above, and halted. It regarded the men with more
symptoms of curiosity than alarm, but as it gazed, its distressed
pantings indicated that it had been long retreating from some object of
dread.

Meantime both guns were discharged, and the contents undoubtedly
penetrated the animal’s body, for he leapt upright in the air, and on
descending, staggered off slowly in a course at right angles from the
one which he was first pursuing. Glenn then let the hounds go forth,
and soon overtaking the animal, they were speedily forced to act on the
defensive; for the enormous foe wheeled round and pursued in turn.
Finding the hounds were too cautious and active to fall victims to his
sharp horns, he pawed the earth, and uttered the most horrific
bellowings. As Glenn and Joe rode by the place where he had stood when
they fired, they perceived large quantities of frothy blood, which
convinced them that he had received a mortal wound. They rode on and
paused within eighty paces of where he now stood, and calling back the
baying hounds, again discharged their guns. The buffalo roared most
hideously, and making a few plunges towards his assailants, fell on his
knees, and the next moment turned over on his side.

“Come back, Joe!” cried Glenn to his man, who had mounted and wheeled
when the animal rushed towards them, and was still flying away as fast
as his pony could carry him.

“No—never!” replied Joe; “I won’t go nigh that awful thing! Don’t you
see it’s getting dark? How’ll we over find the way home again?”

The latter remark startled Glenn, for he had lost all consciousness of
the lateness of the hour in the excitement, and to his dismay had also
lost all recollection of the direction of his dwelling, and darkness
had now overtaken them! While pausing to reflect from which quarter
they first approached the mound, the buffalo, to his surprise and no
little chagrin, rose up and staggered away, the darkness seen obscuring
him from view altogether. Glenn, by a blast of his horn, recalled the
dogs, and joining Joe, set off much dispirited, in a course which he
feared was not the correct one. Night came upon them suddenly, and
before they had gone a mile the darkness was intense. And the
breathless calm that had prevailed during the day was now succeeded by
fitful winds that howled mournfully over the interminable prairie.
Interminable the plain seemed to our benighted riders, for there was
still no object to vary the monotony of the cheerless scene, although
they had paced briskly, and, as they supposed, far enough to have
reached the cliffs of the river. Nor was there even a sound heard as
they rode along, save the muffled strokes of their horses’ hoofs in the
dry grass that covered the earth, the low winds, and an occasional cry
of the dogs as they were trodden upon by the horses.

Ere long a change came over the scene. About two-thirds of the distance
round the verge of the horizon a faint light appeared, resembling the
scene when a dense curtain of clouds hangs over head, and the rays of
the morning sun steal under the edge of the thick vapour. But the stars
could be seen, and the only appearance of clouds was immediately above
the circle of light. In a very few minutes the terrible truth flashed
upon the mind of Glenn. The dim light along the horizon was changed to
an approaching flame! Columns of smoke could be seen rolling upwards,
while the fire beneath imparted a lurid glare to them. The wind blew
more fiercely, and the fire approached from almost every quarter with
the swiftness of a race horse. The darkened vault above became
gradually illuminated with a crimson reflection, and the young man
shuddered with the horrid apprehension of being burnt alive! It was
madness to proceed in a direction that must inevitably hasten their
fate, the fire extending in one unbroken line from left to right, and
in front of them; and they turned in a course which seemed to place the
greatest distance between them and the furious element. Ever and anon a
frightened deer or elk leaped past. The hounds no longer noticed them,
but remained close to the horses. The leaping flames came in awful
rapidity. The light increased in brilliance, and objects were
distinguishable far over the prairie. A red glare could be seen on the
sides of the deer as they bounded over the tall, dry grass, which was
soon to be no longer a refuge for them. The young men heard a low,
continued roar, that increased every moment in loudness, and looking in
the direction whence they supposed it proceeded, they observed an
immense, dark, moving mass, the nature of which they could not divine,
but it threatened to annihilate every thing that opposed it. While
gazing at this additional source of danger, the horses, blinded by the
surrounding light, plunged into a deep ditch that the rain had washed
in the rich soil. Neither men nor horses, fortunately, were injured;
and after several ineffectual efforts to extricate themselves, they
here resolved to await the coming of the fire. Ringwood and Jowler
whined fearfully on the verge of the ditch for an instant, and then
sprang in and crouched trembling at the feet of their master. The next
instant the dark, thundering mass passed over head, being nothing less
than an immense herd of buffalo driven forwards by the flames! The
horses bowed their heads as if a thunderbolt was passing. The fire and
the heavens were hid from view, and the roar above resembled the rush
of mighty waters. When the last animal had sprung over the chasm, Glenn
thanked the propitious accident that thus providentially prevented him
from being crushed to atoms, and uttered a prayer to Heaven that he
might by a like means be rescued from the fiery ordeal that awaited
him. It now occurred to him that the accumulation of weeds and grass in
the chasm, which saved them from injury when falling in, would prove
fatal when the flames arrived! And after groping some distance along
the trench, he found the depth diminished, but the fire was not three
hundred paces distant! His heart sank within him! But when on the eve
of returning to his former position, with a resolution to remove as
much of the combustible matter as possible, a gleam of joy spread over
his features, as, casting a glance in a direction from that they had
recently pursued, he beheld the identical mound he had ascended before
dark, and from which his unsteady and erratic riding in the night had
fortunately prevented a distant separation. They now led their horses
forth, and mounting without delay, whipped forward for life or death.
Could the summit of the mound be attained they were in safety—for there
the soil was not encumbered with decayed vegetation—and they spurred
their animals to the top of their speed. It was a noble sight to see
the majestic white steed flying towards the mound with the velocity of
the wind, while the diminutive pony miraculously followed in the wake
like an inseparable shadow. The careering flames were not far behind;
and when the horses gained the summit and Glenn looked back, the fire
had reached the base!

“I thank all the saints at once!” exclaimed Joe, dismounting and
falling on his knees.

“Thank your pony’s legs, also,” remarked Glenn, smiling.

“Was there ever such a blessed deliverance!” said Joe, panting.

“Was there ever such a lucky tumble into a ditch!” replied Glenn, with
spirits more buoyant than usual.

“Was there ever an old hunter so much deceived!” said a voice a few
paces down that side of the cone least exposed to the glare of the
fire, and so much in the shadow of the peak that the speaker was not
perceived from the position of the young men. But as soon as the words
were uttered, Ringwood and Jowler sprang from the horses’ heels where
they had lain panting, and rushed in the direction of the speaker, whom
they accosted with marks of joyful recognition.

“It is Boone!” exclaimed Glenn, leaping from his horse, and running
forward to his friend, who was now seen to rise up, and a moment after
his horse, that had been prostrate and still, was likewise on his feet.

“Ha! ha! ha! You have played me a fine trick, truly,” laughingly
remarked Boone, returning their hearty salutations.

“How?” inquired Glenn.

“In the first place, to venture forth before my arrival; in the next to
inspire me with the belief that I was on the eve of encountering a
brace of Indians. But I will begin at the beginning. When I crossed the
river and reached your hut, (which is indeed impregnable,) I was
astonished to find you had gone forth to hunt without a guide; and not
so much fearing you would be lost, should night overtake you, as
apprehending serious danger from the fire, the approach of which I
anticipated long before night, from the peculiar complexion of the
atmosphere, I set out on your trail, in hopes of overtaking you before
the shades of evening set in; but darkness coming on, I could trace you
no farther than to this mound. In vain did I endeavour to ascertain
which direction you then travelled; but resolving not to abandon the
search, I continued cruising about the prairie until the near approach
of the fire forced me to retreat hither. It was when urging my horse to
his utmost speed that I beheld you and your bear-hunter charging from
another direction, and from the partial view, as we were all under
whip, (and knowing the Osages were not far off,) I was instantly
convinced that you were savages. Arriving first, I made my sagacious
horse lie down, and then concealed myself behind his body.”

“I am not only rejoiced that we were not the savages you supposed, (for
then Joe and I must have perished in the flames somewhere,) on our own
account, but for the sake of the only man who can possibly extricate us
from this dilemma,” replied Glenn.

“You are somewhat wide of the mark as respects my jeopardy, my lad,”
said Boone; “for had you been hostile Osages, most assuredly ere this
you had both been killed.”

“Good gracious!” exclaimed Joe, whose predicament suddenly flashed upon
his mind; “for Heaven’s sake let us get home as fast as possible! He
says the Indians are about! Do let us go, Mr. Glenn; we can travel now
out yonder where the grass has all been burnt.”

“Pshaw! You seem more alarmed now, Joe, than when there really was
danger. Are the Osages truly hostile?” continued Glenn, addressing
Boone.

“They are not at war with the whites, as a nation,” replied Boone, ever
and anon looking towards the only point from which the fire now
approached; “but in thin settlements, where, they may easily be the
strongest party, as roving brigands, they may be considered extremely
dangerous. Your man’s advice is not bad.”

“There! Don’t you hear that? Now, _do_ let’s go home!” continued Joe,
with increased alarm.

Fortunately, that portion of the plain over which the scathing element
had spent its fury was the direction the party should pursue in
retracing their way homeward.

The light dry grass had been soon consumed, and the earth wore a
blackened appearance, and was as smooth as if vegetation had never
covered the surface. As the party rode briskly along, (and the pony now
kept in advance,) the horses’ hoofs rattled as loudly on the baked
ground as if it were a plank floor. The reflection of the fire in the
distance still threw a lurid glare over the extended heath. As the
smoke gradually ascended, objects could be discerned at a great
distance, and occasionally a half-roasted deer or elk, was seen
plunging about, driven to madness by its tortures. And frequently they
found the dead bodies of smaller animals that could find no safety in
flight.

“What’s that?” cried Joe, reining up his pony, and gazing at a huge
dark object ahead.

“A prize, to which we are justly entitled!” exclaimed Glenn, riding
forward, on discovering it to be the buffalo (now dead) that they had
fired upon early in the evening, and which circumstance he was relating
to Boone at the moment of the discovery by Joe.

“You have not only been lucky as hunters,” said Boone, as they
dismounted to inspect the animal, (which was an enormous bull,) “but,
what is extraordinary indeed, when you find your fallen game, it is
already cooked!”

“Huzza for us!” cried Joe, momentarily forgetting the Indians, in his
extravagant joy of having aided in killing the animal, and at the same
time leaping astride of it.

“The wolves have been here before us,” observed Boone, seeing a large
quantity of the buffalo’s viscera on the ground, which he supposed had
been torn out by those ravenous animals.

“Oh! oh! oh! oh!” exclaimed Joe, leaping up, and running a few steps,
and then tumbling down and continuing his cries.

“What has hurt the fellow so badly?” inquired Glenn, walking round from
the back of the animal to the front. The words were scarcely uttered
before he likewise sprang away, hastily, as he beheld a pronged
instrument thrust from the orifice in the body whence the bowels had
been extracted!

“Dod! I wonder if it’s wolves or Injins!” exclaimed a voice within the
cavity of the huge body.

“I’ve heard that voice before—it must be Sneak’s,” said Boone, laughing
heartily.

Now the buffalo was observed to quiver slightly, and after some
exertion to extricate himself, the long snake-like form of the
redoubtable “Hatchet-face” came forth and stood erect before the gaping
mouth and staring eyes of Joe.

“If I didn’t hear a white man speak, I wish I may be singed!” exclaimed
Sneak, wiping the moisture from his face, and rolling his eyes round.

“What did you stick that sharp thing in the calf of my leg for?”
demanded Joe, shaking his head threateningly and coming forward.

“He! he! he! That’s revenge for shooting my pups,” replied Sneak.

“But how came you here?” inquired Boone.

“I was taking a hunt”—here Boone interrupted him by asking where his
gun was. “I had no gun,” said Sneak; and then stooping down and running
his arm into the body of the buffalo, he produced a pronged spear,
about four feet in length; “this,” he continued, “is what I hunted
with, and I was hunting after muskrats in the ponds out here, when the
fire came like blazes, and like to ’ave ketched me! I dropped all the
muskrats I had stuck, and streaked it for about an hour towards the
river. But it gained on me like lightning, and I’d ’ave been in a purty
fix if I hadn’t come across this dead bull. I out with my knife and was
into him in less than no time—but split me, if I didn’t feel the heat
of the fire as I pulled in my feet! I knew the Injins was about, by the
buffalo; and the tarnation wolves, too, are always everywhere, and that
accounts for my jobbing that feller’s leg when he sot down on top of
me.”

Glenn’s laughter at the above narration was arrested by Boone, who
placed one hand on his shoulder, and with the other pointed out towards
the fire about a mile distant, before which and thrown in relief by the
flames could be distinctly discerned the flitting forms of a band of
savages! A number were mounted, and others could be seen on foot, and
all moving about in various directions round a large herd of buffalo,
which occasionally made a stand to resist the foe that harassed them on
all sides, but were soon driven forward again by the flames. Now a
mounted chief could be seen to ride boldly up within a few paces of the
dark mass of animals, and drawing his arrow to the head, discharge it,
shaft and all, into the defenceless side of his victim. The enraged
animal thus pursued either fell or rushed furiously on its foe; but the
skilful savage, by a dexterous turn or sudden leap, seemed to avoid him
with ease, and flying round, sent forth another barbed messenger as he
careered at full speed.

“As I’m afoot, I’ll go ahead!” cried Sneak, starting off at a gait that
verified his words.

“Good gracious!” exclaimed Joe, leaping on his pony and whipping after
Sneak, while Boone and Glenn followed in a brisk gallop.




CHAPTER IV.

The retreat—Joe makes a mysterious discovery—Mary—A
disclosure—Supper—Sleep—A cat—Joe’s flint—The watch—Mary—The bush—The
attack—Joe’s musket again—The repulse—The starting rally—The desperate
alternative—Relief.


The guidance of Sneak was infallible. Ere long the party reached the
vicinity of the river, which was indicated by the tall trees and the
valleys, and all apprehensions of immediate danger subsiding, they
slackened their pace.

Sneak, though not so much distressed as the panting horses, fell back,
and entered into conversation with Boone relative to the probable
operations of the Indians, while Joe continued some little distance in
advance, apparently wrapped in contemplation of the recent scenes that
had so much astonished him. When he was within about a hundred paces of
his long-wished for home, he thought he saw an object moving about in
front of the palisade. He checked his pony for an instant; but
convinced that the savages could not possibly have arrived already, he
again whipped onward, inclined to believe it to be nothing more than a
phantom of the brain. But when he proceeded a few stops farther, his
pony stopped suddenly and snorted, while a being, which he could not
exactly define, was distinctly seen to rise up and glide swiftly out of
view round the inclosure.

“Who’s that!” shouted he, and at the same time looking eagerly back at
his companions, whose near approach induced him to maintain his
position.

“Go on, Joe! What’s the matter?” remarked Glenn, the head of his steed
having passed over the back of the pony as he stood across the path and
blocked up the way.

“I beg to be excused! As sure as I’m alive, I saw an Indian run round
towards the gate!” replied Joe.

“Foller me,” said Sneak, poising his spear in the air, and advancing.

“Thank Heaven, it’s you!” exclaimed the mysterious object, coming
forward fearlessly, on hearing the men’s voices.

“Dod rot your cowardly skin!” said Sneak, after looking at the
approaching form and turning to Joe, “how dare you to be frightened at
sich a thing as that—a female woman!”

“It was not me—it was my pony, you great—”

“What?” asked Sneak, sharply, turning abruptly round, as they paused at
the gate.

“You great long buffalo tapeworm!” said Joe, alighting on the side of
the pony opposite to his quarrelsome companion, and then going forward
and opening the gate in silence.

“What brings thee hither at this late hour, Mary?” inquired Glenn, on
recognizing the ferryman’s daughter.

“Nothing—only—I”—stammered the abashed girl, who had expected only to
see our hero and his man.

“Speak out, lass, if you have any thing important to say,” remarked
Boone, when they entered the inclosure, placing his hand encouragingly
on the girl’s head.

Mary still hesitated, and Boone was no little puzzled to conjecture
rightly what it was she intended to impart; but he was convinced it
must be something of no ordinary nature that would induce a maiden of
reputed timidity to leave her father’s hut at a late hour of the night.

“Now tell me, Mary, what it was you wished to say,” remarked Glenn,
addressing her in a playful tone, when they were seated in the house,
and a lamp suspended against the wall was lighted.

“I did not expect to find Mr. Boone and Sneak with you—and now—”

“What?” inquired Glenn, much moved by her paleness, and the throbbing
of her breast, which now seemed to be gradually subsiding.

“Nothing—only you and Joe are both safe now,” she replied, with her
eyes cast down.

“Were we in danger? How are we safe?” inquired Glenn, regarding her
words as highly mysterious.

“Everybody is safe where Mr. Boone is,” replied Mary.

“But what was the danger, my pretty lass?” inquired Boone, playfully
taking her hand.

“Why Posin, one of father’s boatmen—”

“Speak on, lass—I know Posin to be an unfeeling wretch, and a
half-blood Indian; but he is also known to be a great coward, and
surely no harm could have been feared from him,” said Boone.

“But I heard him speaking to himself when I was filling my pitcher at
the spring, and he was standing behind some rocks, where he couldn’t
see me, and didn’t think any one was within hearing.”

“What said he?” inquired Glenn, impatiently, and much interested in the
anticipated disclosure, for he had often remarked the satanic
expression of Posin’s features.

“These were his words: ‘The Osages will be here before to-morrow
morning. If Raven, the chief, will go halves with me, I’ll tell him how
much money the young men have, and help to get it!’ Such were his very
words!” continued Mary, her dark eyes assuming a brightness, and her
voice a boldness unwonted on ordinary occasions, as she proceeded: “He
then started off towards the prairie with his rifle, and nobody has
seen him since. I told father about it but he wouldn’t believe there
was any danger; and when night came, he told me not to be uneasy, but
to sleep like a good girl. I did lie down, for I never like to disobey
my father; but I couldn’t sleep, and so I got up and came here to wait
till you returned, to tell you all about it.”

“Thanks, Mary—I shall never forget your kindness,” said Glenn, as much
affected by her simplicity and gentleness as at the threatened danger.

“You’re a sweet lass; God bless you, Mary!” said Boone, kissing her
smooth forehead. “Now run home and go to sleep, child; we will be on
our guard. As for you, your father is respected by all the Indians, and
therefore your own safety will be best secured under his protection.”

“I will accompany you to the hut,” said Glenn, as the girl bid them
good night, and was about departing.

“Oh no—I’m used to going alone,” said Mary, promptly declining the
proposition.

“She speaks truly, and it is unnecessary,” said Boone, as the maiden
bowed and disappeared.

The party then fastened the gate and secured themselves within the
stone house. Joe petitioned Glenn to permit him to bring in the dogs,
and Sneak seconded the motion, proposing to lie with them before the
fire.

After a hearty repast, Boone and Glenn retired to their couches in
quest of repose, so much needed after the exercises of the day. Nor was
it long before they were steeped in that deep and solemn slumber which
throws a mysterious veil over the senses, obscuring from the vision all
objects of an unpleasant nature, relieving the mind of the cares that
may have pressed heavily upon it during the day, and at the same time
by the gentlest process refreshing and reinvigorating the weary
faculties for renewed exertion.

Silence brooded over the fireside scene. The lamp threw a dim ray
around its small flame unruffled by the confined and motionless air.
The fawn was coiled in a sleeping posture under its master’s bed, while
the kitten purred upon its velvet back. On one side of the hearth lay
Sneak, his head pillowed upon one of the hounds, while the other slept
against his back. Joe was the only one present who had not fallen under
the magic influence of slumber. Hitherto he had yielded to a more
powerful impulse—that of the appetite—and he now sat upon a low stool
on the corner of the hearth opposite to Sneak, his back leaning against
the side of the fireplace, holding in his left hand a pewter platter,
and in his right a rib of the deer he had killed, well cooked, which he
raised to his mouth occasionally, and sometimes at very long intervals,
between the approaches of the sleep which was gradually overpowering
him. Once, when his eyelids sank heavily and closed, and the platter
rested on his lap, and his right hand, still clenching the savoury
bone, fell powerless at his side—Ringwood, in his hard breathing,
chanced to snuff up some ashes that caused him to sneeze. Joe started
at the sound, and after rolling his eyes round once or twice and
finding all right, raised the bone once more to his mouth and set his
jaws again in motion.

“Dod, man! are you going to chaw all night?” asked Sneak, awakened by
the motion of Ringwood, and looking up at the face of Joe in
astonishment.

“I had nothing to eat all day,” replied Joe, fishing for a cracker
floating in the greasy platter.

“But ain’t you a-going to sleep some?” asked Sneak, half unconsciously,
the final utterance smothered in a guttural rumble as he again sank
back on his canine pillow.

“Yes, when I’ve got my supper,” replied Joe lazily, and indistinctly,
with one end of the bone in his mouth. But it was not long before he
again nodded, and his hand with the bone in it was once more lowered
softly down at his side. He was soon palpably fast asleep. And now the
kitten, having finished its nap, came with a noiseless tread to the
comfortable fire, humming its low unvaried song; and, rubbing its soft
side against the head of Jowler, finally crouched down before the
embers, with its feet drawn under it, and its eyes apparently watching
the brilliant sparks that ever and anon flew up the chimney. But ere
long it scented the well-flavoured viand that dangled in the vicinity,
and after casting a glance at the face of Joe, and being satisfied that
he was insensible to all external objects, stealthily began to gnaw the
end of the bone that rested on the hearth. As long as it had in mind
the fear of interruption, it was permitted to feast moderately; but
when its ravenous propensity urged it to more active and vigorous
operations, Joe once more opened his eyes, and after looking slowly
around, but not down, again attempted to raise the rib to a is mouth.

“Hello!—augh! scat!” he cried, leaping up violently.

His first impression was that the Indians, about whom he had been
dreaming, were upon him; his next that a rattlesnake clung to his
finger; and finally, finding it to be the kitten bestowing some
scratches on the hand that sought to bereave it of its prize, he
uttered the latter exclamation, first in rage; but pleased that his
condition was no worse, soon after called the poor frightened pet to
him, and with one or two caresses gave it the bone, and then resigned
himself to unrestrained slumber.

They were all aroused in the morning by the snorting of the horses
without, and the growling and sharp yelping of the hounds within.

“What’s the matter with the horses and dogs, Joe?” inquired Glenn,
rising from his couch.

“I don’t know what ails the foolish things. I know that I fed the
horses; and as for Ringwood and Jowler, I’ll soon kick them out. Let go
my ankle!” exclaimed he, turning to Sneak, who caught hold of him as he
rose to approach the door.

“Don’t open the door yet,” said Boone, who had been listening to the
sounds outside, and then continued in an under tone, addressing Glenn:
“They are certainly here; but whether or not with an evil intent I am
unable to determine.”

“Oh goodness! It’s the Indians!” exclaimed Joe, yielding to sudden
alarm, having momentarily forgotten the anticipated danger when he
proposed opening the door.

“Keep your mouth shet!” said Sneak, listening with his ear placed near
the floor behind the door.

“How many do you make them out to be?” inquired Boone, when Sneak had
occupied his position a few minutes.

“It’s all right!” replied Sneak, eagerly; “there is only two or three
of ’em, and old Roughgrove’s out there talking to ’em! How do you open
the door? Let me out!”

The door was opened with reluctance and cautiously by Joe, and Sneak
going foremost all the party sallied out into the fresh air. A snow of
several inches in depth had fallen, and within the circle enclosed by
the palisade not a single track was to be seen. But when the gate was
drawn back, several Osage Indians were observed standing a few paces
distant with their tomahawks hung in their belts and instead of
exhibiting any symptoms of hostility, they approached smiling, and
extended the hand of friendship to the whites.

“How do!” exclaimed the leader, in imperfect English, grasping the
hands held out in salutation, while his actions were imitated by the
others in silence.

“I’m very well, I thank you,” said Joe, bowing and retreating backwards
when they accosted him, unwilling to venture his hand within their
reach, as Glenn and the rest did.

“Shake hands with them, you silly fellow,” said Boone, “or they will
think you are an enemy.”

“Here, Mr. Osage!” said Joe, his teeth chattering as he extended his
hand; and the Indian, perceiving his alarm, squeezed it so tightly for
merriment that he was on the eve of crying out; and when liberated, he
sprang violently back, much inclined to run away, to their great
amusement.

“That is Raven, the chief,” remarked Roughgrove to Glenn, pointing to
the one that first addressed them, and who was now conversing with
Boone, whom he seemed to know, or to have been familiar with his
character, from his animated gestures and the excited expression of his
features. Sneak stood in silence, a convenient distance apart,
apparently gleaning intelligence from the conference. The chief (as are
the members of this tribe generally) was extremely dark, tall,
athletic, and wore a ferocious aspect, while the few followers with him
manifested a curiosity to examine the apparel and accoutrements of the
whites, but without betraying any signs of an evil disposition.

“Are there not more of them in the vicinity?” inquired Glenn.

“Yes—quite a large party,” said Roughgrove; “but Raven said he did not
wish to intimidate the whites by showing them, without first extending
the hand of friendship himself. They profess to entertain the kindest
feeling towards us, and propose through their chiefs to traffic their
furs and moccasins for such goods as we may be disposed to give them in
return.”

“I do not see your oarsman, Posin,” remarked Glenn, the disclosure of
Mary occurring to him—and then accosted Mary herself, who now joined
them with her eyes cast down in apparent bashfulness.

“His absence is a mystery to me,” replied the old ferryman, “though I
do not attach the same importance to it that Mary does.”

“Father”—uttered his daughter, and pausing in mingled timidity and
dread, as if some undefinable forebodings of harm oppressed her.

“I’ll be shot if I understand all this to my liking,” said Sneak,
staring at the great number of moccasin tracks that had been made round
the enclosure, which truly indicated that more than the four chiefs
present had been prowling there before daylight.

“Hush, Mr. Sneak!” said Joe; “they hear every word you say.”

“Jest let me alone a minute,” replied Sneak, getting down on his knees
and examining the various foot-prints with great minuteness. When he
rose he made some signs to Boone, which the others did not comprehend.

At this juncture several other Indians were seen to approach from the
valley above, where the party had encamped. These painted visitors
likewise came forward with sundry nods and gesticulations of
friendship, at the same time exhibiting several furred articles of
curious workmanship, and a few precious stones, as samples of what they
wished to barter. A short conference then ensued between them and the
head chief, which terminated in a pressing invitation for the whites to
accompany them to their encampment.

“You may all do as you like—I shall stay here,” said Joe, stepping back
towards the gate.

“You are a coward, Joe!” said Glenn; “you may remain, however, to
prevent them from pilfering any thing while we are away,” and he turned
towards the Indians for the purpose of accompanying them.

“Stay!” said Mary, in a distinct and startling tone.

“Why should we not go? We are armed, and could as easily withstand an
attack in their encampment as elsewhere. If it be their determination
to do us harm, their numbers will enable them to accomplish their
purpose notwithstanding all the opposition we can offer,” said Glenn.

“There is no danger,” said Roughgrove, endeavouring to extricate his
arm from the grasp of Mary, who strenuously held him back.

“I have a secret for thee, child,” said Boone, beckoning the trembling
girl to him.

“Oh, what is it? You will not let him—I mean my father, go among them,
will you? _You_ know that Posin is away—perhaps in some ambush —”

“Hush child!” said Boone, in a low tone, and employing gestures that
led the savages to believe he was quieting her fears, while he
whispered a message in her ear that had a singular effect. Though very
pale, the girl now smiled playfully, and returning to her father, said,
in tones so low that no one else could hear, “Father, he says you must
instantly cross the river for assistance—I will be safe, under _his_
protection, till you return.”

“I’ll do it!” replied Roughgrove, setting off towards the ferry. But
when he departed, the chief evinced much anger, and was only appeased
by the assurance that the old ferryman was gone for some article
desired by his child, and would return ere long.

The footprint which had so much attracted Sneak was recognized by some
peculiar marks to be that of Posin, and when the discovery was
communicated to Boone, he at once surmised that danger lurked in the
vicinity; and the subsequent impatience on the part of the Indians to
urge the whites to visit their camp, convinced him that some foul
treachery had been concocted between the half-breed and the savages. He
had also caught a glimpse of several armed Indians behind some bushes
at no great distance from where he stood, notwithstanding Raven had
asserted that the rest of his party were in their encampment; and when
the chief grew angry, and almost menacing, on the withdrawal of the old
ferryman, he resolved to adopt the surest means of safety without
delay. No sooner was the ferry-boat seen to shoot out from the land
than Boone motioned the whites to enter the inclosure. As they turned
towards the gate, the chief made a movement to intercept them; but
Boone drew forth a brace of pistols that had been concealed under his
hunting-shirt, one of which he pointed at Raven, and with the other
intimidated the rest who had advanced likewise, until his friends were
all within the palisade.

Boone drew forth a brace of pistols.

Boone drew forth a brace of pistols that had been concealed under his
hunting-shirt, one of which he pointed at Raven, and with the other
intimidated the rest who had advanced on himself, until his friends
were all within the palisade.


Boone did not wish to be the first to shed blood, and in their own
language asserted as much to the savages; but at the same time he
warned them not to commit any violence in the settlement at their
peril. The chief had not thought there would be any necessity for
bloodshed so soon, and perhaps not at all, if Glenn could be enticed
from his house, while Posin and his comrades might obtain his money.

Nor did he expect to meet with Boone, (renowned among all the tribes
for his wisdom and prowess,) much less to be anticipated on the very
threshold of the enterprise. His rage grew intense on finding himself
outwitted and defied. He drew forth his tomahawk, and though not
venturing to throw it, (for he perceived Glenn and Sneak behind, with
their guns in readiness to fire,) he shook it threateningly at Boone as
he closed the gate, and then strode away sulkily in the direction of
the bushes, where some of his followers had been seen partially
concealed.

When the gate was secured, the inmates of the little fort crowded about
Boone and overwhelmed him with questions.

“Do you think they can get over the posts?” inquired Joe.

“Will they come before father returns?” asked Mary.

“Do you think they will attack us at all?” interrogated Glenn.

“There can be no doubt of it,” replied Boone; “but if we do our duty, I
think we shall be able to resist them. We must be ready to defend
ourselves, at all events—and in the mean time we must watch through the
loopholes on every side to prevent a surprise.” This was hardly spoken
before an arrow whizzed over their heads, and, striking against the
stone wall of the house, fell at the feet of Joe.

“Ugh! look at that!” cried he, leaping some ten feet away.

“Go in, child—and the rest to their posts!” remarked Boone, first to
Mary, and then addressing the men.

“Yes—_do_ go in, Miss!” cried Joe, forcing Mary into the house, where
he also seemed determined to remain himself.

“Come out here!” cried Sneak, going to the door.

“Wait till I screw a flint in my musket,” said Joe.

“You can see better out here,” replied Sneak.

“But I haven’t found the flint yet,” answered Joe.

“He’s a coward!” said Sneak, turning away and going to his post, whence
he could watch the valley below.

Boone’s station was on the opposite side, in the direction of the
supposed encampment of the Indians. But not a savage could now be seen,
and the arrow that fell among them had evidently been discharged from a
great distance above.

“Shall we fire if any of them come within the range of our guns?”
inquired Glenn, from his position on the east, which overlooked the
cliff.

“Certainly,” replied Boone; “the arrow was their declaration of war,
and if they are again seen, it will be in a hostile attitude. Watch
close, Sneak!” he cried, as another shaft flew over the palisade from
the valley below, and penetrated the wood but a few feet above his
head.

“Come out to your post, Joe!” cried Glenn, impatiently.

“I will presently—as soon as I get my gun fixed,” replied Joe.

“If you do not come forth instantly, I’ll thrust you out of the
inclosure!” continued Glenn, somewhat fiercely.

“Here I am,” said Joe, coming out, and making an effort to assume a
bold bearing: “I’m ready now—I only wanted to fix my gun—who’s afraid?”
saying which, he strode in a stooping posture to the loophole on the
west of the inclosure.

While the whole male force of the garrison was required to act as
sentinels, Mary, whose trepidation had been succeeded by deliberate
resolution, was busily employed moulding bullets.

An hour passed, and no Indians had yet been seen, although an
occasional arrow assured the besieged party that the enemy still
remained in the immediate vicinity. They cleared away the snow at their
posts, and placing dry straw to stand upon, prepared to continue the
watch throughout the day and night. Nor were they to suffer for food;
for Mary, though she had not been requested so to do, ere long, to
their joyful surprise, came forth with a dinner handsomely provided,
which she placed before them with a smile of satisfaction playing on
her lips, and entirely unmindful of the shafts that continued to fly
overhead, which either pierced the wood and remained stationary, or
fell expended and harmless at her feet.

Affairs thus remained till night, when the arrows ceased to fly. There
was not a cloud in the heavens, and the moon rose up in purest
brightness. A breathless stillness pervaded the air, and no sound for a
great length of time could be heard but the hooting of owls on the
opposite side of the river, and the howling of wolves in the flats
about a mile above.

“I’m not a bit cold—are you?” said Joe, addressing Sneak.

“Dad! keep an eye out!” replied Sneak, in a low tone.

“There’s nothing out this way but a bush. But I declare it seems to be
bigger and nigher than it was in the daytime,” said Joe.

“Don’t speak so loud,” remarked Boone, crossing to where Joe stood, and
looking through at the bush.

“It’s nothing but a bush,” said Joe.

“Do you wish to kill an Indian?” inquired Boone.

“I wish they were all worms, and I could get my heel on them!” said
Joe.

“That would be cruel—but as any execution we may now do, is in our own
defence, you may fire at that bush if you like,” continued Boone.

“Well,” said Joe; and taking deliberate aim, discharged his musket as
directed, and was knocked down on his back in the snow by the rebound.

“Plague take the gun!” said he, recovering his feet; “but I remember it
had two loads in—I forgot it was charged, and loaded it again. Ha! ha!
ha! but what’s become of the bush?” he continued jocularly, not
thinking he had fired at an Indian.

“Look for yourself,” replied Boone.

“Hang me if it ain’t gone!” exclaimed Joe.

“Ay, truly it is; but had you hit the mark, it would have fallen. It
was rather too far, however, even for your musket,” said Boone,
returning to his former position.

“You are the poorest marksman that ever I saw, or you’d ’ave killed
that red rascal,” said Sneak, coming up to Joe, and finding where the
bush had been.

“I didn’t know it was any thing but a bush—if I’d only known it was an
Indian—”

“You be hanged!” replied Sneak, vexed that such a capital opportunity
should be lost, and petulantly resuming his own station.

An intense silence succeeded the discharge of Joe’s gun, after the
tremendous report died away, in successive reverberations up and down
the river, and over the low wood land opposite. The owls and wolves
were hushed; and as the watchful sentinels cast their eyes over the
snow, on which the calm rays of the moon rested in repose, there was
not the least indication of the presence of a dangerous foe.

Joe leant against the palisade, holding with one hand the breech of his
gun, while the barrel was thrust through the loophole, and seemed to be
indulging in a peculiar train of reflections.

“Now, I’d much rather be in Philadelphia,” said he, in a voice but
little louder than a, whisper, and unconscious of giving utterance to
his thoughts—“a great deal rather be there—in some comfortable
oyster-cellar—than standing out here in the lone wilderness, up to my
knees in snow, and expecting every minute to have a poisoned arrow shot
through my head. Hang it all! I wonder what pleasure Mr. Glenn can
enjoy here? Suppose, now, while I’m standing here thinking, an arrow
should dart over the, other side, and stick five or six inches into me?
I hope they keep a careful look-out. And that reminds me that I ought
to keep an eye out myself, for fear some one may he pinked from my
side.” He applied his eye to the hole, and continued in the same
strain: “I don’t see a single living thing; maybe they’ve all gone off.
If they have, I’ll deserve all the credit, for I’m the only person that
shot at them. And I don’t think that long hatchet-face Sneak will think
that I’m a coward any more. But these savages are strange beings; I had
no more idea that the bush hid an Indian than that there’s one not ten
feet off now, under the snow. And if we hadn’t found him out he might
have crawled up and shot me in the eye through this hole. I won’t hold
my eye here all the time!” said he, rising, and to his astonishment
Sneak stood at his elbow, whither he had glided softly, his quick ear
having caught the hum of Joe’s soliloquy, and his curiosity leading him
to find out the meaning of the mysterious jargon of his
companion-in-arms.

“Of all the men I ever saw you are the dod-rottedest!” exclaimed Sneak,
after staring at him a few moments in silent wonderment, and then
striding back to his post.

“I should like to hear that sentence parsed,” said Joe, looking after
him.

The hours wore on in peace, until midnight, when a low chattering, like
that of a squirrel, was heard in the valley below; while a shrill
whistling, resembling that of quails was distinguished above.

“Come hither!” exclaimed Boone in a whisper to Glenn.

“Do you see any of them?” inquired Glenn, joining his friend.

“Not yet—but we will see enough of them presently. The sounds in the
valleys are signals, and they will attack us on these sides. You may
abandon your watch on the east, and assist me here.”

“And you may come and spell me,” said Sneak to Joe.

“I must not desert my post,” said Joe.

“If you stay there, you’ll be dead sure to be shot!” replied Sneak.

“You don’t think they’re coming back, do you?” inquired Joe, gliding
swiftly to Sneak’s side.

“They’ll be on us in no time. Is your gun loaded?

“I declare I have forgotten whether I loaded it again or not!” said
Joe.

“You’re, a purty feller, to watch with an empty gun, now ain’t you?
Never mind blowing in her—run down a cartridge as quick as you kin; it
makes no odds how much you have in; a big noise will do as much good as
any thing else,” said Sneak, hurriedly, evidently expecting to see the
savage enemy every moment, while Joe did his bidding, asserting all the
time that he believed his musket was already loaded, and expressing a
decided dislike to being kicked over every day from overcharging.

As Boone predicted, but a very short time elapsed before a series of
startling and frightful yells were heard below, which were answered by
similar horrid sounds above. Joe first ran towards Boone and Glenn, and
then sprang back to his place at the side of Sneak, fully convinced
there were no means of retreat, and, being effectually cornered, at
length evinced an ardent desire to fire. When the yells died away in
the distance, a flight of arrows from the north south poured upon the
besieged party. Many of them pierced the outer side of the palisade,
while others, flying over, penetrated the opposite timbers, and
quivered above the heads of the men; and some rattled against the top
of the house, (the snow having melted from the roof,) and fell harmless
to the earth.

There having been no shot yet fired in the direction whence the arrows
came, (for such was the order of Boone,) the savages, emboldened by the
absence of any demonstrations of resistance, and thinking their foes
were shut up in the house, or killed by their numberless shafts,
charged upon the premises simultaneously from both sides, shooting
their arrows and yelling as they came. When they had approached within
a hundred paces of the inclosure, Boone and Sneak fired with deadly aim
at the foremost of the party, and the next moment Glenn followed the
example, while Boone reloaded his gun.

“Now fire!” exclaimed Sneak, shaking Joe by the shoulder, having seen
the savages pause when one of their party uttered the death-howl and
fell.

“Here goes!” said Joe, pulling the trigger and falling over on his back
in the snow from the rebound, for the musket had been truly twice
charged.

“Split me if you didn’t accidentally throw a handful of bullets among
their legs that crack!” said Sneak, observing the now discomfited and
retreating Indians, as they endeavoured to bear off their wounded, and
then firing on them again himself as they vanished down the valley. The
like result was witnessed above, and again in a very short time there
was not a savage to be seen.

“What’s the matter? Why don’t you get up?” asked Sneak turning to Joe,
who still remained prostrate on the ground.

“My mouth’s bleeding—I don’t know but I’m wounded. Didn’t an arrow come
through the hole when I was shooting?” asked Joe, rising partially up
and spitting out a quantity of blood on the snow.

“It was nothing but the gun kicking you like it did in the bear hunt.
If it was an arrow you must have swallered it, for I don’t see the
shaft. But maybe you did—you’re sech a gormandizer,” said Sneak.

“Hang it all, I don’t believe I’m much hurt!” exclaimed Joe, jumping up
suddenly. “Get from before the hole!” he continued, ramming down a
cartridge hastily, and thrusting out the muzzle of his gun.

“Why don’t you blaze away?” asked Sneak, laughing, observing that he
hesitated.

“Why, they’re, all gone!” cried Joe, joyfully, “and it was my old
cannon that swept them off, too.”

Once more silence pervaded the scene. Boone, after the repeated
solicitations of Mary, partook of another bountiful repast, and the
others in turn likewise refreshed themselves, and then resumed the
watch.

Nor was it long before the Osages were once more heard to howl like
fiends, and the sound had hardly ceased to vibrate through the air
before a singular and unexpected assault terrified the besieged party
for a moment. This was a shower of _blazing arrows_ coming from below,
(where all the savages now seemed to be collected,) which ignited the
palisade in many places where the snow had fallen off. But the fire was
easily extinguished, and all, with the exception of Boone, were
disposed to attach but little importance to any further device of the
enemy. Boone, on the contrary, was unusually grave, and requested his
companions to be on the alert, or they would yet be the victims of the
savages.

“I like these kind of arrows the best,” said Joe, “for I can see how to
dodge them.”

“But the wooden slabs can’t dodge—dod! they’re afire on the outside
now!” cried Sneak, truly discovering a flame reaching above the
inclosure from without.

“Watch well from the loopholes!” cried Boone, throwing open the gate
and rushing out, and running round to where the fire was crackling.
“Come, Sneak!—I want your assistance—quick!” he exclaimed, finding the
flames making rapid progress.

“Keep your eye skinned now!” said Sneak, as he left Joe alone to watch
for the Indians, and ran out to aid in subduing the fire.

The savages could evidently see what was transacting, although unseen
themselves, for most of their arrows now seemed to be directed at those
without.

“Look sharp!” said Boone to Joe, through the loophole.

“Let me assist!” cried Glenn, imprudently leaving his post in his
eagerness to share the danger, and coming out with a spade.

“Go in, my friend—we are sufficient here,” said Boone, addressing
Glenn.

“Come in! come in! come in!” cried Joe.

“I see no Indians,” remarked Boone.

“The house is on fire! Fire! fire! fire!” screamed Joe, falling into
his old habit when in the city.

Glenn ran back in this emergency, but when he arrived within the
inclosure, he found that this service had been anticipated by Mary, who
had quietly thrust her hands into the snow, and with balls thus made,
easily extinguished the fire on the roof.

When Boone and Sneak had effected their purpose, they repaired to their
former positions, assured that the utmost caution must be observed to
prevent a surprise from some unexpected quarter, while their attention
was naturally directed to one particular point. But they had hardly
resumed their stations before their ears were saluted by the joyful
report of rifles in the valley. Relief was at hand. Roughgrove had
recrossed the river, with a party of recruits, and fallen upon the rear
of the savages, at a moment when success seemed to smile on their
sanguinary purpose. Their shouts of exultation at the prospect of
firing the premises were now changed to howls of despair, and they fled
in all directions. But Roughgrove, aware of the impolicy of pursuit,
led his men directly to the gallant little garrison; and the victorious
huzzas of his band were answered in like manner by the besieged, who
came forth and gave them a cordial welcome. Never, perhaps, when they
met, did hand grasp hand more heartily. But Mary, who had hitherto cast
aside all the weaker fears of the woman, no sooner beheld her aged
father in safety than she rushed into arms and fainted on his breast.




CHAPTER V.

A strange excursion—A fairy scene—Joe is puzzled and frightened—A
wonderful discovery—Navigation of the upper regions—A crash—No bones
broken.


Several weeks had elapsed since the incidents recorded in the last
chapter. The repulse of the Osages was succeeded by the arrival of a
war-party of Pawnees, and a deadly feud existing between these tribes,
the latter readily joined the whites, and speedily chased the enemy far
beyond the settlements. Boone had returned to his family on the other
side of the river; and Sneak, having made peace with Joe, had likewise
withdrawn to his own domicil, to pursue his avocations of hunting and
trapping in solitude.

Glenn sat before a blazing fire in his little castle, his left hand
clasping a closed book he had been reading, while his dextral elbow was
resting on the rude arm of a chair which he had constructed and
cushioned with furs, and his palm supported his chin. He thus sat
silently, looking steadfastly through one of the little square windows
at the snow-encrusted branches of the trees beyond the inclosure, and
apparently indulging a pleasing train of reflections.

Joe, on the contrary, was engaged in boisterous and mirthful exercise
on the deep and frozen snow without. He was playing with the kitten,
the fawn, and the hounds, and occasionally ran into the stable to
caress the horses.

At length, with no other object than a dreamy impulse to wander among
the wild scenes in the vicinity, Glenn started up, and donning a warm
overcoat and seizing his rifle, set out along the cliff up the river,
(a direction which he had never yet traversed,) accompanied by Joe, who
seemed to look upon his master’s pale composed face, and determined
though gentle motions, with curiosity, if not mystery.

“Why do you stare at me so often?” inquired Glenn, pausing, after they
had walked some distance in silence.

“Because I don’t know what you’re after,” replied Joe.

“You’ll see what I’m after,” said Glenn, setting forward, and
continuing his course along the cliff.

A snow of several feet in depth rested on the earth, and the sun that
shone forth at noon had melted the surface so frequently, that the
freezing nights which had as often succeeded had formed an icy
incrustation quite strong enough to bear the weight of a man. Though it
was a dreary waste, yet Glenn gleaned a satisfaction in casting his
eyes around where his glance beheld no one striving to oppress his
fellow being that he might acquire riches and power, to be again
snatched from his grasp by others, but a peaceful scene, fresh from the
hand of God, and unmarred by the workmanship of meaner creatures. The
broad river far below was covered with a massy plate of ice, and the
snow that rested upon it gave it the appearance of an immense plain,
rather than an incrusted surface of the most perturbed and erratic
stream in the world. The geese and other fowl that wandered over the
frozen surface in quest of their native element, from the great
distance down, seemed to be no larger than sparrows.

Ere long, Glenn and his man reached the valley above, and commenced a
descent through the timber in a diagonal direction, that would conduct
them, after numerous windings, to the edge of the frozen stream, along
which a narrow pathway ran northward about a mile. Glenn paused at an
abrupt angle in his descent, after having proceeded a few paces through
the undergrowth, and stood long in wonderment and admiration, gazing at
the scene that suddenly burst in view. His towering position overlooked
the whole valley. The ten thousand trees beneath, and their ten million
branches and twigs all completely clothed in crystal—while not the
slightest breeze was stirring—presented a view of fairyland, such as
flits across the vision in dreams, that the memory fain would cling to,
but which is lost in the real and conflicting transactions of returning
day. The noonday sun was momentarily veiled by a listless cloud, which
seemed to be stationary in the heavens, as if designed to enhance the
effect of the beauty below, that outvied in brightness even the usual
light above. Not a squirrel was seen to leap from bough to bough, nor a
bird to flit across the opening between the lofty trees; but all was
stillness, silence, and beauty. As Glenn stood entranced, Joe seemed to
be more struck with the operation of the enchantment on his companion’s
features and attitude, than with any effect from the same source
experienced on himself.

“Ain’t you going down to the bottom of the valley?” asked Joe.

“It is a scene such as is beheld by infants in their slumbers, when
they dream of paradise!” said Glenn, paying no attention to Joe, his
eyes immovably riveted on the innumerable sprigs of alabaster which
pointed out in every direction in profuse clusters, while his pale lips
seemed to move mechanically, and his brow expressed a mournful
serenity, as if entertaining a regret that he should ever be separated
from the pearly labyrinths before him, amid which he would delight to
wander forever.

“I think you must be dreaming yourself,” said Joe, staring at him.

“How composed is every object!” continued Glenn; “such must be the
abode of angels and departed spirits, who are not permitted longer to
behold the strifes of earth and its contaminations, but rove
continually with noiseless tread, or on self-poised wing, through
devious and delightful paths, surrounded by sedges of silver
embroidery, and shielded above by mazy fretwork spangled with diamonds,
or gliding without effort through the pure and buoyant air, from bower
to bower of crystal”

“Ugh—talking of the icy trees makes me chilly!” said Joe.

“With life everlasting and unchangeable!” continued Glenn, after a
momentary pause from the interruption of his man, which he only noticed
by a significant motion of the hand for him to be silent.

“But I wouldn’t like the eternal _frost-work_,” said Joe.

“Pshaw!” replied Glenn, pursuing his way downwards. When they reached
the bottom of the valley, they were yet a hundred paces distant from
its junction with the river, which was obscured by the many intervening
trees that grew along the frozen rivulet. Here Glenn again paused to
contemplate the scene. The hills that rose abruptly on either hand, and
the thick intertwining branches above, combined to produce a dusky
aspect scarce less dim than twilight. Glenn folded his arms composedly,
and looked thoughtfully round, as if indulging the delightful fancies
engendered when wandering forth on a summer’s pleasant evening. “There
seems to be a supernatural influence pervading the air to-day,” he
said, in a low-tone, “for I sometimes imagine that flitting spirits
become partially visible. On the pendent icicles and jewelled twigs, me
thinks I sometimes behold for an instant the prismatic rays of elfins’
eyes—”

“Don’t believe it,” said Joe; “or if it is so, they are weeping at the
cold, and will soon be frozen up.”

“And at each sudden turn,” continued Glenn, “they seem to linger an
instant in view, and then vanish sportively, as if amused at the
expense of impotent mortals.”

“I can’t hear ’em laugh,” said Joe.

“And then,” continued Glenn, “although beyond human consciousness,
there may be heavenly sounds in the air—the melody of aërial harps and
fairy voices—to which our ears may be sealed, when, perchance, our
vicinity to their presence may inspire the peculiar sensation I now
experience.”

“I heard a heap of curious sounds one warm sunshiny morning,” said Joe;
“but when I asked an old fellow jogging along the same road what they
meant, he said the day before had been so cold when the stage-driver
went by that his wind froze as it came out of the bugle, and was just
then thawing.”

“If such beings do exist,” continued Glenn, paying no attention to Joe,
“it would delight me to commune with them face to face.”

“I see a buck’s head!” cried Joe, looking down the dell, where the
object he mentioned was distinctly observable amid a cluster of
spicewood bushes, whence a slight jingling sound proceeded as the
animal plucked the nutritious buds bent down by the innumerable
icicles.

“Why should not the sylvan gods”—continued Glenn.

“Hush! I’m going to fire!” said Joe.

“Why should they not resort hither,” said Glenn, unmindful of Joe,
“where no meaner beings abide?”

Joe fired, and Glenn started in astonishment, as if he had had no
intimation of his companion’s intention.

“Hang it all! Isn’t he going to die, I wonder?” said Joe, after the
buck had made one or two plunges in the snow, his sharp hoofs piercing
through the crust on the surface, and with much struggling extricated
himself and stood trembling, and looked imploringly at his foe.

“What in the world are you about?” exclaimed Glenn, casting a listless
glance at the deer, and then staring his companion in the face.

“Whip me if there was any lead in the gun!” said Joe. “I drew the
bullets out yesterday, and forgot to put them in again. But no
matter—he can’t run through the snow—I’ll kill him with the butt of my
musket.”

“Move not, at your peril!” said Glenn, authoritatively, when Joe was
about to rush on the defenceless buck.

“I do believe you are out of your head!” said Joe, staring Glenn in the
face, and glancing at the tempting prize, alternately.

“At such an hour—in such an elysian place as this—no blood shall be
spilled. It were profanity to discolor these pearly walks with clotted
gore.”

“The deuce take the pearls, say I!” said Joe.

“Perhaps,” continued Glenn, “a god may have put on the semblance of a
stag to tempt us.”

“And hang me, if I wouldn’t pretty soon spoil his physiognomy, if you
would only say the word!” said Joe, shaking his head sullenly at the
buck.

“Come,” said Glenn, sternly; and, leading the way, he passed within a
few feet of the terrified animal without turning his head aside, and
directed his steps down the valley towards the river. Joe said nothing
when opposite the buck, awed by the impressive tone and mysterious
bearing of his master; but he grinned defiance at him, and resolved to
embrace the first opportunity to steal out alone, and fully gratify his
revenge; for such was the feeling he now harboured against the animal.

When they reached the margin of the river, they wandered along the
narrow path that turned to the left, and continued up the stream, with
the ice but a few feet distant on one hand, and the precipitous
acclivity of rocks on the other. They maintained a brisk pace for about
thirty minutes, when the range of cliffs terminating abruptly, they
entered a low flat forest.

“_Now_, what do you say to my firing?” exclaimed Joe, staring at an
enormous wolf, a short distance on the left, that seemed to be tearing
the flesh from the carcass of a deer.

“You must not fire,” replied Glenn, viewing the scene with no interest.

“Why not? If the deer’s a sylvan god, the wolfs sure to be a black
devil, and it’s a duty to take the god’s part,” said Joe.

“No!” replied Glenn, still striding on.

“Where are you going to, I should like to know? I hope you haven’t any
idea of going closer to the haunted island!” said Joe, following
reluctantly.

“What haunted island?” asked Glenn.

“Why that one right ahead of us!” replied Joe, pointing to a small
island a few hundred paces distant.

“Who says it is haunted?” demanded Glenn.

“Why, everybody in the country _knows_ it’s haunted. Didn’t you hear
Miss Mary telling all about it?”

“What did she tell about it?”

“That several years ago a man flew up the river riding on a black cloud
of smoke, and after scaring all the Indians and everybody else away,
took up his abode in yonder island. Not a soul, from that day to this,
has ever been nearer to it than we are now. But strange sights have
been seen there. Once a great big swan, as large as our house, was seen
to come out of the willows and leap into the water. After seeing it
paddle about an hour or two in every direction, an old beaver trapper
and deer hunter took it into his head that it was nothing more than a
water-fowl of some large species; and resolving to have a crack at it
anyhow, he crept behind the rocks at the end of the cliff, and blazed
away when it swam past the next time. Mercy on us! when he fired, they
say the thing turned his head towards him, and came at him in a
straight line, and as fast as lightning, blowing sparks of fire out of
its nostrils, while the poor man stood stock still, spell-bound, until
it seized upon him, and he has never been heard of since.”

“Nothing more?” asked Glenn, lightly, and smiling.

“Good gracious! what more would you want? But there _was_ more; for the
very next day, when the people were looking at the island from a
distance, and wondering what had been the fate of old Odell, another
large bird came out. But this was like an eagle, and instead of going
into the water, it flew up into the air, and kept going higher and
higher, until it was no bigger than a sparrow, and soon vanished
altogether! I declare we are too near the island now, Mr. Glenn; let us
go back; we have gone far enough!” said Joe, beseechingly, his own tale
having roused all the terrors which his nature was capable of
harboring.

Glenn seemed to pay no attention to what his companion was saying, but
strode onward directly towards the island.

“Mr. Glenn!” continued Joe, stepping ahead, and facing him by turning
round. “Oh, sir! you don’t certainly intend to venture any closer to
that fatal spot?”

“Pshaw!” replied Glenn, pushing him aside, and continuing on. When they
were opposite the island, Joe, whose alarm had almost deprived him of
the power of motion, was now struck with horror as he beheld his master
pause, and then descend to the ice, and walk deliberately to the
haunted ground! When Glenn reached the bank, he turned to his pale and
shivering companion, and motioned him to follow.

“Oh, Heaven! we’ll never be seen any more!” cried Joe, between his
chattering teeth.

“Come on, Joe! I’ll take care of you,” said Glenn, encouragingly, as
his man hesitated in doubt when midway on the ice.

“The holy saints preserve me!” said Joe, gliding over, quaking with
fear, and clinging to Glenn’s hand.

They walked up a gentle ascent from the water’s edge, whence Glenn
expected to see nothing more than a surface of snow, and the dense
growth of young timber incident to such a place. But what was his
surprise, on beholding, in the midst of the island, and obscured from
view to the surrounding country by an almost impenetrable grove of
young willows, a round chimney-top rising over a high circular granite
wall! Nothing daunted, he continued his steps directly towards the
mysterious dwelling, notwithstanding the protestations and prayers of
Joe. When they drew near, a thin slightly coloured vapor could be
distinguished ascending from the chimney, indicating that the tenement
was certainly inhabited. When they reached the wall, they pursued their
way round it until they found a small iron gate.

“Rap there, Joe,” said Glenn. Joe only turned his head, and looked at
him in silence.

“Knock,” continued Glenn.

“Oh!” exclaimed Joe, falling on his knees. “If ever you were prevailed
on not to do any thing you were doing, let me this one time persuade
you to leave this place.”

“Knock!” repeated Glenn, emphatically. Joe struck the gate several
blows with his knuckles, but so gently that he could not hear them
himself. Glenn seemed to grow angry, and seizing his man’s musket, was
in the act of applying the end of it violently, when the gate flew open
at one spring, and a hoary porter stood bowing and beckoning before
him.

“Do not enter!” cried Joe, throwing his arms around Glenn.

“It is too late, now—you have knocked, and it is opened unto you—your
mission must be accomplished before you turn back. Mine is not yet
effected—I am the one who dared to face the magic swan—and like me, all
who come hither must remain until it shall be the pleasure of the
fire-wizard to release them,” said the old attendant.

“Lead me to this fire-wizard!” said Glenn, firmly, stepping into the
inclosure. When they entered, the gate closed after them without any
apparent agency of the old hunter, and with such force that Joe sprang
several feet forward.

“Oh, goodness! we are nothing but poor rats in the trap, now!”
exclaimed he.

“I pledged myself for your safety, and will keep my word,” said Glenn.

“But what will the wizard care about your veracity?” asked Joe.

“Follow!” said the old porter, leading the way towards the house. After
passing several small buildings, Glenn found himself in a spacious
area, over which were scattered various and strange implements, and
divers nondescript machines. Some half dozen men were also observed,
their sleeves rolled up, and intently plying the chisel, the file and
other tools. These men cast a momentary and sullen glance at the
visitors, like convicts in the penitentiary, and resumed their labours
in silence. The party soon arrived at the door of the main building,
when the old porter entered alone, and after remaining a few moments
within, came forth and announced his readiness to conduct our hero into
the presence of the fire-wizard. Glenn motioned him to lead on, and
after following through a short hall, and turning into a large chamber,
the mysterious lord of the island was confronted, reclining before them
on a couch of furs. He appeared to be an emaciated and decrepit old
man, his long white beard extending down to his breast; and when he
motioned our hero to a seat, his hand seemed to tremble with
feebleness. Yet there was something in his eye that indicated no
ordinary spirit, and instantly impressed Glenn with the respect that he
conceived to be due to superior genius; for notwithstanding all the
miraculous things told of the fire-wizard, he rightly conjectured the
personage before him to be nothing more than a human being, a recluse,
perhaps, and, like himself, seeking in solitude the enjoyments which
(for peculiar reasons) could not be found among mankind.

“What brings thee hither?” demanded the aged man, after a few minutes’
silence, during which his brilliant eyes were closely fixed upon the
composed features of Glenn.

“That which induced thee to seek such a solitary abode,” replied our
hero.

“Have you no fears?” continued the old man.

“None!” replied Glenn, firmly.

“Give me your hand!” exclaimed the old man; “you are the only being
that ever confronted the fire-wizard without feeling terror—and for
those who know not fear there is no danger. Instead of a menial, or a
victim, I will make you my companion.”

“Thank him, Mr. Glenn,” whispered Joe, “and perhaps he won’t hurt us.”

“I am seeking amusement,” said Glenn; “and as long as I am pleased, it
matters not with whom or where shall be my abode. But the moment I
desire it, I will go hence.”

The fire-wizard motioned the attendant to withdraw, who instantly
obeyed, leading Joe out at the same time, the poor fellow evincing
great reluctance to be separated from Glenn.

“Before exhibiting to you the mysterious objects which have acquired
for me the name of magician,” said the old man, “I will briefly give
you my history. I was, in youth, they termed an idle dreamer—ever on
the alert for new discoveries—and was more laughed at than encouraged
in my pursuit of rare inventions. More than fifty years ago I
ascertained that steam might be made to propel machinery. I attempted
to explain the principles of this discovery to my fellow-men, and to
convince them of the vast benefits that might result from it. I was not
heeded—nay, I was insulted by their indifference—and made a solemn vow
that its advantages should never be reaped through my instrumentality.
In secret I constructed a small steamboat, and having placed on board
such materials as might be required, and secured the assistance of a
requisite number of artisans, I came hither, resolved to prosecute my
experiments to my own satisfaction in solitude, where the taunts of
skeptics could not reach me. Follow, and you shall behold what has been
the result of my unrestrained researches.” The old man arose, and
conducted our hero across the yard to a curtained shelter on one side
of the inclosure.

“La! if that ain’t its foot!” exclaimed Joe, who joined our hero, and
observing a large foot, resembling in shape that of the swan, under the
folds of the curtain, while the old wizard paused a moment before
unveiling the curious object. It was as Joe surmised: when the canvas
was withdrawn, an artificial swan of monstrous dimensions, though
perfect in all its proportions, was revealed to their wondering gaze. A
little beyond, another curtain was drawn aside, and an eagle, holding
in its beak a bloody crown, and in its talons a silken banner of
stripes and stars, stood before them in the attitude of springing up in
the air.

“Which will you try first?” demanded the fire-wizard, while a proud
smile played on his lips.

“Can _either_ of them be set in motion by your art?” asked Glenn.

“Both!” exclaimed the wizard. “If you will tarry till the ice is gone,
the swan shall rush through the strongest current as swiftly as the
wild horse careers over the prairie; or the eagle shall even now dart
beyond the clouds, and transport you in a few brief hours to where you
will see the briny waves rolling against the distant Atlantic coast!”

Glenn was incredulous, and his unbelief was betrayed by a smile, in
spite of his efforts to the contrary.

“Bring hither a lamp!” said the wizard to the attendant and was quickly
obeyed.

“Oh, don’t make him mad! He’s going to do something now!” whispered Joe
to Glenn. The wizard touched a spring; the breast of the eagle flew
open, and within could be seen polished wheels and other portions of a
complicated machinery. The old man next applied the blaze of the lamp
to some spirits within, and in a very few minutes particles of steam
could be seen to escape from the eagle’s nostrils. The wizard touched
another spring, and the enormous bird strode out and paused in the
centre of the area.

“If you would behold the home of your youth, be it whithersoever it
may, so that you name it, follow me, and your eyes shall gaze upon that
spot within a few hours,” said the sage, as the wings of the stupendous
eagle slowly unfolded, and rising to a horizontal position, uncovered a
transparency in the side of the chest, through which could be seen a
gorgeous couch within, sufficiently ample to contain two men, and
separate from the fire and machinery by a partition of isinglass.

“Come!” exclaimed the sage, opening the tortoise-shell door under the
wing, and stepping into the couch.

“Don’t do any such thing!” said Joe.

“Ha! ha! ha! Do you think it can fly, Joe?” remarked Glenn, laughing.

“It _will_ fly!” said the old man, emphatically; “and I charge you to
be prepared to ascend beyond the clouds, if you have the courage to
occupy a portion of my couch.”

“Though I cannot believe it will rise at your bidding,” replied Glenn,
“yet, should it do so, I must be permitted to regard you as being only
flesh and blood, and as such, I do not hesitate to venture as much as
another mortal will;” Baying which, our hero seated himself beside the
reputed fire-wizard.

The old man closed the door, and drawing forth a small compass (his
companion intimating the course,) adjusted several screws within
convenient reach, accordingly; he then pressed a small lever with his
foot, and the wings, after quivering a moment, flapped quickly, and the
great eagle darted almost perpendicularly up in the air, and was beyond
the reach of vision in a very few seconds!

When a certain height was attained, the wizard turned the bird in the
course indicated by his companion.

“What think you now of the fire-wizard!” demanded the sage, with an air
of triumph.

“Still that he is a man—but a great one—and this, the perfection of his
art, the greatest extent the Supreme Being has permitted the mind of a
man to attain!” replied Glenn, gazing in admiration at the countries
far below, which he was passing with the velocity of a hurricane.

“And still you fear not!” demanded the wizard.

“And shall not!” replied Glenn, “so long as your features are
composed.” The old man pressed his hand and smiled.

“Yonder is St. Louis!” cried Glenn, running his eye along the valley of
the Missouri, down to its confluence with the Mississippi; and a short
distance beyond, descried the town in question, though it did not seem
to be larger than one ordinary mansion, with its garden and customary
appendages.

“We are far above the reach of vision from the earth,” said the wizard,
bounding forward to endeavour to regulate a part of the machinery that
had for some time attracted his attention, and which Glenn believed to
be not altogether right, from the abrupt movement of his companion.

“How far above the earth are we?’ asked Glenn.

“About twenty-five miles—but should this screw give way, it may be less
very speedily!” exclaimed the old man, almost incoherently, and
applying all his strength to the loosened screw to keep it in its
place.

“Let me assist!” exclaimed Glenn, springing forward.

“It’s gone!” cried the old man; “you have knocked it out! we are
falling—crushed!”


“That’s just what I expected,” said Joe, addressing the fawn, which had
been playing with the dogs, and at length ran against Glenn’s chair so
violently as to push it over.

“Oh! oh! oh!” exclaimed Glenn.

“Goodness! Are you hurt?” asked Joe.

“Is it possible? Am I alive, and _here_?” exclaimed Glenn, staring
wildly round, and doubting his own identity.

“Well, I never heard a dead man talk, as I know of, before; and as to
our being _here_, if your own eyes don’t convince you, I’ll swear to
it,” said Joe.

“Did I not go up to the island this morning?” inquired Glenn.

“No,” said Joe.

“Did you not accompany me, and fire at the buck?” interrogated Glenn,
resuming his seat.

“No—I’ll be hanged if I did!” said Joe somewhat warmly.

“What have I been doing all day?”

“You’ve been sitting there fast asleep, and I presume you were
dreaming.”

“Thank Heaven, it was but a dream!” exclaimed Glenn, laughing.

“A dream?” responded Joe, sitting down on his stool, and soliciting
Glenn to relate it to him. Glenn complied, and the narration was
nothing more than what the incredulous reader has been staring at all
this time. But we will make amends.




CHAPTER VI.

A hunt— A deer taken—The hounds—Joe makes a horrid discovery—Sneak—The
exhumation.


“It beats all the dreams I ever heard,” said Joe, feeling his right
shoulder with his left hand..

“Why do you feel your shoulder, Joe?” asked Glenn, smiling, as he
recollected the many times his man had suffered by the rebound of his
musket, and diverted at the grave and thoughtful expression of his
features.

“It _was_ a dream, wasn’t it?” asked Joe, with simplicity, still
examining his shoulder.

“But you know there was no lead in the gun, and it could not rebound
with much violence,” said Glenn.

“I’ll soon see all about it,” exclaimed Joe, springing up and running
to his gun. After a careful examination he returned to his stool beside
the fire, and sat some minutes, with the musket lying across his knees,
and his chin in his hand, plunged in profound meditation on the
imaginary incidents which had just been related to him. Had the dream
been an ordinary one, and he not an actor in it, it might have passed
swiftly from his memory; but inasmuch as the conduct imputed to him was
so natural, and the expressions he was made to utter so characteristic,
he could not but regard it as a vision far more significant and
important than a mere freak of the brain during a moment of slumber.

“What are you studying about?” interrogated Glenn.

“I can’t understand it,” replied Joe, shaking his head.

“Neither can the most renowned philosopher,” said Glenn; “but you can
tell whether your musket has been discharged.”

“It hasn’t been fired,” said Joe. “But what distresses me is, that
there should be only a charge of powder in it, just as you stated, and
when I drew out the shot you were fast asleep. You must have heard me
say I intended to do it.”

“Not that I remember,” said Glenn.

“Then there must be a wizard about, sure enough,” said Joe, and he
crossed himself.

“Suppose we take our guns and walk out in the direction mentioned?”
said Glenn; “I feel the want of exercise after my sleep, and have some
curiosity to test the accuracy of my dream by comparing the things
described with the real objects on the island.”

“Not for the world!” cried Joe, lifting both hands imploringly; “but I
will gladly go anywhere else, just to see if the bushes are as
beautiful as you thought they were, and if the deer can’t run on the
snow-crust as well as the dogs.”

“Come on, then—I care not which course we go,” said Glenn, taking up
his gun, and leading the way out of the inclosure.

They pursued a westerly course until they reached nearly to the edge of
the prairie, when they paused in the midst of a cluster of hazel
bushes, to admire the beauty of the novel scene. The description had
been perfect. Even Glenn surveyed the emblazenry of magic “frost work,”
around him with some misgivings as to the fallacy of his vision. Joe
stared at his master with a curious and ludicrous expression.

“I am not dreaming now, Joe,” said he, with a smile.

“How do you know?” asked Joe.

“That’s well put,” said Glenn; “indeed, I am very sure that many of my
lively and spirited friends in Philadelphia and New York, could they
but see me, would swear that I have been dreaming every day for the
last three months. However, I have not now the same reverence for the
sylvan gods I was so much inclined to worship in my last sleep; and,
moreover, I am the first to see the deer this time. Yonder it stands.
It is not a buck, though; capture it as soon as you please.”

“Where is it?” exclaimed Joe, his superstition vanishing as he
anticipated some sport; and, gliding quickly to Glenn’s side, he
beheld, under the branches of a low scrubby oak tree, the head and ears
of a large doe. It was intently watching our pedestrians, and stood
motionless in the ambush, on which it vainly relied to obscure it from
the eyes of an enemy.

“You must not fire,” said Glenn, placing his hand on the shoulder of
Joe. Joe lowered his musket reluctantly, and turning his eyes to his
master, seemed inclined to relapse into the belief that all was not
right and natural in their proceedings.

“Now go to it,” said Glenn, gently taking the gun from Joe.

“I’d rather not,” said Joe.

“Why? A doe cannot hurt you—it has no horns.”

“I don’t fear it—I’m only afraid it will run away,” said Joe, eager to
secure the prize.

“Try it, at all events; if it should run very fast, I think I shall be
able to arrest its career with the gun,” said Glenn, who prepared to
fire, provided the deer was likely to escape the clutches of Joe.

“Here goes!” cried Joe, leaping through the small bushes towards the
covert. The deer moved not until Joe reached within a few feet of it,
when, making a mighty spring, it bounded over the head of its
assailant, and its sharp feet running through the icy surface of the
snow, penetrated so far down, from the force of its weight, that it was
unable to escape. It now lay quite still, with its large blue eyes
turned imploringly to its foe. Joe seized it by the hind feet, and
exultingly exclaimed that the prize was safely his own. The trembling
and unresisting animal appeared to be as perfectly submissive as a
sheep in the hands of the shearer.

“You have it, sure enough!” said Glenn, coming up and viewing the scene
with interest.

“Lash me if I haven’t!” said Joe, much excited. “Have you got any sort
of a string about you?”

“No.”

“Please cut down a hickory withe, and peel the bark off for me, while I
hold its legs.”

Glenn drew out his hunting knife, but paused when in the act of
executing his man’s request, and turning, with a smile playing upon his
lip, said—

“Perhaps, Joe, this is but another dream; and if so, it is folly to
give ourselves any unnecessary trouble.”

“Lash me if it ain’t reality!” replied Joe, as the deer at length began
to struggle violently.

Extricating its feet from his grasp, the doe bestowed a well directed
kick on its foe’s head, which tumbled him over on his back. The animal
then sprang up, but aware there was no chance of escape by running,
faced about and plied its bony head so furiously against Joe’s breast
and sides that he was forced to scamper away with all possible
expedition.

“Has it bruised you, Joe? If so, this is certainly no dream,” remarked
Glenn.

“Oh, goodness! I’m battered almost to a jelly. I’ll take my oath
there’s no dreaming about this. Let me go after Ringwood and Jowler.”

“It would be too cruel to let the hounds tear the poor thing,” said
Glenn; “but after you have bound its feet together, you may bring out
one of the horses and a sled, and convey it home unhurt.”

“The horses can’t go in this deep snow,” said Joe.

“True, I forgot that. Take your musket and shoot it,” said Glenn,
turning away, not wishing to witness the death of the deer.

“I’d rather take him prisoner,” said Joe, lowering his musket after
taking a long aim. “I can drag it on the sled myself.”

“Then go for it,” said Glenn; “and you may bring the hounds along; I
will exercise them a little after that fox which keeps such a
chattering in the next grove. But first let us secure the deer.”

Joe charged upon the doe once more, and when it aimed another blow at
him, he threw himself under its body, and the animal falling over on
its side, the combined efforts of the men sufficed to bind its feet.
Joe then went to the house for the hounds and the sled, and Glenn leant
against the oak, awaiting his return. It was not long before the hounds
arrived, which was soon succeeded by the approach of Joe with the sled.
Ringwood and Jowler evinced palpable signs of delight on beholding the
bound captive, but their training was so perfect that they showed no
disposition to molest it without the orders of their master. One word
from Glenn, and the deer would have been instantly torn in pieces; but
it was exempt from danger as long as that word was withheld.

Joe soon came up, and in a very few minutes the doe was laid upon the
sled. When he was in the act of starting homewards with his novel
burden, the hounds, contrary to their usual practice, refused to
accompany Glenn to the thicket north of their position, where the fox
was still heard, and strangely seemed inclined to run in a contrary
direction. And what was equally remarkable, while snuffing the air
towards the south, they gave utterance to repeated fierce growls. Joe
was utterly astonished, and Glenn was fast losing the equanimity of his
temper.

“There’s something more than common down there; see how Ringwood
bristles up on the back,” said Joe.

“Run there with the hounds, and see what it is,” said Glenn.

“And I’ll take my musket, too,” said Joe, striding in the direction
indicated, with the hounds at his heels and his musket on his shoulder.

When he reached a narrow rivulet about one hundred paces distant, that
gradually widened and deepened until it formed the valley in which the
ferry-house was situated a half mile below, he paused and suffered the
hounds to lead the way. They ran a short distance up the ravine and
halted at the edge of a small thicket, and commenced barking very
fiercely as they scented the air under the bushes.

“I’ll bet it’s another bear,” said Joe, putting a fresh priming in the
pan of his musket, and proceeding after the hounds. “If it is a bear,
ought I to fool with him by myself?” said he, pausing at the edge of
the thicket. “I might get my other ear boxed,” he continued, “and it’s
not such a pleasant thing to be knocked down by the heavy fist of a big
black bear. If I don’t trouble him, he’ll be sure to let me alone. What
if I call the dogs off, and go back? But what tale can I manufacture to
tell Mr. Glenn? Pshaw! What should I fear, with such a musket as this
in my hand? I can’t help it. I really believe I _am_ a little touched
with cowardice! I’m sorry for it, but I can’t help it. It was born with
me, and it’s not my fault. Confound it! I _will_ screw up courage
enough to see what it is, anyhow.” Saying this, he strode forward
desperately, and urging the hounds onward, followed closely in the rear
in a stooping posture, under the hazel bushes.

In a very few moments Joe reached the head of the ravine, but to his
astonishment and no little satisfaction, he beheld nothing but a
shelving rock, from under which a spring of clear smoking water flowed,
and a large bank of snow which had drifted around it, but through which
the gurgling stream had forced its way. Yet the mystery was not solved.
Ringwood and Jowler continued to growl and yelp still more furiously,
running round the embankment of snow repeatedly, and ever and anon
snuffing its icy surface.

“Whip me if I can figure out this,” said Joe; “what in the world do the
dogs keep sticking their noses in that snow for? There can’t be a bear
in it, surely. I’ve a notion to shoot into it. No I won’t. I’ll do
this, though,” and drawing out his long knife he thrust it up to the
handle in the place which seemed the most to attract the hounds.

“Freeze me if it hasn’t gone into something besides the snow!”
exclaimed he, conscious that the steel had penetrated some firm
substance below the frozen snow-crust. “What the deuce is it?” he
continued, pulling out the knife and examining it. “Ha! blood, by
jingo!” he cried, springing up; “but it can’t be a living bear, or it
would have moved; and if it had moved, the stab would have killed it. I
_won’t_ be afraid!” said he, again plunging his knife into it, “It
don’t move yet—it must be dead—why, it’s frozen. Pshaw! any thing would
freeze here, in less than an hour. I’ll soon see what it is.” Saying
this, he knelt down on the embankment, and commenced digging the snow
away with all his might. The dogs crouched down beside him, growling
and whining alternately, and otherwise exhibiting symptoms of
restlessness and distress.

“Be still, poor Ringwood, I’m coming to him; I see something dark, but
there’s no hair on it. Ugh! hallo! Oh goodness! St. Peter! Ugh! ugh!
ugh!” cried he, springing up, his face as pale as the snow, his hair
standing upright, his chin fallen, and his eyes almost straining out of
their sockets. Without taking his gun, or putting on his hat, he ran
through the bushes like a frightened antelope, leaping over ditches
like a fox-chaser, tearing through opposing grape vines, and not
pausing until his course was suddenly arrested by Glenn, who seized him
by the skirt of the coat, and hurled him on his back beside the sled on
which the deer was bound.

“What is the matter?” demanded Glenn.

Joe panted painfully, and was unable to answer.

“What ails you, I say?” repeated Glenn in a loud voice.

“Peter”—panted Joe.

“Do you mean the pony?”

“St. Peter!” ejaculated Joe.

“Well, what of St. Peter?”

“Oh, let me be off!” cried he, endeavouring to scramble to his feet.
But he was most effectually prevented. For no sooner had he turned over
on his hands and knees, than Glenn leaped astride of him.

“Now, if you _will_ go, you shall carry me on your back, and I will
pelt the secret out of you with my heels, as we travel!”

“Just let me get in the house and fasten the door, and I will tell you
every word,” said Joe imploringly.

“Tell me now, or you shall remain in the snow all day long!” said
Glenn, with a hand grasping each side of Joe’s neck.

“Oh, what shall I do? I can’t speak!” yelled Joe, trying outright, the
large tear-drops falling from his nose and chin.

“You have not lost your voice, I should say, at all events,” implied
Glenn, somewhat touched with pity at his man’s unequivocal distress,
though he could scarce restrain his laughter when he viewed his
grotesque posture. “What has become of your musket and hat?” he added.

“I left them both there,” said Joe, gradually becoming composed under
the weight of his master.

“Where?” asked Glenn.

“At the cave-spring.”

“Well, what made you leave them there?”

“Just get off my back and I’ll tell you. I’m getting over it now; I’m
going to be mad instead of frightened,” said Joe, with real composure.

“Get up, then; but I won’t trust you yet. You must still suffer me to
hold your collar,” said Glenn.

“If you go to the cave-spring you will see a sight!”

“What kind of a sight?”

“Such a sight as I never dreamed of before!”

“Then it has been nothing but a dream _this time_, after all your
foolery?”

“No, I’ll be shot if there was any dreaming about it,” replied Joe; and
he related every thing up to the horrid discovery which caused him to
retreat so precipitately, and then paused, as if dreading to revert to
the subject.

“What did you find there? Was it any thing that could injure you?”

“No,” said Joe, shaking his head solemnly.

“Why did you run, then?” demanded Glenn, impatiently.

“The truth is, I don’t know myself, now I reflect about it. But I’d
rather not tell what I saw just yet. I was pretty considerably alarmed,
wasn’t I?”

“Ridiculous! I will not be trifled with in this manner Tell me
instantly what you saw!” said Glenn, his vexation and anger overcoming
his usual indulgent nature.

“I’ll tell you now—it was a—Didn’t you see them bushes move?” asked
Joe, staring wildly at a clump of sumach bushes a few paces distant.

“What was it you saw at the cave-spring!” shouted Glenn, his face
turning red.

“I—I”—responded Joe, his eyes still fixed on the bushes. “It was
a—Ugh!”—cried he, starting, as he beheld the little thicket open, and a
tall man rise up, holding in his hand a bunch of dead muskrats.

“Dod speak on—I want to hear what it was—I’ve been laying here all this
time waiting to know what great thing it was that skeered you so much.
I never laughed so in all my life as I did when he got a-straddle of
you. I was coming up to the sled, when I saw you streaking it through
the vines and briers, and then I squatted down awhile to see what would
turn up next.”

“Ha! ha! ha! is it you, Sneak? I thought you was an Indian! Come on,
I’ll tell now. _It was a man’s moccasin_!” said Joe, in a low,
mysterious tone.

“And you ran in that manner from an old moccasin!” said Glenn,
reproachfully.

“But there was a _foot_ in it!” continued Joe.

“A _he_ man’s foot?” inquired Sneak, quickly turning to Joe.

“How could I tell whether it was a he man’s foot, or a female woman’s,
as you call them?” replied Joe.

“Are you sure it was a human being’s foot?” demanded Glenn.

“Well, I never saw any other animal but a man wear a buckskin
moccasin!” replied Joe.

“An Irishman can’t tell any thing right, nohow you can fix it,” said
Sneak.

“They can’t tell how you make wooden nutmegs,” retorted Joe.

“Come,” said Glenn, “we will go and examine for ourselves.”

The party set off in a brisk walk, and soon reached the scene of Joe’s
alarm. Sure enough, there was the moccasin, and a man’s foot in it!

“It’s somebody, after all,” said Sneak, giving the frozen foot a kick.

“Ain’t you ashamed to do that?” said Joe, knitting his brows.

“He’s nothing more than a stone, now. Why didn’t he holler when you
stuck your knife into him?” replied Sneak.

“Dig him up, that we may see who he is,” said Glenn.

“I’d rather not touch him,” said Joe.

“You’re a fool!” said Sneak. “Stand off, and let me at him—I’ll soon
see who he is.” Sneak threw down his maskrats, and with his spear and
knife soon extricated the body, which he handled as unceremoniously as
he would have done a log of wood. “Dod rot your skin!” he exclaimed,
when he brushed the snow from the man’s face. He then threw down the
body with great violence.

“Oh don’t!” cried Joe, while the cold chills ran up his back.

“Who is it?” asked Glenn.

“It’s that copper-snake, traitor, skunk, water-dog, lizard-hawk, horned
frog—”

“Who do you mean?” interrupted Glenn.

“_Posin_, the maliverous rascal who collogued with the Injins to murder
us all! I’m glad he got his dose—and if he was alive now, I’d make him
swaller at least two foot of my spear,” said Sneak.

“’Twas me—I killed him—look at the buck-shot holes in his back!”
exclaimed Joe, now recovering from his excitement and affright.

“Yes, and you’re a nice chap, ain’t you, to run like flugins from a
dead man that you killed yourself!” said Sneak.

“How did I know that I killed him?” retorted Joe.

“Any fool might know he was dead,” replied Sneak.

“I’ll pay you for this, some of these times,” said Joe.

“How shall we bury him?” asked Glenn.

“That can be done real easy,” said Sneak, taking hold of the dead man’s
leg and dragging him along on the snow like a sled.

“What are you going to do with him?” demanded Glenn.

“I’m a going to cut a hole in the ice on the river, and push him
under,” said Sneak.

“You shall do no such thing!” said Glenn, firmly; “he must be buried in
the earth.”

“Just as you say,” said Sneak, submissively, throwing down the leg.

“Run home and bring the spades, Joe,” said Glenn, “and call for the
ferrymen to assist us.”

“And I’ll take the sled along and leave it in the yard,” said Joe,
starting in the direction of the deer and calling the hounds after him.

“Let the hounds remain,” said Glenn. “I am resolved to have my
fox-hunt.” Joe soon disappeared.

“If you want to hunt, you can go on; Roughgrove and me will bury this
robber,” said Sneak.

“Be it so,” said Glenn; “but remember that you are not to put him in
the river, nor must you commit any indecent outrage upon his person.
Let his body return to the earth—his soul is already in the hands of
Him who created it.”

“That’s as true as gospel,” said Sneak; “and I would rather be froze in
this snow than to have his hot berth in the t’other world. I don’t feel
a bit mad at him now—he’s paying for his black dagiverous conduct hard
enough by this time, I’ll be bound. I say, Mr. Glenn, it’ll be rather
late when we get through with this job—will there be any vacant room at
your fireside to-night?”

“Certainly, and something to eat—you will be welcome, provided you
don’t quarrel too much with Joe,” replied Glenn.

“Oh, Joe and me understand each other—the more we quarrel the more we
love one another. We’ll never fight—do you mind that—for he’s a coward
for one thing, and I won’t corner him too close, because he’s
broad-shouldered enough to _lick me_, if he was to take it into his
head to fight.”

Glenn called the hounds after him and set out in quest of the fox, and
Sneak turned to the dead body and mused in silence.




CHAPTER VII.

Boone—The interment—Startling intelligence—Indians about—A
skunk—Thrilling fears—Boone’s device.


Ere long Joe was on his way back to the cave-spring, with several
spades on his shoulder, accompanied by Boone, (who had just crossed the
river on a visit to Glenn,) and Roughgrove, with his two oarsmen.

“Is Glenn at the spring with Sneak?” asked Boone, in a very thoughtful
and grave manner.

“Yes, sir, I left him there, and I now hear him with the hounds chasing
a fox,” replied Joe, in true native style.

“If he is with the hounds, he is certainly not at the spring,” remarked
Roughgrove.

“I meant that he was there, or _thereabouts_” replied Joe.

“Who found the dead man?” inquired Boone.

“I did—that is, when the dogs scented him—and it almost frightened me
when I dug out his foot,” said Joe.

“No doubt!” observed Boone.

The party now moved along in silence, still permitting Joe to lead the
way, until they suddenly emerged from the thicket in the immediate
vicinity of the spring, when an unexpected scene attracted their
notice. Sneak was composedly seated on the body of the dead man, and
very deliberately searching his pockets!

“Well! that beats all the mean actions I ever beheld before!” said Joe,
pausing and staring indignantly at Sneak.

“You’re a fool!” replied Sneak.

“What for? because I wouldn’t rob the dead?” retorted Joe.

“Do you call this robbing the dead? Hain’t this traitor stoled this
lump of gold from the Injins?” said Sneak, displaying a rough piece of
the precious metal about the size of a crow’s egg.

“Is it gold?” asked Joe, with some anxiety.

“Sartainly it is,” answered Sneak, handing it to him to be examined;
“and what good could come of burying it agin? I’ll leave it to Mr.
Boone to say if I ain’t right in taking it myself.”

“Oh, any thing worth this much ought to be taken,” said Joe, depositing
the lump of gold in his pocket.

“See here, my chap,” said Sneak, rising up and casting a furious glance
at him, “if you don’t mean to hand that out again, one or the t’other
of us must be put in the ground with the traitorious Posin—and if it is
to be you, it’ll be a purty thing for it to be said that you brought a
spade to bury yourself with.”

“Didn’t I find the body?” said Joe.

“But burn me if you found the gold,” said Sneak.

“Shall I decide the matter?” interposed Roughgrove.

“I’m willing,” said Sneak.

“And so am I,” replied Joe.

“Then give it to me, and I’ll cut it in two, and give a half to each of
you,” said Roughgrove.

The decision was final; and seizing the spades, Joe, Sneak, and the
oarsmen began to prepare a resting-place for the dead body. Boone
continued silent, with his eyes steadfastly gazing at the earth which
the workmen began to throw up.

“Posin’s done ferrying now,” said Dan Rudder, one of the defunct’s old
companions in the service of Roughgrove.

“No he ain’t,” said Sneak, throwing up a spadeful of flint stones.

“I’ll keep some of these for my musket,” said Joe.

“Why ain’t he?” demanded Dan.

“Because he’s got to cross the river—the river—what do they call
it?—the river Poles,” said Sneak.

“Styx, you dunce,” said Joe.

“Well, ’twas only a slip of the tongue—what’s the difference between
poles and sticks?”

“_You_ never read any thing about it; you only heard somebody say so,”
said Joe, pausing to listen to the hounds that ever and anon yelped in
the vicinity.

“If I didn’t, I don’t believe the man that wrote that book ever
crossed, or even had a squint at the river himself,” replied Sneak.

“Whereabouts is the river?” asked Dan.

“In the lower regions,” said Joe, striking his spade against a hard
substance.

“What’s that you’re scraping the dirt off of?” asked Sneak.

“Oh, my goodness!” cried Joe, leaping out of the grave.

“Let it remain!” said Boone, in a commanding tone, looking in and
discovering a skull; “I once buried a friend here—he was shot down at
my side by the Indians.”

“Fill up the hole agin! Posin shan’t lay on top of any of your
friends!” exclaimed Sneak, likewise leaping out of the grave.

“It matters not—but do as you please,” said Boone, turning away and
marking the distressed yelping of the hounds, which indicated, from
some unusual cause, that they did not enjoy the chase as much as was
their wont.

“Split me if he shan’t be buried somewhere else, if I have to dig the
hole myself,” said Sneak, filling up the grave.

“I’ll stick by you, Sneak,” said Dan.

“Dan and me ’ll finish the job; all the rest of you may go off,” said
Sneak, releasing the rest of the party from any further participation
in the depositing of the remains of Posin in the earth.

“Glenn does not yet understand Ringwood and Jowler,” said Boone, still
listening to the chase.

“I never heard the dogs bark that way before until to-day,” said Joe;
“only that night when we killed the buffalo.”

“Something besides the buffalo caused them to do it then,” replied
Boone.

“Yes, indeed—they must have known the fire was coming—but the fire
can’t come now.”

“Sneak,” said Boone, “when you are done here, come to Mr. Glenn’s
house.”

“I will, as soon as I go to my muskrat trap out at the lake and get my
rifle.”

“Be in a hurry,” said Boone; and turning towards the chase, he uttered
a “Ya-ho!” and instantly the hounds were hushed.

“Dod!” exclaimed Sneak, staring a moment at Boone, while his large eyes
seemed to increase in size, and then rolling up his sleeves, he delved
away with extraordinary dispatch.

In a very short space of time, Ringwood and Jowler rushed from the
thicket, and leaping up against the breast of their old master, evinced
a positive happiness in once more beholding him. They were soon
followed by Glenn, who dashed briskly through the thicket to see who it
was that caused his hounds to abandon him so unceremoniously. No sooner
did he discover his aged friend than he ran forward and grasped his
hand.

“I thought not of you, and yet I could think of no one else who might
thus entice my noble hounds away. Return with me, and we will have the
fox in a few minutes—he is now nearly exhausted,” said Glenn.

“Molest him not,” said Boone. “Did you not observe how reluctantly the
hounds chased him?”

“I did; what was the cause of it?” asked Glenn.

“The breeze is tainted with the scent of Indians!” whispered Boone.

“Again thou art my preserver!” said Glenn, in a low tone.

“I came to give you intelligence that the Osages would probably be upon
you in a few days,” said Boone; “but I did not think they were really
in the neighbourhood until I heard your unerring hounds. Col. Cooper,
of my settlement, made an excursion southward some ten days ago to
explore a region he had never visited; but observing a large war-party
at a distance, coming hitherward, he retreated precipitately, and
reached home this morning. Excessive fatigue and illness prevented him
from accompanying me over the river; and what is worse, nearly every
man in our settlement is at present more than a hundred miles up the
river, trapping beaver. If we are attacked to-night, or even within a
day or two, we have nothing to depend upon but our own force to defend
ourselves.”

“Should it be so, I doubt not we will be able to withstand them as
successfully as we did before,” said Glenn.

“Let us go with Roughgrove to his house, and take his daughter and his
effects to your little fortress,” said Boone, joining the old ferryman,
whom a single word sufficed to apprize of the state of affairs.

“I must prepare for the worst, now,” said Roughgrove; “they will never
forget or forgive the part I acted on the night of their defeat.”

Boone, Glenn, and Roughgrove proceeded down the valley, while Joe
seemed disposed to loiter, undetermined what to engage in, having cast
an occasional curious glance at Boone and his master when engaged in
their low conversation, and rightly conjecturing that “something wrong
was in the wind,” as he expressed it.

“Why don’t you go home?” asked Sneak, rolling the dead body into the
grave, and dashing the mingled earth and snow remorselessly upon it.

“I’ll go when I’m ready,” replied Joe; “but I should like to know what
all that whispering and nodding was about.”

“I can tell you,” said Dan; but his speech was suddenly arrested by a
sign from Sneak.

“I wish you would tell me,” continued Joe, manifesting no little
uneasiness.

“Have you got a plenty to eat at your house?” asked Sneak.

“To be sure we have,” said Joe; “now tell me what’s in the wind.”

“If I was to tell you, I bet you’d be frightened half to death,”
remarked Sneak, driving down a headstone, having filled up the grave.

“No! no—I—indeed but I wouldn’t, though!” said Joe, trembling at every
joint, the true cause, for the first time, occurring to him. “Ain’t it
Indians, Mr. Sneak?”

“Don’t call me _Mister_ agin, if you please. There are more moccasins
than the one you found in these parts, that’s all.”

“I’ll go home and tell Mr. Glenn!” said Joe, whirling round quickly.

“Dod rot your cowardly hide of you!” said Sneak, staring at him
contemptuously; “now don’t you _know_ he knowed it before you did?”

“Yes—but I was going home to tell him that some bullets must be
run—that’s what I meant.”

“Don’t you think he knows that as well as you do?” continued Sneak.

“But I—I _must_ go!” exclaimed Joe, starting in a half run, with the
hounds (which had been forgotten by their master) following at his
heels.

“Let me have the hounds, to go after my gun—the red skins might waylay
me, if I go alone, in spite of all my cunning woodcraft,” said Sneak.

“Go back!” cried Joe, to the hounds. They instantly obeyed, and the
next moment Joe was scampering homeward with all the speed of which his
legs were capable.

When he reached the house, his fears were by no means allayed on
beholding the most valuable articles of Roughgrove’s dwelling already
removed thither, and the ferryman himself, his daughter, Boone and
Glenn, assembled in consultation within the inclosure. Joe closed the
gate hurriedly after him, and bolted it on the inside.

“Why did you shut the gate? Open it again,” said Glenn.

“Ain’t we besieged again? ain’t the Indians all around us, ready to
rush in and take our scalps?” said Joe, obeying the command
reluctantly.

“They will not trouble us before night,” said Roughgrove.

“No, we need not fear them before night,” remarked Boone, whose
continued thoughtful aspect impressed Glenn with the belief that he
apprehended more than the usual horrors of Indian warfare during the
impending attack.

“They will burn father’s house, but that is nothing compared to what I
fear will be his own fate!” murmured Mary, dejectedly.

“We can soon build him another,” said Glenn, moved by the evident
distress of the pale girl; “and I am very sure that my little stone
castle will suffice to preserve not only your father and yourself, but
all who take shelter in it, from personal injury. So, cheer up, Mary.”

“Oh, I will not complain; it pained me most when I first heard they
were coming once more; I will soon be calm again, and just as composed
when they are shooting at us, as I was the other time. But _you_ will
be in a great deal more danger than you were that night. Yet Boone is
with us again—he _must_ save us,” said Mary.

“Why do you think there will be more danger, Mary?” asked Glenn.

“Yes, why do you think so?” interposed Joe, much interested in the
reply.

“Because the snow is so deep and so firm, they will leap over the
palisade, if there be a great many of them,” replied Mary. Glenn felt a
chill shoot through his breast, for this fact had not before occurred
to him.

“Oh, goodness!—let us all go to work and shovel it away on the
outside,” cried Joe, running about in quest of the spades. “Oh, St.
Peter!” he continued, “the spades are out at the cave-spring!”

“Run and bring them,” said Glenn.

“Never—not for the world! They’d take my scalp to a certainty before I
could get back again,” replied Joe, trembling all over.

“There is no danger yet,” said Roughgrove, the deep snow having
occurred to him at the first announcement of the threatened attack, and
produced many painful fears in his breast, which caused a sadness to
rest upon his time-worn features; “but,” he continued, “it would not be
in our power to remove the snow in two whole days, and a few hours only
are left us to prepare for the worst.”

“Let them come within the inclosure,” said Glenn, “and even then they
cannot harm us. The walls of my house are made of stone, and so is the
ceiling; they can only burn the roof—I do not think they can harm our
persons. We have food enough to last for months, and there is no
likelihood of the siege lasting a single week.”

“I’ll make sure of the deer,” muttered Joe; and before any one could
interpose, he struck off the head of the doe with an axe, as it still
lay bound upon the sled. And he was brandishing the reeking steel over
the neck of the fawn, that stood by, looking on innocently, when a cry
from Mary arrested the blow.

“If you injure a hair of Mary’s gift,” said Glenn, in anger, “you shall
suffer as severe a fate yourself.”

“Pardon me,” said Joe to Mary; “I was excited—I didn’t hardly know what
I was doing. I thought as we were going to be pent up by the Indians,
for goodness only knows how long, that we’d better provide enough food
to keep from starving. I love the fawn as well as you do, and Mr. Glenn
loves it because you gave it to him; but its natural to prefer our own
lives to the lives of dumb animals.”

“I forgive you,” said Mary, playing with the silken ears of the pet.

“Say no more about it,” said Glenn; “but as you are so anxious to be
well provided with comforts, if we are besieged, there is one thing I
had forgotten, that is absolutely necessary for our existence, which
you can procure.”

“What is it? Be quick, for we havn’t a moment to lose,” said Joe.

“Water,” replied Glenn.

“That’s a fact—but—its way off at the spring, by the ferry,” said Joe,
disliking the idea of exposing himself without the inclosure.

“True, yet it must be had. If you can get it nearer to us, you are at
liberty to do so,” said Glenn.

“Here comes Sneak,” said Mary; “he will assist you.”

Sneak readily agreed to the proposition, and he and Joe set out, each
with a large bucket, while the rest of the party, with the exception of
Boone (who desired to be left alone,) retired within the house.

When Sneak and Joe were filling their buckets at the spring the second
time, the hounds (which attended them at Joe’s special request)
commenced barking.

“What’s that?” cried Joe, dashing his bucket, water and all, in Sneak’s
lap, and running ten or fifteen feet up the hill.

“Dod rot your cowardly heart!” exclaimed Sneak, rising up and shaking
the cold water from his clothes; “if I don’t pay you for this, I wish I
may be shot!”

“I thought it was the Indians,” said Joe, still staring at the small
thicket of briers, where the hounds were yet growling and bounding
about in a singular manner.

“I’ll see what it is and then pay you for this ducking,” said Sneak,
walking briskly to the edge of the thicket, while the water trickled
down over his moccasins.

“What is it?” cried Joe, leaping farther up the ascent with great
trepidation, as he saw the hounds run out of the bushes as if pursued,
and even Sneak retreating a few paces. But what seemed very
unaccountable was a _smile_ on Sneak’s elongated features.

“What in the world can it be?” repeated Joe.

“Ha! ha! ha! if that ain’t a purty thing to skeer a full-grown man into
fits!” said Sneak, retreating yet farther from the thicket.

“What makes _you_ back out, then?” inquired Joe. The hounds now ran to
the men, and the next moment a small animal, not larger than a rabbit,
of a dark colour, with long white stripes from the nose to the tail,
made its appearance, and moved slowly toward the spring. Sneak ran up
the hill beyond the position occupied by Joe, maintaining all the time
a most provoking smile.

“Who’s scared into fits now, I should like to know?” retorted Joe.

“I wish I had my gun,” said Sneak.

“Hang me, if I’m afraid of that little thing,” said Joe. Still the
hounds ran round, yelping, but never venturing within thirty feet of
the animal.

“I’ll be whipped if I understand all this!” said Joe, in utter
astonishment, looking at Sneak, and then at the hounds.

“Why don’t you _run_?” cried Sneak, as the animal continued to advance.

“I believe you’re making fun of me,” said Joe; “that little thing can’t
hurt anybody. Its a pretty little pet, and I’ve a notion to catch it.”

“What are you talking about? You know you’re afraid of it,” said Sneak,
tauntingly.

“I’ll show you,” said Joe, springing upon the animal. The polecat (for
such it was) gave its assailant a taste of its quality in a twinkling.
Joe grasped his nose with both hands and wheeled away with all possible
expedition, while the animal pursued its course towards the river.

“My goodness, I’ve got it all over my coat!” exclaimed Joe, rolling on
the snow in agony.

“Didn’t I say I’d pay you for spilling the cold water on me?” cried
Sneak, in a convulsion of laughter.

“Why didn’t you tell me, _you rascal_?” cried Joe, flushed in the face,
and forgetting the Indians in his increasing anger.

“Oh, I’ll laugh myself sore—ha! ha! ha!” continued Sneak, sitting down
on the snow, and laughing obstreperously.

“You long, lopsided scoundrel, you. My Irish blood is up now,” said
Joe, rushing towards Sneak with a resolution to fight.

“I’ll be whipt if you tech me with them hands,” said Sneak, running
away.

“Oh, what shall I do?” cried Joe, sinking down, his rage suddenly
subdued by his sickening condition.

“If you’ll say all’s square betwixt us, I’ll tell you what to do. If
you don’t do something right quick, they won’t let you sleep in the
house for a month.”

“Well. Now tell me quick!”

“Pull off your coat before it soaks through.”

“I didn’t think of that,” said Joe, obeying with alacrity, and
shivering in the cold air.

“Now twist a stick into it, so you can carry it up to the house,
without touching it with your hands, that is, if none of it got on
’em,” continued Sneak.

“There ain’t a bit anywhere else but on the shoulder of my coat,” said
Joe, acting according to Sneak’s instructions. Filling their buckets,
they at length started towards the house, Joe holding a bucket in one
hand, and a long pole, on which dangled his coat, in the other. When
they entered, the company involuntarily started; and Glenn, losing all
control over his temper, hurled a book at his man’s head, and commanded
him not to venture in his presence again until he could by some means
dispense with his horrid odor.

“Foller me,” said Sneak, leading the way to the stable, and taking with
him one of the spades he had brought in from the burial; “now,” he
continued, when they were with the horses, “dig a hole at this end of
the stall, and bury your coat. If you hadn’t took it in the house, like
a dunce, they’d never ’ave known any thing about it.”

“Oh, my goodness! I’m sick!” said Joe, urging the spade in the earth
with his foot, and betraying unequivocal signs of indisposition.
However, the garment was soon covered up, and the annoyance abated.

But no sooner was Joe well out of this difficulty, than the dread of
the tomahawk and scalping knife returned in greater force than ever.

Boone remained taciturn, his clear, eagle-eye scanning the palisade,
and the direction from which the savages would be most likely to come.

Joe approached the renowned pioneer for the purpose of asking his
opinion respecting the chances of escaping with life from the expected
struggle, but was deterred by his serious and commanding glance. But
soon a singular change came over his stern features, and as sudden as
strange. His countenance assumed an air of triumph, and a half-formed
smile played upon his lip. His meditations had doubtless resulted in
the resolution to adopt some decisive course, which, in his opinion,
would insure the safety of the little garrison. His brow had been
watched by the inmates of the house, and, hailing the change with joy,
they came forth to ascertain more certainly their fate.

“How much powder have you, my young friend?” asked Boone.

“Five kegs,” answered Glenn, promptly.

“Then we are safe!” said Boone, in a pleasant and affable manner, which
imparted confidence to the whole party.

“I thought—I almost _knew_ that we were safe, with _you_ among us,”
said Mary, playing with Boone’s hand.

“But you must not venture out of the house as much as you did before,
my lass, when arrows begin to fly,” replied Boone, kissing the maiden’s
forehead.

“But I’ll mould your bullets, and get supper for you,” said Mary.

“That’s a good child,” said Roughgrove; “go in, now, and set about your
task.”

Mary bowed to her father, and glided away. The men then clustered round
Boone, to hear the plan that was to avail them in their present
difficulty.

“In times of peril,” said Boone, “my knowledge of the Indian character
has always served me. I first reflect what I would do were I myself a
savage; and, in taking measures to provide against the things which I
imagine would be done by myself, I have never yet been disappointed.
The Indians will not rashly rush upon us, and expose themselves to our
bullets, as they storm the palisade. Had they the resolution to do
this, not one of us would escape alive, for they would tear down the
house. It is a very large war-party, and they could begin at the top
and before morning remove every stone. But they shall not touch one of
them—”

“I’m so glad!” ejaculated Joe.

“Hush your jaw!” said Sneak.

“They will be divided into two parties,” continued Boone; “one party
will attack us from the west with their arrows, keeping at a respectful
distance from our guns, while the other will force a passage to the
palisade from the east without being seen, for they will come under the
snow! We must instantly plant a keg of powder, on the outside of the
inclosure, and blow them up when they come. Joe, bring out a keg of
powder, and also the fishing rods I saw in the house. The latter must
be joined together, and a communication opened through them. They must
be filled with powder and one end placed in the keg, while the other
reaches the inclosure, passing through an auger hole. You all
understand now what is to be done—let us go to work—we have no time to
spare.”

It was not long before every thing was executed according to the
directions of Boone, and at nightfall each man was stationed at a
loophole, with gun in hand, awaiting the coming of the savages.




CHAPTER VIII.

Night—Sagacity of the hounds—Reflection—The sneaking savages—Joe’s
disaster—The approach of the foe under the snow—The silent watch.


The night was beautiful. The moon sailed through a cloudless sky, and
the north wind, which had whistled loudly among the branches of the
trees in the valley at the close of day, was hushed, and a perfect calm
pervaded the scene.

“What’re you leaving your post for?” asked Sneak, as Joe suddenly
abandoned his watch on the west side of the inclosure, and tripped
across to Roughgrove.

“Mr. Roughgrove—Mr. Roughgrove,” said Joe, in a low tone.

“Well, what do you want with me?” responded the old ferryman.

“I wanted to tell you that your two oarsmen are forgotten, and to ask
you if we hadn’t better call to them to come up here, where they’ll be
out of danger?”

“They are _not_ forgotten,” said Roughgrove; “I sent them over the
river to procure assistance, if possible.”

“Thank you. I’m glad they’re out of danger. I couldn’t rest till I
found out something about them,” said Joe, retiring; but instead of
resuming his watch, he slipped into the house.

“He’s at his old tricks agin,” said Sneak, when he observed him
stealthily enter the door. “Come out, I say!” he continued, in a loud
voice.

“What is the matter?” interrogated Glenn, from his station on the
north.

“Why, that feller’s crept into the house agin,” replied Sneak.

“Well, but he’s come out again,” said Joe, reappearing, and walking
reluctantly to his loophole.

“What did you go in for?” demanded Glenn.

“I just wanted to tell Miss Mary that the two oarsmen that helped us to
bury Posin were gone over the river, and were safe.”

“Did she ask for this information?” inquired Glenn.

“No, not exactly,” responded Joe; “but I thought if I was uneasy about
the young men myself, that she, being more delicate than a man, must be
considerably distressed.”

“A mere subterfuge! See that you do not leave your post in future,
under any circumstances, without permission to do so.”

“I won’t,” replied Joe, peering through his loophole.

Matters remained quiet for a great length of time, and Glenn began to
hope that even Boone had been mistaken. But Boone himself had no doubts
upon the subject. Yet he seemed far more affable and cheerful than he
did before the plan of resistance was formed in his mind. Occasionally
he would walk round from post to post, and after scanning the aspect
without, direct the sentinels to observe closely certain points, trees
or bushes, where he thought the enemy might first be seen. He never
hinted once that there was a possibility of escaping an attack, and the
little party felt that the only alternative was to watch with diligence
and act with vigor and resolution when assailed.

“Do you think they are now in this immediate neighbourhood?” inquired
Glenn.

“They are not far off, I imagine,” replied Boone; and calling the
hounds from the stable, he continued, “I can show you in which quarter
they are.” The hounds well understood their old master. At his bidding
they snuffed the air, and whining in a peculiar manner, with their
heads turned towards the west, the vicinity of the savages was not only
made manifest, but their location positively pointed out.

“I was not aware, before, of the inestimable value of your gift,” said
Glenn, gazing at the hounds, and completely convinced that their
conduct was an unerring indication of the presence of the foe.

“Eh! Ringwood!” exclaimed Boone, observing that his favorite hound now
pointed his nose in a northern direction and uttered a low growl.
“Indeed!” he continued, “they have got in motion since we have been
observing the hounds. I was not mistaken. Even while we were speaking
they divided their strength. One party is even now moving round to the
east, and at a given signal the other will attack us on the west,
precisely as I predicted. See! Ringwood turns gradually.”

“And you think the greatest danger is to be apprehended from those on
the east?” said Glenn.

“Yes,” said Boone, “for the others cannot approach near enough to do
much injury without exposing themselves to great peril.”

“But how can you ascertain that they will cut a passage under the snow,
and the precise direction in which they will come?”

“Because,” said Boone, “we are situated near the cliff on the east, to
the summit of which they can climb, without being exposed to our fire,
and thence it is likewise the shortest distance they can find to cut a
passage to us under the snow. Mark Ringwood!” he continued, as the
hound having made a semicircle from the point first noticed, became at
length stationary, and crouching down on the earth, (where the snow had
been cleared away at Boone’s post,) growled more angrily than before,
but so low he could not have been heard twenty paces distant.

“This is strange—very strange,” said Glenn.

A sound resembling the cry of an owl was heard in the direction of the
cliff. It was answered on the west apparently by the shrill howl of a
wolf.

“The signal!” said Boone. “Now let us be on the alert,” he continued,
“and I think we will surprise _them_, both on and under the snow. Let
no one fire without first consulting me, even should they venture
within the range of your guns.”

The party resumed their respective stations, and once more not a sound
of any description was heard for a considerable length of time.
Roughgrove was at the side of Boone, and the other three men were
posted as before described. The hounds had been sent back to their lair
in the stable. Not a motion, animate or inanimate, save the occasional
shooting of the stars in the begemmed firmament, could be observed.

While Glenn rested upon his gun, attracted ever and anon by the
twinkling host above, a throng of unwonted memories crowded upon him.
He thought of his guileless youth; the uncontaminated days of enjoyment
ere he had mingled with the designing and heartless associates who
strove to entice him from the path of virtue; of the hopes of budding
manhood; of ambitious schemes to win a name by great and honourable
deeds; of parents, kindred, home; of _her_, who had been the angel of
all his dreams of paradise below: and then he contemplated his present
condition, and notwithstanding his resolution was unabated, yet in
spite of all his struggles, a tear bedewed his cheek. He felt that his
fate was hard, but he _knew_ that his course was proper, and he
resolved to fulfil his vow. But with his sadness, gloomy forebodings,
and deep and unusual thoughts obtruded. In the scene of death and
carnage that was about to ensue, it occurred to him more than once that
it might be his lot to fall. This was a painful thought. He was brave
in conflict, and would not have hesitated to rush reckless into the
midst of danger; but he was calm now, and the thought of death was
appalling. He would have preferred to die on a nobler field, if he were
to fall in battle. He did not wish to die in his _youth_, to be cut
off, without accomplishing the many ends he had so often meditated, and
without reaping a few of the sweets of life as the reward of his
voluntary sacrifice. He also desired to appear once more in the busy
and detracting world, to vindicate the character that might have been
unjustly aspersed, to reward the true friendship of those whose
confidence had never been shaken, and to rebuke, perhaps forgive, the
enemies who had recklessly pursued him. But another, and yet a more
stirring and important thought obtruded upon his reflections. It was
one he had never seriously considered before, and it now operated upon
him with irresistible power. It was a thought of things _beyond_ the
grave. The stillness of midnight, the million stars above him, the blue
eternal expanse through which they were distributed—the repose of the
invisible winds, that late had howled around him—the never-ceasing flow
of the ice-bound stream before him, and the continual change of hill
and valley—now desolate, and clothed in frosty vestments, and anon with
verdure and variegated beauty—constrained him to acknowledge in the
secret portals of his breast that there was a great, ever-existing
Creator. He then called to mind the many impressive lessons of a pious
mother, which he had subsequently disregarded. He remembered the things
she had read to him in the book of books—the words of prayer she taught
him to utter every eve, ere he closed his eyes in slumber—and he _now_
repeated that humble petition with all the fervency of a chastened
spirit. He felt truly convinced of the fallacy of setting the heart and
the affections altogether on the things of this world, where mortals
are only permitted to abide but a brief space; and a hearty repentance
of past errors, and a firm resolve to obey the requisitions of the
Omnipotent in future, were in that hour conceived and engraven
indelibly upon his heart.

“Mr. Boone—Mr. Boone—Mr. Boone!” cried Joe, softly.

“Dod! don’t make sich a fuss,” said Sneak.

“Be silent,” whispered Boone, gliding to Joe, and gazing out on the
snow, where he beheld about twenty savages standing erect and
motionless, not eighty paces distant.

“I came within an ace of shooting,” said Joe, “before I thought of what
you had said. I pulled the trigger with all my might before I
remembered that you said I musn’t shoot till you told me, but as good
luck would have it, my musket wasn’t cocked.” Boone went to each of the
other loopholes, and after scrutinizing every side very closely, he
directed Sneak and Glenn to abandon their posts and join him at Joe’s
stand, for the purpose of discharging a deadly volley at the
unsuspecting foe.

“Does it not seem cruel to spill blood in this manner?” whispered
Glenn, when he viewed the statue-like forms of the unconscious Indians.

“Had you witnessed the barbarous deeds that _I_ have seen _them_
perform—had you beheld the innocent babe ruthlessly butchered—your
children—your friends maimed, tomahawked, scalped, _burned_ before your
eyes—could you know the hellish horrors they are _now_ meditating—you
would not entertain much pity for them,” said Boone, in a low tone,
evidently moved by terrible memories, the precise nature of which the
one addressed could not understand. But Glenn’s scruples vanished, and
as a matter of necessity he determined to submit without reserve to the
guidance of his experienced friend.

“I should like to know how them yaller rascals got up here so close
without being eyed sooner,” said Sneak to Joe.

“That’s what’s been puzzling me, ever since I first saw them,” said
Joe, in scarce audible tones.

“Split me if you havn’t been asleep,” said Sneak.

“No indeed I havn’t,” said Joe. “I’ll declare,” he continued, looking
out, “I never should have thought of _that_. I see now, well enough,
how they got there without my seeing them. They’ve got a great big ball
of snow, half as high as a man’s head, and they’ve been rolling it all
the time, and creeping along behind it. They’re all standing before it
now, and just as I looked one moved his leg, and then I saw what it
was. This beats the old boy himself. It’s a mercy they didn’t come all
the way and shoot me in the eye!”

“Hush!” said Boone. “They must have heard something, or supposed they
did, or else your neglect would have been fatal to you ere this. They
are now waiting to ascertain whether they were mistaken or not. Move
not, and speak no more, until I order you.”

“I won’t,” said Joe, still gazing at the erect dark forms.

“See how many there is—can’t you count ’em?” said Sneak, in a whisper,
leaning against Joe, and slyly taking a cartridge from his belt,
slipped it in the muzzle of the musket which was standing against the
palisade.

“What’re you doing with my gun?” asked Joe, in a very low tone, as he
happened to turn his head and see Sneak take his hand away from the
muzzle of the musket.

“Nothing—I was only feeling the size of the bore. It’s big enough to
kick down a cow.”

“What are you tittering about? you think it’s a going to kick me again,
but you’re mistaken—it ain’t got two loads in this time.”

“Didn’t Mr. Boone jest tell you to keep quiet?” said Sneak.

“Don’t you speak—then I won’t,” responded Joe.

The moon had not yet reached the meridian, and the dark shadow of the
house reaching to the palisade on the west, prevented the Indians from
observing the movements of the whites through the many slight apertures
in the inclosure, but through which the besieged party could easily
observe them.

After a long pause, during which neither party had uttered a word or
betrayed animation by the least movement, Glenn felt the weight of a
hand laid gently on his shoulder, and turning beheld Mary at his side.
Without a motion of the lips, she placed in his hand some bullets she
had moulded, and then passing on to the other men, gave each a like
quantity.

“Retire, now, my lass,” said Boone; and when she returned to the house,
he continued, addressing Glenn—“If they do not move one way or the
other very soon, we will give them a broadside where they are.”

“And we could do execution at this distance,” observed Glenn.

“I’d be dead sure to kill one, I know I would,” said Sneak.

“Let me see if I could take aim,” said Joe, deliberately pointing his
musket through the loophole. The musket had inadvertently been cocked,
and left in that condition, and no sooner did Joe’s finger gently press
upon the trigger, than it went off, making an astounding report, and
veiling the whole party in an immense cloud of smoke.

“Who did that?” cried Boone, stamping with vexation.

“Was that you, Joe?” demanded Glenn.

Joe made no answer.

“Oh, dod! my mouth’s smashed all to pieces!” said Sneak, crawling up
from a prostrate position, caused by the rebound of the musket, for he
was looking over Joe’s shoulder when the gun went off.

“Where’s Joe?” inquired Glenn, pushing Sneak aside.

“He’s dead, I guess—I believe the gun’s busted,” said Sneak.

“Now, sir! why did you fire?” cried Glenn, somewhat passionately,
stumbling against Joe, and seizing him by the collar. No answer was
made, for poor Joe’s neck was limber enough, and he quite insensible.

“He’s dead in yearnest, jest as I told you,” said Sneak; “for that gun
kicked him on the shoulder hard enough to kill a cow—and the hind side
of his head struck my tooth hard enough to’ve kilt a horse. He’s broke
one of my upper fore-teeth smack in two.”

“Every man to his post!” exclaimed Boone, as a shower of arrows rattled
about the premises.

Sneak now occupied Joe’s station, and the first glance in the direction
of the savages sufficed to determine him how to act. Perhaps no one
ever discharged a rifle more rapidly than he did. And a brisk and
well-directed fire was kept up for some length of time, likewise, by
the rest of the besieged.

It was, perhaps, a fortunate thing that Joe _did_ fire without orders,
and without any intention of doing so himself. It seemed that the
savages had been meditating a desperate rush upon the fort,
notwithstanding Boone’s prediction; for no sooner did Joe fire, than
they hastily retreated a short distance, scattering in every direction,
and, without a moment’s consultation, again appeared, advancing rapidly
from every quarter. It was evident that this plan had been preconcerted
among them; and had all fired, instead of Joe only, they might easily
have scaled the palisade before the guns could have been reloaded.
Neither had the besiegers been aware of the strength of the garrison.
But they were soon made to understand that they had more than Glenn and
his man to contend against. The discharges followed in such quick
succession that they paused, when but a moment more would have placed
them within the inclosure. But several of them being wounded, and Boone
and Glenn still doing execution with their pistols, the discomfited
enemy made a precipitate retreat. An occasional flight of arrows
continued to assail the besieged, but they came from a great distance,
for the Indians were not long in scampering beyond the range of the
loopholes.

When Glenn could no longer see any of the dark forms of the enemy, he
turned round to contemplate the sad condition of Joe. Joe was sitting
up, with his hands locked round his knees.

“Well, split me in two!” cried Sneak, staring at his companion.

“What’s the matter, Sneak?” asked Joe, with much simplicity.

“That’s a purty question for _you_ to ask, after there for dead this
half-hour almost”

“Have the Indians been here?” asked Joe, staring round wildly.

“Hain’t you heard us shooting?”

“My goodness,” cried Joe, springing up. “Oh! am I wounded? say!” he
continued, evincing the most lively alarm.

“Well, if this don’t beat every thing that ever I saw in all my life, I
wish I may be shot!” said Sneak.

“What is it?” asked Joe, his senses yet wandering.

“Jest feel the back of your head,” said Sneak. Joe put his hand to the
place indicated, and winced under the pain of the touch. He then looked
at his hand, and beholding a quantity of clotted blood upon it, fell
down suddenly on the snow.

“What’s the matter now?” asked Glenn, who had seen his man sitting up,
and came swiftly to him when he fell.

“I’m a dead man!” said Joe, mournfully.

“That’s a lie!” said Sneak.

“What ails you, Joe?” asked Glenn, his tone much softened.

“I’m dying—oh! I’m shot through the head!”

“Don’t believe him, Mr. Glenn—I’ll be smashed if its any thing but my
tooth,” said Sneak.

“Oh—I’m dying!” continued Joe, pressing his hand against his head,
while the pain and loss of blood actually produced a faintness, and his
voice became very weak.

“Are you really much hurt?” continued Glenn, stooping down, and feeling
his pulse.

“It’s all over!” muttered Joe. “I’m going fast. Sancte Petre!—Pater
noster, qui es in coelis, sanctificeter nomen tuum; adveniat regnum
tu—”

Here Joe’s voice failed, and, falling into a syncope, Glenn and Sneak
lifted him up and carried him into the house.

“Is he shot?” exclaimed Mary, instantly producing some lint and
bandages which she had prepared in anticipation of such an event.

“I fear he has received a serious hurt,” said Glenn, aiding Mary, who
had proceeded at once to bind up the wound.

“I’ll be split if he’s shot!” said Sneak, going out and returning to
his post. Glenn did likewise when he saw the first indications of
returning consciousness in his man; and Mary was left alone to restore
and nurse poor Joe. But he could not have been in better hands.

“I should like to know something about them curious words the feller
was speaking when he keeled over,” said Sneak, as he looked out at the
now quiet scene from the loophole, and mused over the events of the
night. “I begin to believe that the feller’s a going to die. I don’t
believe any man could talk so, if he wasn’t dying.”

“Have you seen any of them lately?” inquired Boone, coming to Sneak’s
post and running his eye along the horizon through the loophole.

“Not a one,” replied Sneak, “except that feller laying out yander by
the snowball.”

“He’s dead,” said Boone, “and he is the only one that we are sure of
having killed to-night. But many are wounded.”

“And smash me if Joe didn’t kill that one when his musket went off
before he was ready,” said Sneak.

“Yes, I saw him fall when Joe fired; and that accident was, after all,
a fortunate thing for us,” continued Boone.

“But I’m sorry for poor Joe,” said Sneak.

“Pshaw!” said Boone; “he’ll be well again, in an hour.”

“No, he’s a gone chicken.”

“Why do you think so?”

“Didn’t he say so himself? and didn’t he gabble out a whole parcel of
purgatory talk? He’s as sure gone as a stuck pig, I tell you,”
continued Sneak.

“He will eat as hearty a breakfast to-morrow morning as ever he did in
his life,” said Boone. “But let us attend to the business in hand. I
hardly think we will be annoyed any more from this quarter, unless
yonder dead Indian was a chief, and then it is more than probable they
will try to steal him away. However, you may remain here. I, alone, can
manage the others.”

“Which others?” inquired Sneak.

“Those under the snow,” replied Boone; “they are now within twenty
paces of the palisade.”

“You don’t say so?” said Sneak, cocking his gun.

“I have been listening to them cutting through the snow a long while,
and it will be a half hour yet before I spring the mine,” said Boone.

“I hope it will kill ’em all!” said Sneak.

“Watch close, and perhaps _you_ will kill one yet from this loophole,”
said Boone, returning to his post, where the slow-match was exposed
through the palisade near the ground; and Roughgrove stood by, holding
a pistol, charged with powder only, in readiness to fire the train when
Boone should give the word of command.

Boone applied his ear to a crevice between the timbers near the earth,
where the snow had been cleared away. After remaining in this position
a few moments, he beckoned Glenn to him.

“Place your ear against this crevice,” said Boone.

“It is not the Indians I hear, certainly!” remarked Glenn. The sounds
resembled the ticking of a large clock, differing only in their greater
rapidity than the strokes of seconds.

“Most certainly it is nothing else,” replied Boone.

“But how do they produce such singular sounds? Is it the trampling of
feet?” continued Glenn.

“It is the sound of many tomahawks cutting a passage,” replied Boone.

“But what disposition do they make of the snow, when it is cut loose.”

“A portion of them dig, while the rest convey the loose snow out and
cast it down the cliff.”

While the above conversation was going on, a colloquy of a different
nature transpired within the house. Joe, after recovering from his
second temporary insensibility, had sunk into a gentle doze, which
lasted many minutes. Mary had bathed his face repeatedly with sundry
restoratives, and likewise administered a cordial that she had brought
from her father’s house, which seemed to have a most astonishing
somniferous effect. When the contents of the bottle were exhausted, she
sat silently by, watching Joe’s apparent slumber, and felt rejoiced
that her patient promised a speedy recovery. Once, after she had been
gazing at the fawn, (that had been suffered to occupy a place near the
wall, where it was now coiled up and sleeping,) on turning her eyes
towards the face of Joe, she imagined for a moment that she saw him
close his eyelids quickly. But calling him softly and receiving no
answer, she concluded it was a mere fancy, and again resigned herself
to her lonely watch. When she had been sitting thus some minutes,
watching him patiently, she observed his eyes open slowly, and quickly
smack to again, when he found that she was looking at him. But a moment
after, conscious that his wakefulness was discovered, he opened them
boldly, and found himself possessed of a full recollection of all the
incidents of the night up to his disaster.

“Have they whipt all the Indians away that were standing out on the
snow, Miss Mary?”

“Yes, long ago—and none have been seen, but the one you killed, for
some time,” she replied, encouragingly.

“Did I kill one sure enough?” asked Joe, while his eyes sparkled
exceedingly.

“Yes, indeed,” replied she; “and I heard Mr. Boone say he was glad it
happened, and that the accident was, after all, a fortunate thing for
us.”

“_Accident_!” iterated Joe; “who says it was an accident?”

“Wasn’t it an accident?” asked the simple girl.

“No, indeed!” replied Joe. “But,” he continued, “have they blown up the
other Indians yet?”

“Not yet—but I heard them say they would do it very soon. They can be
heard digging under the snow now, very plainly,” said Mary.

“Indeed!” said Joe, with no little terror depicted in his face. “I wish
you’d go and ask Mr. Boone if he thinks you’ll be entirely safe, if you
please, Miss Mary,” said Joe beseechingly.

“I will,” responded Mary, rising to depart.

“And if they ask how I am,” continued Joe, “please say I am a great
deal better, but too weak yet to go out.”

Mary did his bidding; and when she returned, what was her astonishment
to find her patient running briskly across the room from the cupboard,
with a whole roasted prairie-hen in one hand, or at least the body of
it, while he tore away the breast with his teeth, and some half dozen
crackers in the other! In vain did he attempt to conceal them under the
covering of his bed, into which he jumped as quickly as possible. Guilt
was manifest in his averted look, his trembling hand, and his greasy
mouth! Mary gazed in silent wonder. Joe cowered under her glance a few
moments, until the irresistible flavour of the fowl overcame him, and
then his jaws were again set in motion.

“I fear that eating will injure you,” remarked Mary, at length.

“Never fear,” replied Joe. “When a sick person has a good appetite,
it’s a sure sign he’s getting better.”

“If you think so you can eat as much as you please,” said Mary; “and
you needn’t hide any thing from me.”

Joe felt a degree of shame in being so palpably detected, but his
appetite soon got the better of his scruples, and he gratified the
demands of his stomach without reserve.

“But what did Mr. Boone say?” asked he, peeping out.

“He says he thinks there is no danger. But the Indians are now within a
few feet of the palisade, and the explosion is about to take place.”




CHAPTER IX.

Sneak skills a sow that “was not all a swine”—The breathless
suspense—The match in readiness—Joe’s cool demeanour—The match
ignited—Explosion of the mine—Defeat of the savages—The captive—His
liberation—The repose—The kitten—Morning.


“Don’t you think I know who you are, and what you’re after?” said
Sneak, as he observed a large black sow, or what seemed to be one,
rambling about on the snow within a hundred paces of him. “If that
ain’t _my_ sow! She’s gone, that’s dead sure; and if I don’t pepper the
red rascal that killed her I wish I may be split. That Indian ’ll find
I’m not such a fool as he took me for. Just wait till he gits close
enough. I ain’t to be deceived by my own sow’s dead skin, with a great
big Osage in it, nohow you can fix it.” Sneak’s conjecture was right.
The Indian that Joe had killed was a chief, and the apparent sow was
nothing more than a savage enveloped in a swine’s skin. The Indian,
after reconnoitering the premises with some deliberation, evidently
believed that his stratagem was successful, and at length moved in the
direction of his dead comrade, with the manifest intention of bearing
the body away.

“I’ll let you have it now!” said Sneak, firing his rifle, when the
seeming sow began to drag the fallen chief from the field. The
discharge took effect; the savage sprang upright and endeavoured to
retreat in the manner that nature designed him to run; but he did not
go more than a dozen paces before he sank down and expired.

“That’s tit for tat, for killing my sow,” said Sneak, gazing at his
postrate foe.

“Come here, Sneak,” said Boone, from the opposite side of the
inclosure.

“There was but one, and I fixed him,” said Sneak, when they asked him
how many of the enemy were in view when he fired.

“They heard the gun,” said Glenn, applying his ear to the chink, and
remarking that the Indians had suddenly ceased to work under the snow.

“Be quiet,” said Boone; “they will begin again in a minute or two.”

“They’re at it a’ready,” said Sneak, a moment after, and very soon they
were heard again, more distinctly than ever, cutting away with
increased rapidity.

“Suppose the match does not burn?” observed Glenn, in tones betraying a
fearful apprehension.

“In such an event,” said Boone, “we must retreat into the house, and
fasten the door without a moment’s delay. But I do not much fear any
such failure, for the dampness of the snow cannot so soon have
penetrated through the dry reeds to the powder. Still we should be
prepared—therefore, as there is no necessity that more than one of us
should be here now, and as I am that man, withdraw, all of you, within
the house, and remain there until your ears and eyes shall dictate what
course to pursue.” Boone’s command was promptly obeyed, and when they
reached the house and looked back, (the door was kept open,) they
beheld the renowned pioneer standing erect, holding a pistol in his
right hand (which he pointed at the cotton that connected with a train
of powder running along a short plank to the reed that reached the
buried keg,) while the moon, now midway in the heavens, “and
beautifully bright,” revealed the stern and determined expression of
pale brow and fixed lip. Thus he stood many minutes, and they seemed
hours to those who gazed upon the breathless scene from the house. Not
a sound was heard, save the rapid ticking of tomahawks under the snow
outside of the inclosure, or the occasional hasty remark of those who
were looking on in painful and thrilling suspense. Once Boone bowed his
head and listened an instant to the operations of the savages, and when
he rose erect again, the party looking on confidently expected he would
fire the train. But the fatal moment had not yet arrived. Still he
pointed the pistol at the combustible matter, and his eye glanced along
the barrel; but he maintained a statue-like stillness, as if awaiting
some preconcerted signal.

“Why don’t he fire?” inquired Glenn, in a whisper.

“It is not quite time yet,” responded Roughgrove.

“Dod! they’ll crawl up presently, and jump over the fence,” said Sneak.

“Oh, goodness! I wish he’d shoot!” said Joe, in low, sepulchral tones,
his head thrust between Sneak’s legs, whither he had crawled
unobserved, and was now peering out at the scene.

“Who are you?” exclaimed Sneak, leaping away from Joe’s bandaged head,
which he did not recognize at the first glance.

“It’s nobody but me,” said Joe, turning his face upward, that his
friend might not suppose him an enemy.

“Well, what are you doing here? I thought you was a dying.”

“I’m a good deal better, but I’m too weak to do any thing yet,” said
Joe, in piteous tones, as he looked fearfully at Boone, and listened to
the strokes of the Indians without, which became louder and louder.

“Stand back a little,” said Boone to those in the door-way, “that I may
enter when I fire—the match may burn more briskly than I anticipated.”

A passage was opened for him to enter. He pulled the trigger—the pistol
missed fire—he deliberately poured in fresh priming from his horn, and
once more taking aim, the pistol was discharged, and, running to the
house, and entering a little beyond the threshold, he paused, and
turned to behold the realization of his hopes. The light combustible
matter flashed up brightly, and the blaze ran along the ground a moment
in the direction of the end of the reed; but at the instant when all
expected to see the powder ignited, the flames seemed to die away, and
the darkness which succeeded impressed them with the fear that the damp
snow had, indeed, defeated their purpose.

“Split me if it _shan’t_ go off!” cried Sneak, running out with a torch
in his hand, that he snatched from the fireplace. When he reached the
trench that had been dug along the palisade, and in which the slow
match was placed, he looked down but once, and dashing his fire-brand
behind him, sprang back to the house, with all the celerity of which he
was capable. “Dod!” said he, “it’s burning yet, but we couldn’t see it
from here. It’ll set the powder off in less than no time!”

“I trust it will!” said Boone, with much anxiety. And truly the crisis
had arrived, beyond which, if it were delayed a single minute, it would
be too late! The _voices_ of the Indians could now be heard, and the
sounds of the tomahawks had ceased. They were evidently on the eve of
breaking through the icy barrier, and rushing upon their victims.
Boone, with a composed but livid brow, placed his hand upon the
ponderous door, for the purpose of retreating within, and barring out
the ruthless assailants. The rest instinctively imitated his motions,
but at the same time their eyes were yet riveted on the dimly burning
match. A small flash was observed to illumine the trench—another and a
larger one succeeded! The first train of powder was ignited—the Indians
were bursting through the snow-crust with direful yells—the blaze ran
quickly along the plank—it reached the end of the reed—a shrill
whizzing sound succeeded—a sharp crash under the snow—and then all was
involved in a tremendous chaotic explosion! An enormous circular cloud
of smoke enveloped the scene for a moment, and then could be seen
tomahawks, bows, and arrows, and even _savages_, sailing through the
air. The moon was darkened for the space of several minutes, during
which time immense quantities of snow poured down from above. The
startling report seemed to rend both the earth and the heavens, and
rumbled far up and down the valley of the Missouri, like the deep
bellowing of a coruscant thunder-cloud, and died away in successive
vibrations until it finally resembled the partially suppressed growling
of an angry lion.

When the inmates of the house sallied forth, the scene was again quiet.
After clearing away the enormous masses of snow from the palisade, they
looked out from the inclosure through the loophole on the east, and all
was stillness and silence. But the view was changed. Instead of the
level and smooth surface, they now beheld a concave formation of snow,
beginning at the earth, which was laid bare where the powder had been
deposited, and widening, upward and outward, till the ring of the
extreme angle reached a height of fifteen or twenty feet, and measured
a circumference of fifty paces. But they did not discover a single dead
body. On the contrary, they soon distinguished the sounds of the
savages afar off, in fiendish and fearful yells, as they retreated in
great precipitation.

“Dod! none of ’em’s killed!” exclaimed Sneak, looking about in
disappointment.

“Hang it all, how could they expect to kill any, without putting in
some lead?” replied Joe, standing at his elbow, and evincing no
symptoms of illness.

“What’re _you_ a doing out here? You’d better go in and finish dying,”
said Sneak.

“No, I thank you,” said Joe; “my time’s not come yet; and when it does
come, I’ll know what to do without your instructions. I’m well now—I
never felt better in my life, only when I was eating.”

“Go to the horses, Joe, and see if they have suffered any injury,” said
Glenn. “I don’t believe a single Indian was killed by the explosion,”
he continued, addressing Boone.

“The snow may have preserved them,” replied Boone; “and yet,” he
continued, “I am sure I saw some of them flying up in the air.”

“I saw them too,” said Glenn, “but I have known instances of the kind,
when powder-mills have blown up, where men were thrown a considerable
distance without being much injured.”

“It answered our purpose, at all events,” said Boone, “for now, no
inducement whatever can ever bring them back”

“If I were sure of that,” replied Glenn, “I would not regret the
bloodless result of the explosion.”

“You may rely upon it implicitly,” said Boone; “for it was a surprise
they can never understand, and they will attach to it some
superstitious interpretation, which will most effectually prevent them
from meditating another attack”

“Goodness gracious alive!” exclaimed Joe, nimbly springing past Boone
and Glenn, and rushing into the house.

“What can be the matter with the fellow, now?” exclaimed Glenn.

“He was alarmed at something in the stable—see what it is, Sneak,” said
Boone.

“I’ve got you, have I? Dod! come out here!” exclaimed Sneak, when he
had been in the stable a few moments.

“Who are you talking to?” asked Glenn.

“A venimirous Osage smutty-face!” said Sneak, stepping out of the
stable door backwards, and dragging an Indian after him by the ears.

“What is that?” demanded Glenn, staring at the singular object before
him. The question was by no means an unnatural one, for no being in the
human shape ever seemed less like a man. The unresisting and bewildered
savage looked wildly round, displaying a face as black as if he had
just risen from the bottom of some infernal lake. His tattered buckskin
garments had shared the same fate in the explosion; his eyebrows, and
the hair of his head were singed and crisped; and, altogether he might
easily have passed for one of Pluto’s scullions. He did not make
resistance when Sneak led him forth, seeming to anticipate nothing else
than an instantaneous and cruel death, and was apparently resigned to
his fate. He doubtless imagined that escape and longer life were
utterly impossible, inasmuch as, to his comprehension, he was in the
grasp of evil spirits. If he had asked himself _how_ he came thither,
it could not have occurred to him that any other means than the agency
of a supernatural power threw him into the hands of the foe.

“I thought I saw one of them plunging through the air over the
inclosure,” said Boone, smiling.

“Hanged if I didn’t think so too,” said Joe, who had at length returned
to gaze at the captive, when he ascertained that he was entirely meek
and inoffensive.

“Have you got over your fright already?” asked Sneak.

“What fright?” demanded Joe, with affected surprise.

“Now, _can_ you say you weren’t skeered?”

“Ha! ha! ha! I believe you really thought I _was_ frightened. Why, you
dunce, you! I only ran in to tell Miss Mary about it.”

“Now go to bed. Don’t speak to me agin to night,” said Sneak,
indignantly.

“I’ll go and get something to eat,” said Joe, retreating into the
house.

“Tell Roughgrove to come here,” said Boone, speaking to Joe.

“I will,” said Joe, vanishing through the door.

When the old ferryman came out, Boone requested him (he being the most
familiar with the Osage language,) to ask the savage by what means he
was enabled to get inside of the inclosure. Roughgrove did his bidding;
and the Indian replied that the Great Spirit _threw_ him over the
palisade, because he once killed a friend of Boone’s at the
cave-spring, and was now attempting to kill another.

“Why did you wish to kill us?” asked Roughgrove.

The Indian said it was because they thought Glenn had a great deal of
money, many fire weapons, and powder and bullets, which they (the
savages) wanted.

“Was it _right_ to rob the white man of these things, and then to
murder him?” continued Roughgrove.

The savage replied that the prophet (Raven) had told the war-party it
was right. Besides, they came a long and painful journey to get
(Glenn’s) goods, and had suffered much with cold in digging under the
snow; several of their party had been killed and wounded, and he
thought they had a good right to every thing they could get.

“Did the whites ever go to your village to rob and murder?” inquired
the old ferryman.

The Indian assumed a proud look, and replied that they _had_. He said
that the buffalo, the bear, the deer, and the beaver—the eternal
prairies and forests—the rivers, the air and the sky, all belonged to
the red men. That the whites had not been _invited_ to come among them,
but they had intruded upon their lands, stolen their game, and killed
their warriors. Yet, he said, the Indians did not hate Boone, and would
not have attacked the premises that night, if they had known he was
there.

“Why do they not hate Boone? He has killed more of them than any one
else in this region,” continued Roughgrove.

The Indian said that Boone was a great prophet, and was loved by the
Great Spirit.

“Will the war-party return hither to-night?” asked Roughgrove.

The Indian answered in the negative; and added that they would never
attack that place again, because the Great Spirit had fought against
them.

Boone requested Roughgrove to ask what would be done with the false
prophet who had advised them to make the attack.

The savage frowned fiercely, and replied that he would be tied to a
tree, and shot through the heart a hundred times.

“What do you think we intend to do to _you_?” asked Roughgrove.

The savage said he would be skinned alive and put under the ice in the
river, or burned to death by a slow fire. He said he was ready to die.

“I’ll be shot if he isn’t a spunky fellow!” said Sneak.

“Do you desire such a fate?” continued the old ferry man.

“The Indian looked at him with surprise, and answered without
hesitation that he _did_—and then insisted upon being killed
immediately.

“Would you attempt to injure the white man again if we were not to kill
you?”

The Indian smiled, but made no answer.

“I am in earnest,” continued Roughgrove, “and wish to know what you
would do if we spared your life.”

The Indian said such talk was only trifling, and again insisted upon
being dispatched.

After a short consultation with Boone and Glenn, Roughgrove repeated
his question.

The savage replied that he did not believe it possible for him to
escape immediate death—but if he were not killed, he could never think
of hurting any of those, who saved him, afterwards. Yet he stated very
frankly that he would kill and rob any _other_ pale-faces he might meet
with.

“Let me blow his brains out,” said Sneak, throwing his gun up to his
shoulder. The Indian understood the movement, if not the words, and
turning towards him, presented a full front, without quailing.

“He speaks the truth,” said Boone; “he would never injure any of us
himself, nor permit any of his tribe to do it, so far as his influence
extended. Yet he will die rather than make a promise not to molest
others. His word may be strictly relied upon. It is not fear that
extorts the promise never to war against us—it would be his gratitude
for sparing his life. Take down your gun, Sneak. Let us decide upon his
fate. I am in favour of liberating him.”

“And I,” said Glenn.

“And I,” said Roughgrove.

“I vote for killing him,” said Sneak.

“Hanged if I don’t, too,” said Joe, who had been listening from the
door.

“Spare him,” said Mary, who came out, and saw what was passing.

“We have the majority, Mary,” said Glenn; “and when innocence pleads,
the generous hand is stayed.”

Roughgrove motioned the savage to follow, and he led him to the gate.
The prisoner did not understand what was to be done. He evidently
supposed that his captors were about to slay him, and he looked up, as
he thought, the last time, at the moon and the stars, and his lips
moved in deep and silent adoration.

Roughgrove opened the gate, and the savage followed him out, composedly
awaiting his fate. But seeing no indication of violence, and calling to
mind the many wild joys of his roving youth, and the horrors of a
sudden death, he spoke not, yet his brilliant eyes were dimmed for a
moment with tears. His deep gaze seemed to implore mercy at the hands
of his captors. He would not utter a petition that his life might be
spared, yet his breast heaved to rove free again over the flowery
prairies, to bathe in the clear waters of running streams, to inhale
the balmy air of midsummer morning, to chase the panting deer upon the
dizzy peak, and to hail once more the bright smiles of his timid bride
in the forest-shadowed glen.

“Go! thou art free!” said Roughgrove.

The Indian stared in doubt, and looked reproachfully at the guns in the
hands of his captors, as if he thought they were only mocking him with
hopes of freedom, when it was their intention to shoot him down the
moment he should think his life was truly spared.

“Go! we will not harm thee!” repeated Roughgrove.

“And take this,” said Mary, placing some food in his yielding hand.

The Indian gazed upon the maiden’s face. His features, by a magical
transition, now beamed with confidence and hope. Mary was in tears—not
tears of pity for his impending death, but a gush of generous emotion
that his life was spared. The savage read her heart—he knew that the
white woman never intercedes in vain, and that no victim falls when
sanctified by her tears. He clasped her hand and pressed it to his
lips; and then turning away in silence, set off in a stately and
deliberate pace towards the west. He looked not back to see if a
treacherous gun was pointed at him. He knew that the maiden had not
trifled with him. He knew that she would not mock a dying man with
bread. He neither looked back nor quickened his step. And so he
vanished from view in the valley.

He clapsed her hand, and pressed it to his lips.

He clasped her hand, and pressed it to his lips.


“Dod! he’s gone! We ought to’ve had his sculp!” said Sneak, betraying
serious mortification.

“We must give it up, though—we were in the minority,” said Joe,
satisfied with the decision.

“In the what?” asked Sneak.

“In the minority,” said Joe.

“Let’s go in the house and git something to eat,” said Sneak.

“Hang me if I ain’t willing to be with you there,” said Joe.

The whole party entered the house to partake of a collation prepared by
the dainty hands of Mary. Mary had frequently insisted upon serving
them with refreshments during the night, but hitherto all her
persuasions had been unavailing, for the dangers that beset them on
every hand had banished all other thoughts than those of determined
defensive operations.

Boone was so certain that nothing farther was to be apprehended from
the enemy, that he dispensed with the sentinels at the loopholes. He
relied upon Ringwood and Jowler to guard them through the remainder of
the night; and when a hearty meal was eaten he directed his gallant
little band to enjoy their wonted repose.

Ere long Mary slumbered quietly beside her father, while Boone and
Glenn occupied the remaining couch. Sneak was seated on a low stool,
near the blazing fire, and Joe sat in Glenn’s large arm chair, on the
opposite side of the hearth. The fawn and the kitten were coiled close
together in the centre of the room.

Save the grinding jaws of Sneak and Joe, a death-like silence reigned.
Occasionally, when Sneak lifted his eyes from the pewter platter that
lay upon his knees, and glanced at the bandages on his companion’s
head, his jaws would cease to move for a few moments, during which he
gazed in astonishment at the ravenous propensity of the invalid. But
not being inclined to converse or remonstrate, he endeavoured to get
through with his supper with as much expedition as possible, that he
might enjoy all the comforts of refreshing sleep. Yet he was often on
the eve of picking a quarrel with Joe, when he suffered a sudden twinge
from his broken tooth, while striving to tear the firmer portion of the
venison from the bone. But when he reflected upon his peculiar
participation in the occurrence which had caused him so justly to
suffer, he repressed his rising anger and proceeded with his labour of
eating.

Joe, on the other hand, discussed his savoury dish with unalloyed
satisfaction; yet he, too, paused occasionally, and fixing his eyes
upon the glaring fire, seemed plunged in the deepest thought. But he
did not glance at his companion. At these brief intervals he was
apparently reflecting upon the incidents of the night. One thing in
particular puzzled him; he could not, for the life of him, conceive how
his musket rebounded with such violence, when he was positively certain
that he had put but one charge in it, and that only a moderate one. He
was sometimes inclined to think the blow he received on the head was
dealt by Sneak; but when he reflected it would be unnatural for one man
to strike another with his _teeth_, and that Sneak had likewise
sustained a serious injury at the same time, conjectures were entirely
at fault.

“What are you a thinking about so hard?” asked Sneak.

“I’m trying to think how I got that blow on the back of my head,” said
Joe, turning half abstractedly to Sneak.

“Yes, and I’d like to know how you come to mash my mouth so
dod-rottedly,” said Sneak, in well-affected ill nature.

“Hang it, Sneak, you know well enough that I wouldn’t do such a thing
on purpose, when I was obliged to almost knock out my own brains to do
it,” said Joe, apologetically.

“If I hadn’t thought of that,” replied Sneak, “I don’t know but I
should’ve shot you through when I got up.”

“And I should never have blamed you for it,” said Joe, “if it had been
done on purpose. Does it hurt you much now?”

“Don’t you see how its bleeding?”

“That’s gravy running out of your mouth, ain’t it?”

“Yes, but its bloody a little,” said Sneak, licking his lips.

“I shall have to sit up and sleep,” said Joe; “for my head’s so sore I
can’t lie down.”

“I’m a going to lay my head on this stool and sleep; and I’m getting so
drowsy I can’t set much longer,” said Sneak.

“All’ll be square between us, about breaking your tooth, won’t it?”

“Yes, I can’t bear malice,” said Sneak, shaking Joe’s extended hand.

“Oh me!” said Joe, “I shan’t be able to doze a bit, hardly, for trying
to study out how the old musket came to kick me so.”

“I’ve got a notion to tell you, jest to see if you’ll sleep any better,
then.”

“Do you know?” asked Joe, quickly; “if you do, I’ll thank you with all
my heart to tell me?”

“Dod! if I don’t!” said Sneak; “but all’s square betwixt us?”

“Yes, if you’re willing.”

“Well, don’t you remember when I told you to count the Indians standing
out there, I leant agin you to look over your shoulder? I stole a
cartrich out of your shot-bag then, and slipt it in the muzzle of your
musket. Don’t you know it was leaning agin the post?”

Joe turned round and looked Sneak full in the face for several moments,
without uttering a word.

“When it went off,” continued Sneak, “it made the tremendousest crack I
ever heard in all my life, except when the keg of powder busted.”

“You confounded, blasted rascal you!” exclaimed Joe, doubling up his
fists, and preparing to assault his friend.

“Now don’t go to waking up the folks!” said Sneak.

“I’ll be hanged if I hain’t got a great notion to wear out the iron
poker over your head!” continued Joe, his eyes gleaming with rage.

“Look at my tooth,” said Sneak, grinning in such manner that the
remaining fragment of the member named could be distinctly seen. The
ludicrous expression of his features was such as constrained Joe to
smile, and his enmity vanished instantaneously.

“I believe you got the worst of the bargain, after all,” said Joe,
falling back in his chair and laughing quite heartily.

“You know,” continued Sneak, “I didn’t mean it to turn out as bad as it
did. I jest thought it would kick you over in the snow, and not hurt
you any, hardly.”

“Well, let’s say no more about it,” said Joe; “but when you do any
thing of that kind hereafter, pause and reflect on the consequences,
and forbear.”

“I’ll keep my mouth out of the way next time,” said Sneak; “and now, as
all’s square betwixt us, s’pose we agree about how we are to do with
them dead Indians. S’pose we go halves with all the things they’ve
got?”

“No, I’ll be hanged if I do!” said Joe quickly. “The one I shot was a
chief, and he’s sure to have some gold about him.”

“Yes, but you know you’d never a killed him if it hadn’t been for me.”

“But if it hadn’t been for you I wouldn’t have got hurt,” replied Joe,
reproachfully.

“Well, I don’t care much about the chief—the one I killed maybe took
all his silver and gold before I shot him. Anyhow, I know I can find
something out there in the snow where they were blowed up,” said Sneak,
arranging a buffalo robe on the hearth and lying down.

“And we must hereafter let each other alone, Sneak,” said Joe, “for the
fact is, we are both too much for one another in our tricks.”

“I’m willing,” replied Sneak, lazily, as his eyes gradually closed.

Joe placed his dish on the shelf over the fireplace, and folding his
arms, and leaning back in his great chair, likewise closed his eyes.

But a few moments sufficed to place them both in the land of dreams.
And now the silence was intense. Even the consuming logs of wood seemed
to sink by degrees into huge livid coals, without emitting the least
sparkling sound. The embers threw a dim glare over the scene, such as
Queen Mab delights in when she leads her fairy train through the
chambers of sleeping mortals. A sweet smile rested upon the lips of
Mary. A loved form flitted athwart her visions. Roughgrove’s features
wore a grave but placid cast. Boone’s face was as passionless and calm
as if he were a stranger to terrific strife. Perils could now make no
impression on him. There was sadness on the damp brow of Glenn, and a
tear was stealing through the corner of his lids. A scene of woe, or
the crush of cherished hopes, was passing before his entranced vision.
Sneak, ever and anon grasped the empty air, and motioned his arm, as if
in the midst of deadly conflict. And Joe, though his bruised face
betrayed not his cast of thought, still evinced a participation in the
ideal transactions of the night, by the frequent involuntary motions of
his body, and repeated endeavours to avoid visionary dangers.

The kitten lay upon the soft neck of the fawn, and at intervals resumed
its low, humming song, which had more than once been hushed in perfect
repose. At a late hour, or rather an early one, just ere the first
faint ray of morning appeared in the distant east, puss purred rather
harshly on the silken ears of its companion, and its sharp claws
producing a stinging sensation, the fawn shook its head violently, and
threw its little bed-fellow rather rudely several feet away. The
kitten, instead of being angry, fell into a merry mood, and began to
frisk about in divers directions, first running under the bed, then
springing upon some diminutive object on the floor as it would upon a
mouse, and finally pricking again the ear of the fawn. The fawn then
rose up, and creeping gently about the room, touched the cheeks or
hands of the slumbering inmates with its velvet tongue, but so softly
that none were awakened. The kitten, no longer able to annoy its
companion by its mischievous pranks, now paced up to the fire and
commenced playing with a dangling string attached to Joe’s moccasin.
Once it jumped up with such force against his foot that he jerked it
quickly several inches away. But this only diverted puss the more.
Instead of being content with the palpable demonstration thus effected,
it followed up the advantage gained by applying both its claws and
teeth to the foot. While it confined its operations to the stout
buckskin, but little impression was made; but when it came in contact
with the ankle, which was only covered with a yarn stocking, the result
was entirely different.

“Ugh! Confound the fire!” exclaimed Joe, giving a tremendous kick,
which dashed puss most violently into Sneak’s face.

“Hey! Dod! What is it?” cried Sneak, tearing the kitten (whose briery
nails had penetrated the skin of his nose) away, and throwing it across
the room. “I say! did you do that?” continued Sneak, wiping the blood
from his nose with his sleeve, and addressing Joe, who kept his eyes
fast closed, though almost bursting with suppressed laughter, and
pretending to be steeped in earnest slumber. “I won’t stand this!” said
Sneak, smarting with his wounds, and striking the chair in which Joe
sat with his foot. “Now,” continued Sneak, “if you done that, jest say
so, that’s all.”

“Did what?” asked Joe, opening his eyes suddenly.

“Why, throwed that ere pestiverous cat on me!” said Sneak.

“No. Goodness! is there a pole-cat in here?” exclaimed Joe, in such
well-counterfeited tones of anxiety and alarm, that the real encounter
occurring to Sneak, and his pain being now somewhat abated, he gave
vent to a hearty fit of laughter, which awoke every person in the
house.




CHAPTER X.

The lead removed—The wolves on the river—The wolf hunt—Gum fetid—Joe’s
incredulity—His conviction—His surprise—His predicament—His narrow
escape.


When Sneak opened the door, the sun had risen and was shining brightly.
In a moment the inmates of the house were stirring. The horses neighed
in the stable for their accustomed food and water, and when Joe
hastened to them, he embraced the neck of each, in testimony of his joy
that they were once more saved from the hands of the Indians. The
hounds pranced round Boone and Glenn, manifesting their delight in
being relieved of the presence of the enemy. The gate was thrown open,
and the scene of the explosion minutely examined. Fortunately the
channel cut under the snow by the savages ran a few feet apart from the
powder, or the whole of them must inevitably have perished. As it was,
not a single one lost his life, though many were blown up in the air to
a considerable height. Joe and Sneak found only a few spears, knives,
and tomahawks, that had been abandoned by the savages; and then they
repaired to the west side of the inclosure, where the two dead Indians
were still lying. They had scarce commenced searching their victims for
booty, when a solitary Indian was seen approaching from the upper
valley.

They had scarce commenced searching their victim.

They had scarce commenced searching their victims for booty, when a
solitary Indian was seen approaching from the upper valley.


“We hain’t got our guns!” exclaimed Sneak, pulling out his knife.

“I’ll get mine!” cried Joe, running away with all his might.

“What’s the matter?” inquired Boone, smiling, who had also seen the
approaching Indian, and was walking to where the dead savages lay,
accompanied by Glenn and Roughgrove, when he met Joe running swiftly
towards the house.

“Hang me, if the Indians ain’t coming back again,” replied Joe.

“There is but one, and he has a white flag,” said Boone, who had
discovered a small rag attached to a pole borne by the Indian.

“What can he want?” inquired Glenn.

“He wants permission to bury the dead,” replied Roughgrove.

“He’s the very rascal we let loose last night,” said Sneak.

This was true. Although the singed savage had removed some of the black
marks produced by the explosion, yet so many palpable traces of that
event were still exhibited on his person, there could be no doubt of
his identity.

The Indian came for the purpose mentioned by Roughgrove, and his
request was granted. He made a sign to a comrade he had left some
distance behind, who, in a very few minutes, was seen to approach in a
hasty though timorous pace.

“Don’t go to shooting out here!” exclaimed Sneak, hearing a clicking
sound, and the next moment observing Joe pointing his musket through
the loophole nearly in a line with the spot where he stood.

“Come in! come in! come in!” cried Joe.

“Put your gun away, and be silent,” said Glenn.

“I’ll be silent,” replied Joe, “but I’d rather stand here and watch
awhile. If they ain’t going to hurt any of us, it’ll do no harm; and if
they _do_ try to kill any of you, it may do some good.”

When the second Indian arrived, he seized the body of the savage
enveloped in the swine-skin, (knowing that permission to do so had been
obtained by his comrade,) and bore him away with great expedition,
manifesting no inclination whatever to tarry at a place which had been
so fatal to his brethren. But the other had every confidence in the
mercy of the whites, and lingered some length of time, gazing at the
corpse before him, as if hesitating whether to bear it away.

“Why do you not take him up?” inquired Roughgrove.

The Indian said it was the false prophet Raven, and that he hardly
deserved to be buried.

Sneak turned the dead Indian over, (he had been lying on his face,) and
he was instantly recognized by the whole party.

“I’m glad its him,” said Sneak.

“I think we will have peace now,” said Boone, “for Raven has ever been
the most blood-thirsty chief of the tribe.”

“Where is the war-party encamped? When do they return to their own
country?” asked Roughgrove.

The Indian replied that they were encamped in a small grove on the
border of the prairie, where they intended to bury their brothers, and
then it was their intention to set out immediately for their villages.
He added that one of their tribe, whom they had left at home, arrived
that morning with intelligence that a war-party of Pawnees had invaded
their territories, and it was necessary for them to hasten back with
all possible dispatch to defend their wives and children.

Glenn asked Boone how the Indians managed to sleep in the cold prairie;
and, Roughgrove repeating the inquiry to the savage, they were informed
that the war-party carried with them a long but very light sled, in the
shape of a canoe, to which was tied a rope made of buckskins, by which
they pulled it along on the snow with great swiftness. This kept them
warm with exercise through the day. A quantity of furs and buffalo
skins were packed in the canoe that served to keep them warm at night.

“Mr. Roughgrove! Mr. Roughgrove!” cried Joe, from his loophole.

“What do you want with me?” responded the old man.

“Why, Miss Mary’s gone down to your house to see if the Indians have
been there, and they may be there now, perhaps.”

“There’s no danger now, you blockhead,” replied Roughgrove.

“Keep your mouth shet!” said Sneak.

“Your mouth’s mashed—recollect who did it,” retorted Joe.

The savage at length lifted up the dead body, and set off at a brisk
pace towards the prairie. The party then returned to the house and
partook of a plenteous repast that had been provided by Mary.

When the breakfast was over, they repaired to the cliff, to examine the
place where the Indians had first penetrated the snow. They had
commenced operations at the very brow of the cliff, on a shelving rock,
to attain which, without being seen from the garrison, they must have
crawled on their hands and knees a considerable distance. Below could
be seen an immense heap of snow, which had been thrown down from the
place of entrance, just as Boone had described.

“Jest look yander!” cried Sneak, pointing up the river. The scene was a
remarkable one. They beheld a very small deer (the lightness of which
enabled it to run on the snow that covered the ice with great
fleetness, without breaking through the crust,) chased about on the
river by a pack of wolves! These hungry animals had evidently been
racing after it a great length of time, from the distressed appearance
of the poor victim, and, having driven it upon the ice, they seemed
resolved to prevent it from ever again entering the thickets. The plan
they adopted was systematic, and worthy the imitation of biped hunters.
They dispersed in various directions, and formed themselves in a circle
of about a half mile in diameter, hemming the deer in on all sides,
while only one or two of their number at a time chased it. Round and
round it ran; and though its pursuers were left far in the rear, yet it
remained entirely surrounded by the enemy. Occasionally, when a chasing
wolf became exhausted, one of the guards (abandoning his post) would
enter the ring, and, not being fatigued, was able to carry on the
pursuit with redoubled vigour. Thus the chase was kept up with
increasing fierceness by means of a succession of fresh wolves, until
the poor deer finally sank down and surrendered its life. The voracious
pack then rushed from their stations indiscriminately, and coming in
contact immediately over their prey, a most frightful contest ensued
among them. Horrific yells and screams could be heard by the men as
they looked on from their distant position. At times the wolves were so
closely jumbled together that nothing could be distinguished but one
black, heaving, and echoing mass. But the struggle was soon over. In a
very few moments, they became quiet, and started off in a comparatively
peaceful manner towards the island, whence their prize had been driven,
in quest of others. When they abandoned the spot where their victim had
fallen, not so much as a bone remained.

“That’s making a clean business of it!” said Sneak.

“Its no such thing!” said Joe; “it’s a nasty trick to swallow hide,
bones, and bowels, in that manner.”

“Its clean for wolves,” said Sneak.

“Oh, may be you’re part wolf,” said Joe.

“Now, none of your gab, or I’ll play some other trick on you, worse
than that at the spring.”

“You be hanged,” retorted Joe; “I’ll give you leave to do it when you
get a chance the next time.”

“It is a great pity that the deer are subject to such destruction,”
remarked Glenn.

“The wolves we saw are all on yonder island,” said Boone, “and if you
are disposed to have a hunt, I have no doubt we might kill some of
them.”

“We are entirely dependent upon the deer for animal food,” said
Roughgrove; “and if we could only surround that party of wolves as they
did the deer, we might do the settlement much good service.”

“I go in for it,” said Sneak.

“I’d rather wait a day or two, till the Indians have gone clean off,”
said Joe.

“There is nothing to fear from them now,” said Boone, “unless something
they might steal should fall in their way. But it will not require an
hour to rout the wolves on the little island.”

“Then let us hasten and get our guns, and be upon them before they
leave it,” said Glenn.

They returned to the house, and were all soon equipped for the
onslaught, except Joe, who made no preparation whatever.

“Get ready, Joe,” said Glenn; “your redoubtable musket will do good
service.”

“I’d rather not,” said Joe; “I’m hardly well enough to walk so far.
I’ll take care of Miss Mary. I wonder what’s become of her? Mr.
Roughgrove, Miss Mary hasn’t come back yet!”

“Yes she has,” replied the old ferryman; “I saw her bring this frozen
flower up, while we were standing on the cliff, and she has only
returned for the other pots, I hear her singing down the valley now,”
he added, after stepping to the gate and listening a moment.

“Have you any gum fetid?” asked Boone, addressing Glenn.

“I’ve got lots of it,” interposed Joe, “that I brought along for the
horses, because an old man at St. Louis told me they would never die so
long as I kept a lump of it in the rack.”

“What use do you make of it?” asked Glenn.

“The scent of it will at any time collect the wolves,” said Boone,
directing Joe to bring it along.

The party set out at a brisk pace, Joe with the rest, for it was
necessary to station the men at as many points as possible. Boone,
Roughgrove, and Glenn, when they reached the upper valley, descended to
the river, while Sneak and Joe were directed to station themselves on
the main-land opposite the upper and lower ends of the island. The
party of three advanced towards the island on the ice, and Sneak and
Joe pursued their way in a parallel direction through the narrow skirt
of woods that bordered the range of bluffs.

Ere long the two on land descended from their high position and entered
a densely-timbered bottom, the upper part of which (a half mile
distant) was only separated from the island by a very narrow channel.

Here, for the first time that day, the thought that the island he was
approaching was the haunted one of Glenn’s dream occurred to Joe, and
he paused suddenly.

“What are you stopping for?” asked Sneak.

“Because”—Joe hesitated, positively ashamed to tell the reason; and
after a moment’s reflection he was impressed with a thorough conviction
that his apprehensions and scruples were ridiculous.

“Don’t you hear me?” continued Sneak.

“I was thinking about going back for the dogs,” said Joe.

“Yes, and they would be torn to bits in a little less than no time,”
said Sneak.

“Come on, then,” said Joe, setting forward again, and dismissing all
fears of the fire-wizard from his mind.

“Let me see how much asafoetida you’ve got,” said Sneak, after they had
walked a few moments in silence.

“Here it is,” said Joe, unwrapping a paper containing several ounces;
“but hang me, if that ain’t rather too strong a joke of Mr. Boone’s
about its collecting the wolves. I can’t believe that.”

“Did you ever hear of Mr. Boone’s telling a lie?” asked Sneak.

“No, I never did, and that’s a fact,” said Joe; “but I’m afraid he’s
got into a scrape this time—Jingo! look yonder!” he continued, throwing
his musket up to his face, and pointing it at a very large black wolf
that stood in the path before them.

“Don’t shoot! I put two loads in your gun,” cried Sneak, hastily.

“Confound your long-necked gourd-head, I say!” said Joe, throwing down
the muzzle of his musket in an instant, and the next moment the wolf
disappeared among the tall bushes. “Why, hang me, if you didn’t tell a
lie!” continued Joe, running down his ramrod.

“Don’t I know it?” replied Sneak. “I jest said so to keep you from
shooting; becaise if you had shot, you’d ’ave skeered all the other
wolves away, and we wouldn’t ’ave killed any.”

“It’s well you didn’t put in another cartridge,” said Joe, “for I wish
I may be smashed if I stand this kicking business any longer.”

“Now, I guess you’ll believe there’s something in the asafoetida, after
all! and the wolves’ll come all round you and won’t go off for shooting
at ’em, if you’ll only rub it on the soles of your boots.”

“I’ll try it!” said Joe, suiting the action to the word, and then
striding onward, and looking in every direction for the wolves.

“You’ll have to tree, if they come too thick.”

“Pshaw!” replied Joe, “you can’t scare me in that way. I don’t believe
a hat full of it would make them stand and be shot at.”

They were now opposite the island. Joe selected a position even with
the upper end of it, and Sneak remained below. Boone, after stationing
Roughgrove and Glenn to the best advantage, walked out to the
main-land, and taking some of the gum fetid in Joe’s possession,
returned to the island; and, ere long, he, Roughgrove, and Glenn were
heard discharging their guns with great rapidity, and the cries of the
wolves attested that they were labouring with effect. But none of the
beleaguered animals had yet retreated from the scene of destruction. On
the contrary, several were seen to run across from the main-land and
join those on the island. Presently Sneak commenced a brisk fire. There
seemed to be a whole army of wolves congregated in the vicinity. Joe at
first laughed, and then became confused and puzzled. He anxiously
desired to make the roar of his musket join the melée; but at times he
thought the ravenous enemy rather too numerous for him to be in perfect
safety. The firing on the island continued without abatement. Sneak’s
gun was likewise still heard at regular intervals, and what seemed an
extraordinary matter to Joe was that Sneak should yell out something or
other about the “asafoetida,” and “moccasin tracks,” after every
discharge. Joe was not long idle. He soon saw a huge black wolf
trotting along the little deer path he had just traversed, with its
nose down to the ground. A moment after, another, and then a third,
were seen pursuing the same course, some distance behind. Joe became
uneasy. His first impulse was to scamper over to the island: but, when
he thought of the jeers and jests that would ensue from Sneak, he
resolved to stand his ground. When the foremost wolf had approached
within thirty paces of him, he leveled his musket and fired. The wolf
uttered a fierce howl and expired.

“Hang me, if I haven’t floored you, any how,” said he, exultingly, as
he proceeded to reload his gun with as much expedition as possible. But
the other wolves, so far from being alarmed at the fate of their
comrade, seemed to quicken their pace towards the position of Joe.
“Slash me, if there ain’t too many of them!” ejaculated Joe, as he
perceived several others, and all advancing upon him. “I’ll settle your
hash, by jing!” he continued, firing at the foremost one, which was not
twenty paces distant. The leaden contents of the musket entered its
breast, and it fell dead without a growl. Still the others advanced.
Joe had no time to charge his gun again.

“I’ll make tracks!” said he, starting toward the frozen channel that
separated him from the island. But he had not gone ten paces before he
discovered two enormous wolves approaching from _that_ direction. “I’ll
cut dirt back again!” he continued, whirling suddenly around, and
rushing back to his stand, where he stood not a moment, but sprang up
in a tree, and after attaining a large limb that put out from the
trunk, some fifteen feet above the snow, paused, and pantingly surveyed
his assailants. There were now no less than twenty wolves in sight, and
several were at the root of the tree yelping at him! “I’ll be hanged if
I half like this,” said he. “Snap me, if I don’t begin to believe that
the asafoetida does charm them, after all. Confound Sneak! he’s always
getting me into some hobble or other! Now, if it wasn’t for this tree,
I’d be in a nice fix. Hang it! all the wolves in the world are broke
loose to-day, surely—where the mischief could they all have come from?
Just hear the men, how they are shooting! And they are killing the wild
black dogs every crack—but still they won’t back out! I’ll blaze away
at ’em again!” Saying this, he reloaded his musket as quickly as his
peculiar position would allow, and, for the purpose of ridding himself
as soon as possible of his disagreeable visitors, he poured in an
additional charge of buckshot. “Now,” he continued, “what if the gun
should fly out of my hands? I’d be in a pretty condition then! I
wouldn’t mind the kick at all, if I was only on dry land—but if the gun
should kick me over here, I’d tumble right down into their mouths! I
wish I’d thought of that before I rammed down the wadding. I haven’t
got my screw along, or I might draw out the load again. I’ll not shoot
at all. I’ll just watch till somebody comes and scares them away. Ugh!
you black rascal! what’re you staring up here for?” he continued,
looking down at the largest wolf, which was standing upright against
the tree, and tearing the bark away furiously with his long teeth. The
number of Joe’s enemies continued to increase. There were now perhaps
twenty under the tree. And still the firing on the island was kept up,
though not so incessantly as at first, which inspired Joe with a hope
that they would either kill all the wolves in their vicinity very soon
or force them to join his flock under the tree, when the men would
surely come to his relief. Sneak’s fire abated somewhat, likewise, and
Joe’s reliance upon having their aid in a very short time caused his
fears to subside in a great measure.

“If you’re so crazy after asafoetida,” said he, looking down at the
fiercely staring animals again, “I’ll give you a taste, just to see
what you’ll do.” He took a small portion of the gum which he had
retained, and rubbed it over a piece of paper that he found in his
pocket. He then dropped the paper in their midst. They sprang upon it
simultaneously, and in an instant it vanished, Joe knew not whither.
“Hang me, if I couldn’t pepper a half-dozen at a shot when they all
rush up together so close, if I wasn’t afraid of being kicked down.
I’ll be teetotally smashed if I don’t fix and try it, any how!” said
he, pulling out a strong leather string from his pocket, one end of
which he attached firmly to a small limb of the tree, and the other he
tied as tightly round the wrist of his left arm. He then pulled out his
bandanna, and likewise made his musket fast to a bough. “Now, my
snapping beauties,” he continued, “I’m mistaken if I don’t give you a
dose of blue pills that’ll do your business in short order.” Saying
this, he tore off another piece of paper, and rubbing on the gum,
dropped it down as near as possible to the spot where he wished the
wolves to cluster together. No sooner did it fall than the whole gang
sprang upon it, and he fired with precision in their midst. Joe did not
look to see what execution was done. He was dangling in the air and
whirling round and round at a rapid rate, like a malefactor suspended
from the gallows, with the exception that his neck did not suffer, and
he cried out most lustily for assistance. When the cloud of smoke that
enveloped him cleared away a little, and he became better acquainted
with his critical situation, his yells increased in rapidity and
violence. His condition was truly perilous. The small bough to which he
had attached himself had not sufficient strength to bear him up when
his feet slipped from the larger one below, and it was now bent down a
considerable distance, and that too in a divergent direction from his
recent foothold, and unfortunately there was no limb of the tree of any
strength within his reach. His legs hung within six feet of the surface
of the snow. The discharge had killed four or five of the wolves, but,
undismayed, the remainder assailed him the more furiously. The most
active of them could easily spring as far up as his feet! Never was
terror more strongly depicted in the human face than it was displayed
in Joe’s when he saw the whole pack rushing towards him! They sprang up
with fearful snarls and yells. Joe yelled likewise, and doubled his
knees up to his chin. They missed his feet by several inches, and were
borne out fifteen or twenty feet to one side by the impetus of the
leap. It was by a mighty effort that he thus avoided them, and no
sooner had they passed under him than his legs again dangled downward.
In a moment they whirled round and were again rushing at their victim.
Once more Joe screamed, and drew up his legs while they passed under
him. “Help! help! for God’s sake!” cried he, when they whirled round
again. His cry was heard. Several sharp reports resounded from the
river bank, a few paces on the east. Three or four of the wolves howled
and fell. The rest hesitated, their eyes glistening, and fixed on Joe’s
suspended boots. “Come quick! for Heaven’s sake! I can’t pull up my
legs any more!” cried Joe. This was true, for his strength was fast
failing. The guns were again discharged with deadly effect, and all but
one of the largest of the wolves precipitately ran off, and disappeared
among the bushes.

They sprang up with fearful snarls and yells.

They sprang up with fearful snarls and yells. Joe yelled likewise, and
doubled his knees up to his chin.


“Jerk up your leg! that feller’s a going to take one of your feet along
with him, if he kin!” cried Sneak. Joe saw the wolf charging upon him,
but he was altogether unable to avoid it in the manner he had done
before. It was now only a few feet distant, its mouth open, displaying
a frightful set of teeth, and springing towards him. Finding it
impossible to prevent a collision, Joe resolved to sell his foot as
dearly as possible. As much as he was able, he bent up his knee-joints,
and when his assailant came, he bestowed his heels upon his head with
all his might. The wolf was stunned, and fell under the blow.

“Take that!” cried Sneak, running up and plunging his knife into the
animal’s side. The wolf groaned and died.

“Ha! ha! ha! you were born to be hanged,” said Roughgrove, coming
forward with Boone and Glenn, and laughing heartily.

“He has been hung,” said Boone.

“And almost quartered,” said Glenn.

“Oh, goodness! Jump up here, Sneak, and cut me loose,” said Joe,
beseechingly.

“There’s no danger of you ever dying,” said Sneak.

“Oh, please don’t laugh at me, Sneak, but cut me down; that’s a good
fellow. The string is beginning to cut my wrist like fury!”

“How did you git in such a fix?” continued Sneak.

“Oh, hang it, Sneak, just get me out of the fix, and I’ll tell you all
about it.”

“It’s hung _now_—didn’t you say ‘hang it, Sneak?’” continued Sneak.

“Oh, come, now,” continued Joe; “if you were in this way, don’t you
think I’d help you?”

“Cut him down, Sneak,” said Boone; and in a twinkling Sneak was up in
the tree, and the string was severed. Joe came down with great force,
his feet foremost, and running through the snow-crust to a great depth.

“I wish some of you would help me out of this,” said he, after
struggling some time in vain to extricate himself.

“You’ll want me to carry you home next, I s’pose,” said Sneak,
assisting him up. Joe made no reply; but as soon as he could cut the
string away from his wrist, seized Sneak by the throat, hurled him on
his back, and springing upon him, a violent struggle ensued for a few
moments before they could be separated.

“What do you mean?” exclaimed Glenn, dragging Joe away from his
prostrate victim.

“What did you do that for?” asked Sneak, rising up and brushing the
snow from his head and face, his fall having broken the icy surface.

“You rascal, you! I’ll show you what for!” cried Joe, endeavouring to
get at him again.

“Joe!” said Glenn, “if you attempt any further violence, you shall not
remain another day under my roof!”

“He boxed my ear like thunder!” said Sneak; “I didn’t think the fellow
had so much pluck in him! I like him better now than ever I did. Give
us your paw, Joe.” Joe shook hands with him reluctantly, and then wiped
a flood of tears from his face.

“He told me to put some asafetida on my hoots, and said I could then
kill more wolves,” said Joe; “and it came within an ace of making them
kill me.”

“It was very wrong to do so, Sneak,” said Boone, “and the boxing you
got for it was not amiss.”

“I believe I think so myself,” said Sneak. “But it did make him kill
more wolves after all—jest look at ’em all around here!”

Joe soon recovered entirely from the effects of his swing, his fright,
and his anger, and looked with something like satisfaction on his many
trophies lying round him; and when he disengaged his musket from the
bough of the tree, he regarded it with affection.

They moved homeward, entirely content with the result of the excursion.
Boone explained the reason why so many of the wolves were congregated
about the island. He stated that the vines and bushes on which the deer
feed in the winter were abundant and nutritious in the low lands along
the river, and that great numbers of them repaired thither at that
season of the year. The wolves of course followed them, and having now
destroyed all the large deer in the vicinity of the island, and the
small ones being enabled to run on the snow-crust, they found it
necessary to muster in the chase as great a number as possible, and
thus prevent their prey from escaping to the prairies. He said that the
wolves preferred the timber, being enabled to make more comfortable
lairs and dens among the fallen trees than out in the cold prairies.
But their guns had wrought a fearful destruction among them. Perhaps
three-fourths of them fell.

The party soon reached Glenn’s house. As they entered the inclosure,
they were surprised to see Ringwood running wildly about, whining and
snarling and tearing the snow to pieces with his teeth. Jowler was more
composed, but a low, mournful whine issued continuously from his mouth.

“Dod! what’s the dogs been after?” ejaculated Sneak.

“Go in, Joe, and ask Mary what it means,” said Rough grove.

“I’d rather not—the house may be full of Indians,” replied Joe,
relapsing into his natural cowardice.

“Mary,” said Roughgrove, approaching the door and calling
affectionately. Receiving no reply, the old man entered and called
again. A silence succeeded. Roughgrove reappeared a moment after, with
a changed countenance. Boone gazed at his pale features, and asked the
cause of his distress by a look, not a word.

“She’s gone! gone! gone!” exclaimed Roughgrove, covering his face with
both hands.

Boone made no answer, but turning his face in the direction of the
southern valley, he called upon the name of Mary three times, in clear
and loud tones. He listened for her reply, in a motionless attitude,
several minutes. But no reply came. Now a change came over _his_
features. It was a ferocity from which even the blood-thirsty savages
would have fled in horror!

“My eternal curse upon them! They have seized her! I have been
deceived! I will have vengeance!” said he, in a low, determined tone.

“Will they kill her, or keep her for a ransom?” inquired Glenn, in
extreme and painful excitement.

“A ransom,” said Boone; “but they shall pay the weight of the silver
they demand in blood!”

“May Heaven guard her!” said Roughgrove, in piteous agony.

“Cheer up—we will get her again,” said Boone; and then giving some
hasty directions, preparations were made for pursuit.




CHAPTER XI.

Mary—Her meditations—Her capture—Her sad condition—Her mental
sufferings—Her escape—Her recapture.


When the men departed for the island in quest of the wolves, Mary was
singing over her neglected flowers, at her father’s house in the
valley, and her clear ringing notes were distinctly heard by the whole
party. After they were gone she continued her song, and lingered long
over every faded leaf and withered blossom, with no thought of danger
whatever, and none of pain, save the regret that her long cherished
plants had been forgotten in the consternation of the previous day, and
had fallen victims to the frost-king. But nothing had been touched by
the savages. The domestic fowls clustered about her, and received their
food from her hands as usual. The fawn was with her, and evinced the
delight afforded by the occasional caress bestowed upon it, by
frequently skipping sportively around her. Mary was happy. Her wants
were few, and she knew not that there was such a thing as a malicious
enemy in the world, save the wild savage. Her thoughts were as pure as
the morning dew, and all her delights were the results of innocence.
She had never harmed any one, and her guileless heart never conceived
the possibility of suffering ill at the hands of others. She smiled
when the beautiful fawn touched her hand with its velvet tongue, and a
tear dimmed her eye for an instant when she looked upon her stricken
rose.

While looking at one of the homely shelves in a corner of the deserted
house, Mary accidentally espied a small volume of poems, the gift of
Glenn, that had been neglected. She seized it eagerly, and after
turning over the pages the fiftieth time, and humming over many of the
songs, she paused suddenly, and lifting her eyes to the bright
sun-beams that streamed through the window, long remained in a listless
attitude. Something unusual had startled her simple meditations. At
first a shade of painful concern seemed to pass across her brow, and
then glancing quickly at the book she still held in her hand, a sweet
smile animated her lips. But again and again, ever and anon, the
abstracted gaze was repeated, and as often succeeded by the smile when
her eyes fell upon the volume. Did her thoughts dwell upon the giver of
that book? Undoubtedly. Did she love Glenn? This she knew not herself,
but she would have died for him! She was ignorant of the terms
courtship, love, and marriage. But nature had given her a heart
abounding with noble and generous impulses.

At length she drew her shawl closely round her shoulders, and, closing
the door of the hut, was in the act of returning up the hill, when she
was startled by the furious and sudden barking of the hounds, which she
had left confined in the inclosure on the cliff. She paused, and looked
steadily in every direction, and was not able to discover, or even
conjecture, what it was that had roused the hounds. Yet an undefinable
fear seized upon her. The fawn at her side likewise partook of the
agitation, for the hair stood upright on its back, and it often snuffed
the air with great violence, producing, at each time, a shrill,
unnatural sound.

Mary started briskly up the path, determined to shut herself up in
Glenn’s house until her father returned from the island. When she had
proceeded about twenty paces, and was just passing a dense thicket of
hazel that bordered the narrow path, she heard a slight rustling on the
left, and the next moment she was clasped in the arms of a brawny
savage!

“Oh me! who are you?” demanded she, struggling to disengage herself,
and unable to see the swarthy features of her captor, who stood behind
her. No answer being made, she cast her eyes downwards, and beheld the
colour of the arms that encircled her. “Father! Mr. Glenn! Mr. Boone!”
she exclaimed, struggling violently. Her efforts were unavailing, and,
overcome with exhaustion and affright, she fainted on the Indian’s
breast. The savage then lifted her on his shoulder, ran down to the
rivulet that flowed through the valley, and fled outwards to the
prairie. When he reached the cave-spring, a confederate, who had been
waiting for him, seized the burden and bore it onwards, in a westerly
direction, with increased rapidity. Thus they continued the retreat,
bearing the insensible maiden alternately, until they came to a small
grove some distance out in the prairie, when they slackened their pace,
and, after creeping a short time under the pendent boughs of the trees,
halted in the camp of the war-party.

The Indians gathered round the pale captive, some with rage and deadly
passions marked upon their faces, and others with expressions of
triumph and satisfaction. They now made preparations for departing.
Mary was wrapped in a large buffalo robe, enveloping her body and face,
and placed in the snow-canoe. The party then deposited their tomahawks
and other cumbersome articles at the feet of their captive, and,
grasping the leather rope attached to the canoe, set off rapidly in a
southerly direction.

Ere long, Mary partially awoke from her state of insensibility, when
all was dark and strange to her confused senses. She pulled aside the
long hair of the buffalo skin that obscured her face, and looked out
from her narrow place of confinement. The blue heavens alone met her
view above. The incident of the seizure was indistinct in her memory,
and she could not surmise the nature of her present condition. She
turned hastily on her side, and the occasional bush she espied in the
vicinity indicated that she was rushing along by some means with an
almost inconceivable rapidity. She could scarce believe it was reality.
How she came thither, and how she was propelled over the snow, for
several moments were matters of incomprehensible mystery to the
trembling girl. At first, she endeavoured to persuade herself that it
was a dream; but, having a consciousness that some terrible thing had
actually occurred, all the painful fears of which the mind is capable
were put in active operation. The suspense was soon dispelled. Hearing
human voices ahead, and not readily comprehending the language, she
hastily rose on her elbow. The party of Indians dragging her fleetly
over the smooth prairie met her chilled view. But she was now
comparatively collected and calm. Instantly her true condition was
apparent. She watched the swarthy forms some moments in silence,
meditating the means of escape. Presently one of the savages turned
partly round, and she sank back to escape his observation. Again she
rose up a few inches, and their faces were all turned away from her.
She gradually acquired resolution to encounter any hardship or peril
that might be the means of effecting her escape. But what plan was she
to adopt? The almost interminable plain of which she was in the midst
afforded no hiding-place. Then, the speed of the flying snow-canoe,
were she to leap out, would not only produce a hurtful collision with
the hard snow-crust, but certainly cause her detection. The poor girl’s
heart sank within her, and, for a time, she reclined submissively in
the canoe, and gave way to a flood of tears. She thought of her
gray-haired father, and a piercing agony thrilled through her breast.
And she thought, too, of others—of Boone, of _Glenn_, and her pangs
were hopelessly poignant. Thus she lay for several long hours, a prey
to grief and despair. But some pitying angel hovered over her, and
kindly lessened her sufferings. By degrees, her mind became possessed
of the power of deliberate and rational reflection; and she was
inspired with the belief that the savages only designed to exact a
heavy contribution from the whites by her capture, and would then
surrender her up without outrage or injury. Another hope, likewise,
sprang up in her breast: it was, that the Indian she had been
instrumental in releasing from captivity might protect her person, and,
perhaps restore her to her father. She also felt convinced that Boone
and Glenn would join her father in the pursuit, and she entertained a
lively hope that they would overtake her. But, again, when she looked
out on the surface of the snow, and beheld the rapidity of the savages’
pace, this hope was entertained but for a moment. She then resolved to
make an effort herself to escape. If she was not successful, it would,
at all events, retard the progress of her captors, and she might also
ascertain, with some degree of certainty, their purposes with regard to
her fate. She rose as softly as possible and sprang upon the snow. The
Indians, as she feared, instantly felt the diminution of weight, and
halted so abruptly that every one of them was prostrated on the
slippery snow-crust. Mary endeavoured to take advantage of this
occurrence, and, springing quickly to her feet, fled rapidly in the
opposite direction. But before she had run many minutes, she heard the
savages in close pursuit and gaining upon her at every step. It was
useless to fly. She turned her head, and beheld the whole party within
a few paces of her. The foremost was a tall athletic savage, bearing in
his hand a tomahawk he had snatched from the snow-canoe, and wearing a
demoniac scowl on his lip. Mary scanned his face and then turned her
eyes to heaven. She felt that her end was near, and she breathed a
prayer taught her by her buried mother. The savage rushed upon her,
entwining his left hand in her flowing hair, and waving his tomahawk
aloft with the other, was in the act of sinking the steel in the fair
forehead before him, when the blow was arrested by a mere stripling,
who came up at the head of the rest of the Indians. The Herculean
savage whirled round and scowled passionately at the youth. The young
Indian (the chief just elected in the place of Raven) regarded him a
moment with gleaming eyes, and a determined expression of feature, and
then with much dignity motioned him away. The huge savage was strangely
submissive in a moment, and obeyed without a murmur. Mary was conducted
back to the snow-canoe by the young chief, who led her by the hand,
while the rest walked behind. Once the young warrior turned and looked
searchingly in the face of his fair prize, and she returned the gaze
with an instantaneous conviction that no personal harm was intended
her. The chief was not half so dark as the rest of his tribe, and his
countenance was open, generous, and noble. (It may seem improbable to
the unthinking reader that a timid and alarmed maiden should be able to
read the character of a foe by his features under such circumstances.
But those very circumstances tended to produce such acuteness. And this
is not only the case with human beings, but even with dumb brutes—for,
at the moment they are about to be assailed, they invariably and
instinctively look the assailant in the eye, mercy being the only
remaining hope.) Again the young warrior turned to behold his captive’s
face, and Mary was in tears. He paused abruptly, and, after gazing some
moments in silence and deep thought, resumed his pace. When they
reached the snow-canoe, and while in the act of lifting his captive
into her couch, the young chief observed for the first time a massive
ring of curious workmanship on her finger (the glove she had hitherto
worn being partially torn from her hand in the recent struggle,) and
seemed to regard it with much interest. Mary saw that his eyes were
riveted on the jewel, and notwithstanding it possessed a hallowed value
in having been worn by her mother, yet she felt that she could resign
it to the one who had saved her life, and whose noble bearing, so
different from that of the rest, promised to shield her from future
harm. But he neither asked it as a gift nor tore it from her, but
turned away in silence, and ordered the party to proceed. The command
was instantly obeyed.

There was another Indian that had attracted the notice of Mary—one who
studiously avoided her glance by constantly enveloping his face in his
hairy robe whenever she turned towards him. This he continued to do
until she was again seated in the snow-canoe, and the order was given
to proceed on the journey. He then lingered behind the rest, and
throwing aside his mask, she saw before her the savage that had been
thrown within the inclosure by the explosion. He pointed to the north,
the direction of her home, and, by sundry signs and grimaces, made Mary
understand that he had not been a party to her capture, and that he
would endeavour to effect her escape. He then joined the others, and
the poor girl was once more coursing over the prairie more rapidly than
ever.

The savage rushed upon her.

The savage rushed upon her, entwined his left hand in her flowing hair,
and, waving his tomahawk aloft with the other, was in the act of
sinking the steel in the fair forehead before him, when the blow was
arrested by a mere stripling, who came up at the head of the rest of
the Indians.


There was now mingled with the captive maiden’s thoughts another
subject of contemplation. It was the young chief. His image seemed to
be familiar to her dreamy visions, and she often thought that they had
really met before. But when or where, her memory failed to designate.
She was glad to find herself so unexpectedly under the protection of
one so brave and generous, and she hoped when her father and his
friends should overtake them, he might not be hurt in the conflict that
must inevitably ensue.

The Indians long continued their flight in silence. Scarce a word was
uttered, until the sun was sinking low in the west. And then Mary heard
them speaking about the place of encampment; for her frequent
intercourse With the savages, before the arrival of Glenn in the
vicinity, had enabled her, as well as her father, to acquire an
imperfect knowledge of their language. But they still swept onward,
without any diminution of speed. The chief had probably objected to
their making, a halt by a shake of the head, for Mary did not hear him
reply to those who desired to stop.

When the shades of night fell around, and the broad red face of the
moon peeped over the eastern horizon, the party still careered over the
prairie. More than thirty miles had been traversed. The Indian is more
distinguished for bottom than speed, and has been known to pursue a
victim, or fly in the retreat, more than twenty-four hours without
resting. But this band had suffered much from fatigue before they set
out with their captive. The attempt to surprise the fort had cost them
both blood and labour, and when the moon had risen midway up in the
heavens, they again became clamorous for food and rest. The chief then
told them to turn from their course, and in a few minutes Mary saw that
they were approaching a grove of towering trees. Ere long they halted
under an enormous beech, whose spreading and clustering branches not
only greatly obscured the light from above, but had in a great measure
prevented the snow from covering the earth at its roots. It was not
long before a fire was struck, and the savages having scattered in
every direction in quest of dry wood and bark, in a very short space of
time a large bright blaze flashed up in their midst, around which they
spread their buffalo robes and commenced preparing their venison. Each
one cooked for himself, save the chief, who was provided proportionably
by all. He offered Mary a part of his food, but she declined it. He
then proffered to lift her from the snow-canoe, and place her nearer
the fire. This too she declined, stating that she was warm enough. She
was likewise influenced in this determination by the gestures of the
Indian whom she had befriended the preceding night, who sat by in
apparent unconcern, but at every opportunity, by looks and signs,
endeavoured to cheer and encourage the captive maiden.

After a hearty repast the savages, with the exception of the chief,
rolled themselves in their warm, hairy robes before the glowing fire,
and were soon steeped in profound slumber. The chief long reclined in a
half-recumbent attitude on the couch that had been prepared for him,
and fixing his eyes on the glaring flame, and sometimes on the pale sad
features of Mary, seemed to be under the influence of deep and painful
meditations. At times his features assumed a ferocity that caused Mary
to start and tremble; but at others they wore a mournful expression,
and ever and anon a tear rose up and glistened in his eye. Thus he sat
for more than an hour after all the rest were sunk in motionless
slumber. Finally his bedecked head, adorned with a profusion of rich
and rare feathers, sunk by degrees on the rude pillow, and he too was
soon wandering in the land of dreams.

But sleep brooded not upon the watchful lids of Mary. She gazed in
silence at the wild savage scene before her. The uncouth beings who had
so recently hooted and yelled like sanguinary demons, with intent to
slay and pillage, around her father, her friends and herself, now lay
motionless, though free and still hostile, within a few feet of her,
and she was their captive! She thought of her humble but peaceful home,
and sighed bitterly. And she thought, too, of her distressed friends,
and she was the more distressed from the consciousness that they
sympathized with her sufferings. Poor girl! She looked at the dark
brows and compressed lips of her captors as the fitful flashes of the
flames threw a bright ray upon them, and, in despite of the many hopes
she had entertained, she was horror-stricken to contemplate the reality
of her sad predicament.

At a late and solemn hour, the Indian who had been the captive the
night before, suddenly ceased his snoring, which had been heard without
intermission for a great length of time; and when Mary instinctively
cast her eyes towards him, she was surprised to see him gently and
slowly raise his head. He enjoined silence by placing his hand upon his
mouth. After carefully disengaging himself from his comrades, he crept
quietly away, and soon vanished entirely from sight on the northern
side of the spreading beech. Mary expected he would soon return and
assist her to escape. Although she was aware of the hardships and
perils that would attend her flight, yet the thought of again meeting
her friends was enough to nerve her for the undertaking, and she waited
with anxious impatience the coming of her rescuer. But he came not. She
could attribute no other design in his conduct but that of effecting
her escape, and yet he neither came for her nor beckoned her away. She
had reposed confidence in his promise, for she knew that the Indian,
savage as he was, rarely forfeited his word; but when gratitude
inspired a pledge, she could not believe that he would use deceit. The
fire was now burning quite low, and its waning light scarce cast a beam
upon the branches over head. It was evidently not far from morning, and
every hope of present escape entirely fled from her bosom. But just as
she was yielding to despair, she saw the Indian returning in a stealthy
pace, bearing some dark object in his arms. He glided to her side, and
beckoned her to leave the snow-canoe, and also to take with her all the
robes with which she had been enveloped. She did his bidding, and then
he carefully deposited the burden he bore in the place she had just
occupied. A portion of the object becoming unwrapped, Mary discovered
it to be a huge mass of snow, resembling, in some respects, a human
form, and the Indian’s stratagem was at once apparent to her.
Relinquishing herself to his guidance, she was led noiselessly through
the bushes about a hundred paces distant from the fire, to a large
fallen tree that had yielded to some furious storm, when her conductor
paused. He pointed to a spot where a curve caused the huge trunk to
rise about a foot from the present surface, under which was a round
hole cut through the drifted snow down to the earth, and in which were
deposited several buffalo robes, and so arranged that a person could
repose within without coming in contact with the frozen element around.
Mary looked down, and then at her companion, to ascertain his
intentions. He spoke to her in a low tone, enough of which she
comprehended to understand that he desired her to descend into the pit
without delay. She obeyed, and when he had carefully folded the robes
and divers furs about her body, he stepped a few paces to one side, and
gently lifting up a round lid of snow-crust, placed it over the
aperture. It had been so smoothly cut, and fitted with such precision
when replaced, that no one would have been able to discover that an
incision had been made. He then bade Mary a “Dud by” in bad English,
and set off in a run in a northern direction for the purpose of joining
the whites.

Long and interminable seemed Mary’s confinement to her, but she was
entirely comfortable in her hiding-place, as respected her body. Yet
many dreadful apprehensions oppressed her still. She feared that the
Indians would soon ascertain that she had left the canoe, and return
and discover her place of concealment. At times she thought of the wild
beasts prowling around, and feared they would devour her before
assistance came. But the most harrowing fear was that the friendly
Indian would abandon her to her fate or perhaps be _killed_, without
making known her locality and helpless condition! Thus was she a prey
to painful apprehensions and worrying reflections, until from
exhaustion she sank into an unquiet and troubled slumber.

With the first light of morning, the war-party sprang to their feet,
and hastily dispatching a slight repast, they set out on their journey
with renewed animation and increased rapidity. Before starting, the
chief called to Mary, and again offered some food; but no reply being
returned, or motion discovered under the robe which he imagined
enveloped her, he supposed she was sleeping, and directed the party to
select the most even route when they emerged in the prairie, that she
might as much as possible enjoy her repose.

The Indian who had planned and executed the escape of Mary, with the
well-devised cunning for which the race is proverbial, had told his
companions that he would rise before day and pursue the same direction
they were going in advance of them, and endeavour to kill a deer for
their next night’s meal. Thus his absence created no suspicion, and the
party continued their precipitate retreat.

But, about noon, after casting many glances back at the supposed form
of the captive reclining peacefully in the snow-canoe, the chief, with
much excitement, betrayed by his looks, which seemed to be mingled with
an apprehension that she was dead, abruptly ordered the party to halt.
He sprang to the canoe, and convulsively tearing away the skins
discovered only the roll of snow! He at first compressed his lips in
momentary rage, and then burst into a fit of irrepressible laughter.
But the rest raved and stamped, and uttered direful imprecations and
threats of vengeance. Immediately they were aware of the treachery of
the absent Indian, and resolved with one voice that his blood should be
an atonement for the act. Their thoughts had dwelt too fondly on the
shining gold they were to get in exchange for the maiden, for them ever
to forgive the recreant brother who had snatched the prize from them.
The chief soon recovered his usual grave expression, and partook in
some measure the general disappointment and chagrin. His motives were
not of the same mercenary cast which actuated his tribe, nor did he
condemn the conduct of the one who had rescued the maid, being aware of
the clemency extended him when in the power of the enemy; but the
thought of being outwitted and thwarted roused his anger, and he
determined to recover the lost captive, if possible.

The snow was quickly thrown out, and the war-party adjusted their
weapon’s, with the expectation of encountering the whites; and then
whirling about they retraced their steps even more swiftly than they
had been advancing. Just as the night was setting in, they came in
sight of the grove where they had encamped. They slackened their pace,
and looking eagerly forward, seemed to think it not improbable that the
whites had arrived in the vicinity, and might be lying in ambush
awaiting their return in search of the maid. They then abandoned the
canoe, after having concealed it under some low bushes, and entered the
grove in a stooping and watchful posture. Ere long the chief attained
the immediate neighbourhood of the spreading tree, and with an arrow
drawn to its head, crept within a few paces of the spot where he had
lain the preceding night. His party were mostly a few feet in the rear,
while a few were approaching in the same manner from the opposite
direction. Hearing no sound whatever, he rose up slowly, and with an
“Ugh” of disappointment, strode carelessly across the silent and
untenanted place of encampment.

Vexation and anger were expressed by the savages in being thus
disappointed. They hoped to wreak their vengeance on the whites, and
had resolved to recapture the maiden. Where they expected to find them,
the scene was silent and desolate. And they now sauntered about under
the trees in the partial light of the moon that struggled through the
matted branches, threatening in the most horrid manner the one who had
thus baffled them. Some struck their tomahawks into the trunks of
trees, while others brandished their knives, and uttered direful yells.
The young chief stood in silence, with his arms folded on his breast. A
small ray of light that fell upon his face exhibited a meditative brow,
and features expressing both firmness and determination. He had said
that the captive should be regained, and his followers ever and anon
regarded his thoughtful attitude with the confidence that his decision
would accelerate the accomplishment of their desires. Long he remained
thus, motionless and dignified, and no one dared to address him. [He
had been elected chief by acclamation, after the death of Raven. He was
not an Osage by birth, but had been captured from one of the
neighbouring tribes (the Pawnee) when only six years old. His bravery,
as he grew up, had elicited the admiration of the whole tribe, and it
had long been settled that he should succeed Raven. His complexion was
many degrees lighter than that of the Osages, or even that of the
Pawnees, and had it not been for the paint and stains with which the
warriors decorate their faces, he might have passed, if properly
attired, for an American. When taken in battle he was saved from the
torture by a young Indian maiden. She procured his release and he
refused to return to his own nation. He said that he was no Pawnee, and
when asked to what nation he belonged, he either could not or would not
reply, but said he was satisfied to hunt and fight with any tribe, and
if the chief would give him his daughter (the one that saved his life,)
he would be an Osage. It was done, and his brave exploits soon won for
him the title of the “Young Eagle.”]

The young chief called one of the oldest of the party, who was standing
a few paces distant absorbed in thought, to his side, and after a short
conference the old savage prostrated himself on the snow, and
endeavoured like a hound to scent the tracks of his recreant brother.
At first he met with no success, but when making a wide circuit round
the premises, still applying his nose to the ground occasionally, and
minutely examining the bushes, he paused abruptly, and announced to the
party that he had found the precise direction taken by the maid and her
deliverer. Instantly they all clustered round him, evincing the most
intense interest. Some smelt the surface of the snow, and others
examined the bushes. Small twigs, not larger than pins, were picked up
and closely scrutinized. They well knew that any one passing through
the frozen and clustered bushes must inevitably sever some of the twigs
and buds. Their progress was slow, but unerring. The course they
pursued was the direction taken by Mary and her rescuer. It was not
long before they arrived within a few feet of the place of the maiden’s
concealment. But now they were at fault. There were no bushes
immediately around the fallen tree. They paused, the chief in the van,
with their bows and arrows and tomahawks in readiness for instant use.
They knew that the maiden could not return to her friends on foot, or
the treacherous savage be able to bear her far on his shoulder. They
thought that one or both must be concealed somewhere in the
neighbourhood, and the fallen tree, were it hollow, was the place most
likely to be selected for that purpose. After scanning the fallen trunk
a few minutes in silence, and discovering nothing to realize their
hopes, they uttered a terrific yell, and commenced striking their
tomahawks in the wood, and ripping up the bark in quest of some
hiding-place. But their search was in vain. The fallen trunk was sound
and solid throughout, and the young chief sat down on it within three
paces of Mary! Others, in passing about, frequently trod on the very
verge of the concealed pit.

Mary was awakened by the yell but knew not that the sound came from her
enemies. The Indian had told her that he would soon return, and her
heart now fluttered with the hope that her father and her friends were
at hand. Yet she prudently determined not to rush from her concealment
until she was better assured of the fact. She did not think the savages
would suspect that she was hid under the snow, but yet she thought it
very strange that her father did not come to her at once. Several
minutes had elapsed since she had been startled by the sounds in the
immediate vicinity. She heard the tramp of men almost directly over her
head, and the strokes against the fallen trunk. She was several times
on the eve of rising up, but was as often withheld by some mysterious
impulse. She endeavoured to reflect calmly, but still she could not, by
any mode of conjecture realize the probability of her foes having
returned and traced her thither. Yet an undefinable fear still
possessed her, and she endeavoured with patience to await the pleasure
of her friends. But when the chief seated himself in her vicinity, and
fell into one of his fits of abstraction, and the whole party became
comparatively still and hushed, the poor girl’s suspense was almost
insufferable. She knew that human beings were all around her, and yet
her situation was truly pitiable and lonely. She felt assured that if
the war-party had returned in pursuit of her, the same means which
enabled them to trace their victim to the fallen trunk would likewise
have sufficed to indicate her hiding-place. Then why should she
hesitate? The yells that awakened her had not been heard distinctly,
and under the circumstances she could not believe that she was
surrounded by savages. On the other hand, if they were her friends, why
did they not relieve her? Now a sudden, but, alas! erroneous thought
occurred to her. She was persuaded that they were her friends, but that
the friendly Indian was not with them—he had perhaps directed them
where she could be found, and then returned to his home. Might not her
friends, at that moment, be anxiously searching for her? Would not one
word suffice to dispel their solicitude, and restore the lost one to
their arms? She resolved to speak. Bowing down her head slightly, so
that her precise location might not instantly be ascertained, she
uttered in a soft voice the word “FATHER!” The chief sprang from his
seat, and the party was instantly in commotion. Some of the savages
looked above, among the twining branches, and some shot their arrows in
the snow, but fortunately not in the direction of Mary, while others
ran about in every direction, examining all the large trees in the
vicinity. The chief was amazed and utterly confounded. He drew not
forth an arrow, nor brandished a tomahawk. While he thus stood, and the
rest of the party were moving hurriedly about a few paces distant, Mary
again repeated the word “FATHER!” As suddenly as if by enchantment
every savage was paralyzed. Each stood as devoid of animation as a
statue. For many moments an intense silence reigned, as if naught
existed there but the cheerless forest trees. Slowly, at length, the
tomahawk was returned to the belt, and the arrow to the quiver. No
longer was a desire to spill blood manifested. The dusky children of
the forest attributed to the mysterious sound a supernatural agency.
They believed it was a voice from the perennial hunting-grounds. Humbly
they bowed their heads, and whispered devotions to the Great Spirit.
The young chief alone stood erect. He gazed at the round moon above
him, and sighs burst from his breast, and burning tears ran down his
stained cheek. Impatiently, by a motion of the hand, he directed the
savages to leave him, and when they withdrew he resumed his seat on the
fallen trunk, and reclined his brow upon his hand. One of the long
feathers that decked his head waved forward, after he had been seated
thus a few minutes, and when his eye rested upon it he started up
wildly, and tearing it away, trampled it under his feet. At that
instant the same “FATHER!” was again heard. The young chief fell upon
his knees, and, while he panted convulsively, said, in ENGLISH,
“_Father! Mother! I’m your poor William—you loved me much—where are
you? Oh tell me—I will come to you—I want to see you!_” He then fell
prostrate and groaned piteously. “Father! oh! where are you? Whose
voice was that?” said Mary, breaking through the slight incrustation
that obscured her, and leaping from her covert.

The young chief sprang from the earth—gazed a moment at the maid—spoke
rapidly and loudly in the language of his tribe to his party, who were
now at the place of encampment, seated by the fire they had kindled—and
then, seizing his tomahawk, was in the act of hurling it at Mary, when
the yells of the war-party and the ringing discharges of firearms
arrested his steel when brandished in the air. The white men had
arrived! The young, chief seized Mary by her long flowing hair—again
prepared to level the fatal blow—when she turned her face upwards, and
he again hesitated. Discharges in quick succession, and nearer than
before, still rang in his ears. Mary strove not to escape. Nor did the
Indian strike. The whites were heard rushing through the bushes—the
chief seized the trembling girl in his arms—a bullet whizzed by his
head—but, unmindful of danger, he vanished among the dark bushes with
his burden.




CHAPTER XII.

Joe’s indisposition—His cure—Sneak’s reformation—The pursuit—The
captive Indian—Approach to the encampment of the savages—Joe’s illness
again—The surprise—The terrific encounter—Rescue of Mary—Capture of the
young chief—The return.


We return to the white men. The grief of Roughgrove, and of all the
party, when it was ascertained beyond a doubt that Mary had been
carried off by the savages, was deep and poignant. The aged ferryman
sat silent and alone, and would not be comforted, while the rest made
the necessary arrangements to pursue the foe. The sled was so altered
that blankets, buffalo robes, and a small quantity of food could be
taken in it. Bullets were moulded and the guns put in order. Joe was
ordered to give the horses water, and place a large quantity of
provender within their reach. The hounds were fed and then led back to
their kennel, and Glenn announced, after Roughgrove declared his
determination to go along, that Ringwood and Jowler alone would be left
to guard the premises.

“My goodness!” said Joe, when he understood that he was expected to
make one of the pursuing party, “I can’t go! My head’s so sore, and
aches so bad, I couldn’t go ten miles before I’d have to give up. Let
me stay, Mr. Glenn, and take care of the house.”

“Do you forget that _Mary_ is in the hands of the Indians? Would you
hesitate even to _die_, while striving to rescue a poor, innocent,
helpless maiden? For shame!” replied Glenn.

“I’d spill my heart’s blood for her,” said Joe, “if it would do any
good. But you know how I was crippled last night, and I didn’t sleep a
bit afterwards, hardly.”

“Dod”—commenced Sneak.

“Joe,” said Boone, “from the vigorous manner in which you fought the
wolves, I am induced to believe that your present scruples are not well
founded. We will need every man we can obtain.”

“Oh, I wouldn’t mind it at all,” said Joe, “if it wasn’t that you’re a
going to start right off now. If I only had a little sleep—”

“You shall have it,” said Boone. Both Glenn and Roughgrove looked
inquiringly at the speaker. “We will not start to-night,” continued he.
“It would be useless. We could not overtake them, and if we did, it
would cause them to put Mary to death, that they might escape our
vengeance the more easily. I have duly considered the matter. We must
rest here to-night, and rise refreshed in the morning. We will then set
out on their trail, and I solemnly pledge my word never to return
without bringing the poor child back unharmed.”

“I _hope_ my head’ll be well by morning,” said Joe.

“I _know_ it will be well enough,” said Glenn; “so you need entertain
no hope of being left behind.”

“Now, Sneak, a word with you,” said Boone. “I think you would do almost
_any thing_ for my sake—”

“If I wouldn’t, I wish I may be dod—”

“Stop!” continued Boone, interrupting him.

“Jest ax me to cut off my little finger,” said Sneak, “and if I don’t
do it, I wish I may be dod—”

“Stop!” again interposed Boone. “My first request is one that poor
_Mary_ asked me to make. I know it will be a severe trial.”

“Name it,” cried Sneak, “and if it’s to job out one of my eyes, dod rot
me if I don’t do it!”

“_Hear_ me,” continued Boone; “she desired me to ask you not to use
that ugly word _dod-rot_ any more.”

“Hay!” exclaimed Sneak, his eyes dilating, and his mouth falling wide
open.

“I know it will be a hard matter,” said Boone; “but Mary thinks you
have a good and brave heart, and she says you are the only one among us
that uses bad words.”

“I’d go my death for that gal, or any other female woman in the
settlement, any day of my life. And as she wants me to swaller them
words, that was born with me, dod—I mean, I wish I may be—_indeed_,
I’ll be starved to death if I don’t do it! only when I’m raven mad at
something, and then I can’t help it.”

“Very well,” said Boone. “Now I have a request of my own to make.”

“Sing it out! dod—no—nothing! I didn’t say it—but I’ll _do_ what you
want me to,” said Sneak.

“I think _you_ will not suffer for the want of sleep,” continued Boone;
“and I wish you to go out and get as many of the neighbours to join us
as possible. You can go to three or four houses by midnight, sleep a
little, and meet us here, or in the prairie, in the morning.”

“I shall cut stick—if I don’t I wish I may be do—I—_indeed_ I will!”
and before he ceased speaking he was rushing through the gate.

The little party then took a hasty repast, and, throwing themselves on
the couches, endeavoured to sleep. Boone and Joe were soon wrapped in
slumber; but neither Roughgrove nor Glenn, for a great length of time,
could find repose.

“Strive to be composed, my friend; all will be well,” said Glenn, when
the disconsolate old ferryman gave vent to numerous heart-rending
sighs.

“If you only knew”—commenced Roughgrove, in reply, and the words he was
about to utter died upon his lips.

“I can well imagine the extent of your bereavement,” said Glenn; “but
at the same time I am sure she will be returned to you unharmed.”

“It was not Mary alone I alluded to,” said Roughgrove; “but to lose two
children—all that we had—so cruelly—Oh! may we all meet in heaven!”

“Then you had _two_ children, and lost them both? I never heard the
other mentioned,” said Glenn, now evincing a most lively interest in
the subject.

“No—it was my request that it should never be mentioned. Mary and he
were twins—only six years old, when he was lost. I wished Mary to
forget entirely that she ever had a brother—it could do no good for her
to know it, and would distress her. But now, Heavenly Father! both are
gone!” added the old man, in tears.

“Was he, too, taken by the Indians? the Osages?” inquired Glenn.

“No,” said Roughgrove. “He had been playing on the margin of the river,
and we were compelled to believe that he fell in the stream and was
drowned—at a time when no eye was upon him. Mary was near at hand, but
she did not see him fall, nor could she tell how he disappeared. His
poor mother believed that an Indian stole him away. But the only
Indians then in the neighbourhood were the Pawnees, and they were at
that time friendly. He was surely drowned. If the Pawnees had taken
him, they would soon have proposed a ransom. Yet his mother continually
charged them with the deed. In her dreams she ever saw him among the
savages. In all her thoughts it was the same. She pined away—she never
knew a happy moment afterwards—and when she died, the same belief was
uttered in her last words. I am now alone!” The old man covered his
face with his hands, and sobbed audibly.

“Bear with patience and resignation,” said Glenn, “the dispensations of
an all-wise Providence. All may yet be well. The son, whom you thought
lost forever, may be living, and possibly reclaimed, and Mary shall be
restored, if human efforts can accomplish it. Cheer up. Many a happy
day may still be reserved for you.”

“Oh! my dear young friend! if you but knew _all_!” said Roughgrove.

“Do I not now know all?” asked Glenn.

“No,” replied the old man; “but the rest must remain a secret—it
should, perhaps, be buried in my breast forever! I will now strive to
sleep.” They ceased to speak, and silence reigned till morning.

Joe was roused from his couch in the morning by a tremendous “Ya-hoy!”
outside of the inclosure.

“Run and open the gate,” said Glenn.

“I’d rather not,” said Joe, rubbing his eyes.

“Why?” asked Glenn.

“Hang it, it’s the Indians again!” replied Joe, seizing his musket.

“It is Sneak and his men,” observed Boone, when another shout was
uttered.

“Hang me, if I don’t have a peep at ’em first, anyhow,” said Joe,
approaching the gate cautiously, and peering through a small crevice.

“Ya-hoo!” repeated those without.

“Who are you? why don’t you speak out?” said Joe, still unable to see
their faces.

“Dod—I mean—plague take it! Joe, is Mr. Boone standing there with you?”
asked Sneak.

“No,” replied Joe, opening the gate.

“Then dod _rot_ your hide! why didn’t you let us in?” said Sneak,
rushing through the gate, and followed by five of the neighbours.

“Why, Sneak, how could I tell that you wern’t Indians?” said Joe.

“You be dod—never mind!” continued Sneak, shaking his head, and passing
to where Boone stood, near the house.

“I am glad to see you all,” said Boone, extending his hand to each of
the hardy pioneers. “But let us not waste a moment’s time. I see you
are all armed. Seize hold of the sled-rope, and let us be off.” The
command was instantly obeyed, and the party were soon passing out of
the inclosure. The gate was scarce fastened before another “Ya-hoo!”
came from the valley below, and a moment after they were joined by Col.
Cooper and Dan. The other oarsman had been sent up the river for
reinforcements, and Col. Cooper and Dan having heard the great
explosion, finally resolved to cross over the river, and not await the
arrival of the trappers.

The party now amounted to twelve, and no time was lost in commencing
the march, or rather the chase; for when they reached the prairie and
found the trail of the snow-canoe, their progress equalled that of the
savages. But they had not gone far before Joe was taken suddenly ill,
and begged to be permitted to return.

“I declare I can hardly hold my head up!” said he still holding on to
the rope, and keeping pace with the rest, though his head hung down.

“Possomin’—dod—I mean he’s jest ‘possomin’,” said Sneak.

“No indeed I ain’t—plague it, don’t _you_ say any thing, Sneak,” Joe,
added, in an undertone.

“I am something of a physician,” said Boone, whose quick ear had caught
the words addressed to Sneak. “Let me feel your pulse,” he added,
ordering the party to halt, and turning to Joe, whose wrist he seized.

“I feel something better,” said Joe, alarmed at the mysterious and
severe expression of Boone’s face.

“I hope you will be entirely well in _two minutes_,” said Boone; “and
then it will not be necessary to apply my remedy.”

“I’m about well now,” said Joe: “I think I can go ahead.”

“I believe your pulse is good now; and I think you will hardly have
another attack to-day. If you do, just let me know it.”

“Oh, now I feel perfectly well,” responded Joe; and, seizing the rope,
they were all soon again flying along on the trail of the savages.

A little before noon, while casting his eyes along the dim horizon in
advance, Sneak abruptly paused, causing the rest to do likewise, and
exclaimed, “Dod rot it.”

“What’s the matter, Sneak? Remember the promise you made,” said Boone.

“Oh,” replied Sneak, “in sich an extronary case as this, I can’t help
saying that word yet awhile. But look yander!” he continued, pointing
to a slight eminence a great distance in advance.

“True!” said Boone, “that is an Indian—but it is the only one
hereabouts.”

“He is coming to meet us,” said Glenn.

“Yes! my goodness! he’s looking at us now,” cried Joe, retreating a few
steps.

“If there are more of them watching us,” said Col. Cooper, “they are
somewhere in our rear.”

“Oh! we’re surrounded!” cried Joe, leaping forward again.

“Come on,” said Boone; “we’ll soon learn what he wants with us.”

When they were within a few hundred yards of the solitary Indian, they
again halted, and Joe ran to the sled and seized his musket, which he
cocked and threw up to his shoulder.

“Take down your gun!” said Boone; “that is the Indian whose life we
spared. I was not deceived in his integrity. He was not the one that
stole away Mary. I doubt not he brings intelligence of her.”

“God grant she may still be unharmed!” said Roughgrove, advancing to
meet the Indian, who, being now within gunshot, raised his small white
flag. “Tell me! tell me all about her!” exclaimed Roughgrove, in the
Osage language, when he met the Indian. When the Indian informed him of
the condition of Mary, the old man could not repress his raptures, his
gratitude, or his tears. “She’s safe! she’s safe! Heaven be praised!”
he exclaimed, turning to his companions, who now came up, and
experienced almost as much joy at the announcement as himself.

“Hang me, if you ain’t a right clever fellow,” said Joe, shaking the
Indian’s hand quite heartily. “Now,” he continued, when all the
particulars of Mary’s escape were made known, “there won’t be any use
in fighting; we can just get Miss Mary out of the snow, and then go
home again.”

“You don’t know—keep your mouth shet—dod—,” said Sneak, suppressing the
last word.

“We are not sure of that,” said Boone; “on the contrary, I think it is
very probable we shall have fighting yet. When the war-party discover
the deception, (as they must have done ere this,) they will retrace
their steps. If it was early in the day when they ascertained that the
captive had escaped, we may expect to see them very soon. If it was
late, we will find them in the grove where they encamped. In either
event we must expect to fight—and fight hard too—for they outnumber us
considerably.”

Joe sighed, but said nothing.

“Are you getting ill again?” inquired Boone.

“No—I was only blowing—I got a little tired,” said Joe, in scarce
articulate tones.

“And I feel weak—very weak—but it is with joy!” said Roughgrove.

“And I have observed it, too,” said Boone. “Get in the sled; we will
pull you along till your strength returns.”

“I will be able to use my gun when I meet the foe,” said the old man,
getting into the sled.

The party set forward again, guided by the Indian, and in high spirits.
The consciousness that Mary was in safety removed a weight from the
breasts of all; and, as they ran along, many a light jest and pleasant
repartee lessened the weariness of the march. Even Joe smiled once or
twice when Boone, in a mock heroic manner alluded to his exploits among
the wolves.

“Blast me,” said Joe, when Sneak mentioned a few cases of equivocal
courage as an offset to Boone’s compliments, “blast me, if I haven’t
killed more Indians than any of you, since I have been in this plagued
country.”

“True—that is, your musket has,” said Boone.

“Joe can fight sometimes,” said Glenn, smiling.

“I’ll be hanged if I haven’t always fought, when there was any fighting
going on,” said Joe, reproachfully.

“Yes, and he’ll fight again, as manfully as any of us,” said Boone.

“Dod—why, what are you holding back for so hard?” said Sneak, remarking
that Joe at that instant seemed to be much excited, and, instead of
going forward, actually brought the whole party to a model ate walk by
his counter exertion.

“What do you mean?” asked Glenn.

“Are you going to be ill?” asked Boone.

“No, goodness, no! Only listen to me a minute. An idea struck me, which
I thought it was my duty to tell. I thought this Indian might be
deceiving us. Suppose he leads us right into an ambush when we’re
talking and laughing, and thinking there’s no danger.

“Dod—you’re a cowardly fool!” said Sneak.

“I have likewise a remedy for interruptions—I advise rot to stop
again,” said Boone, when Joe once more started forward.

Just as night was setting in, the party came in sight of the grove
where Mary was concealed. They slackened their pace and drew near the
dark woods quite cautiously. When they entered the edge of the grove,
they heard the war-party utter the yell which had awakened Mary. It was
fully understood by Boone, and the friendly Indian assured them from
the sound, that the Osages had just returned, and were at that moment
leaving the encampment on his trail. But he stated that they could not
find the pale-faced maiden. And he suggested to the whites a plan of
attack, which was to station themselves near the place where he had
emerged from the grove, after hiding Mary; so that when they followed
on his trail they could thus be surprised without difficulty. This
advice was adopted by Boone. The Indian then asked permission to
depart, saying he had paid the white men for sparing his life.

“Oh no!” cried Joe, when Roughgrove interpreted the Indian’s request,
“keep him as a hostage—he may be cheating us.”

“I do not see the impropriety of Joe’s remark this time,” said Glenn.

“Ask him where he will go, if we suffer him to depart,” said Boone. To
Roughgrove’s interrogation, the Indian made a passionate reply. He said
the white men were liars. They were now quits. Still the white men were
not satisfied. He had risked his life (and would probably be tortured)
to pay back the white men’s kindness. But they would not believe his
words. He was willing to die now. The white men might shoot him.. He
would as willingly die as live. If suffered to depart, it was his
intention to steal his squaw away from the tribe, and join the Pawnees.
He would never be an Osage again.

“Go!” said Boone, perceiving by a ray of moonlight that reached the
Indian’s face through the clustering branches of the trees above, that
he was in tears. The savage, without speaking another word, leaped out
into the prairie, and from the circuitous direction he pursued, it was
manifest that nothing could be further from his desire than to fall in
with the war-party.

Boone directed the sled to be abandoned, and, obedient to his will, the
party entered a small covert in the immediate vicinity of the spot
where their guide said he had emerged from the grove on his return to
meet the whites. Here the party long remained esconced, silent and
listening, and expecting every moment to see the foe. At length Boone
grew impatient, and concluding they would encamp that night under the
spreading tree, (the locality of which he was familiar with,) he
resolved to advance and surprise them. He was strengthened in this
determination by the repeated and painful surmises of Roughgrove
respecting Mary’s piteous condition. Glenn, and the rest, with perhaps
one or two exceptions, likewise seemed disposed to make an
instantaneous termination of the torturing suspense respecting the fate
of the poor girl.

Boone and Sneak led the way. The party were compelled to proceed with
the utmost caution. Sometimes they were forced to crawl many paces on
their hands and knees under the pendent snow-covered bushes. They drew
near the spreading tree. A fire was burning under it, the flickering
rays of which could be occasionally seen glimmering through the
branches. A stick was heard to break a little distance on one side, and
Boone and Sneak sank down on the snow, and whispered to the rest to
follow their example. It was done without a repetition of the order.
Joe was the hindmost of all, but after lying a few minutes in silence,
he crept softly forward, trembling all the while. When he reached the
side of Boone, the aged woodman did not chide him, but simply pointed
his finger towards a small decayed log a few paces distant. Joe looked
but a moment, and then pulling his hat over his eyes, laid down flat on
his face, in silence and submission. An Indian was seated on the log,
and very composedly cutting off the dry bark with his tomahawk. Once or
twice he paused and remained a moment in a listening attitude. But
probably thinking the sounds he heard (if he heard any) proceeded from
some comrade like himself in quest of fuel, he continued to cut away,
until an armful was obtained, and then very deliberately arose and
walked with an almost noiseless step to the fire, which was not more
than fifty yards distant. Boone rose softly and whispered the rest to
follow. He was promptly obeyed by all except Joe.

“Come, sir! prepare your musket to fire,” said Boone, stooping down to
Joe, who still remained apparently frozen to the snow-crust.

“Oh! I’m so sick!” replied Joe.

“If you do not keep with us, you will lose your scalp to a certainty,”
said Boone. Joe was well in a second. The party were now about midway
between the fallen trunk where Mary was concealed, and the great
encampment-tree. Boone rose erect for an instant, and beheld the
former, and the single Indian (the chief) who was there. One of the
Indians again started out from the fire, in the direction of the whites
for more fuel. Boone once more passed the word for his little band to
lie down. The tall savage came within a few feet of them. His tomahawk
accidentally fell from his hand, and in his endeavour to catch it, he
knocked it within a few feet of Sneak’s head. He stepped carelessly
aside, and stooped down for it. A strangling and gushing sound was
heard, and falling prostrate, he died without a groan. Sneak had nearly
severed his head from his body at one blow with his hunting-knife.

At this juncture Mary sprang from her hiding-place. Her voice reached
the ears of her father, but before he could run to her assistance, the
chiefs loud tones rang through the forest. Boone and the rest sprang
forward, and fired upon the savages under the spreading tree. At the
second discharge the Indians gave way, and while Col. Cooper, the
oarsmen, and the neighbours that had joined the party in the morning,
pursued the flying foe, Boone and the remainder ran towards the fallen
trunk where Mary had been concealed, but approaching in different
directions. Glenn was the first to rush upon the chief, and it was his
ball that whizzed so near the Indian’s head when he bore away the
shrieking maiden. The rest only fired in the direction of the log, not
thinking that Mary had left her covert. They soon met at the fallen
tree, under which was the pit, all except Glenn, who sprang forward in
pursuit of the chief, and Sneak, who had made a wide circuit for the
purpose of reaching the scene of action from an opposite direction,
entirely regardless of the danger of being shot by his friends.

“She’s gone! she’s gone!” exclaimed Roughgrove, looking aghast at the
vacated pit under the fallen trunk. “But we will have her yet,” said
Boone, as he heard Glenn discharge a pistol a few paces apart in the
bushes. The report was followed by a yell, not from the chief, but
Sneak, and the next moment the rifle of the latter was likewise heard.
Still the Indian was not dispatched, for the instant afterwards his
tomahawk, which was hurled without effect, came sailing over the
bushes, and penetrated a tree hard by, some fifteen or twenty feet
above the earth, where it entered the wood with such force that it
remained firmly fixed. Now succeeded a struggle—a violent blow was
heard—the fall of the Indian, and all was comparatively still. A minute
afterwards, Sneak emerged from the thicket, bearing the inanimate body
of Mary in his arms, and followed by Glenn.

“Is she dead? Oh, she’s dead!” cried Roughgrove, snatching her from the
arms of Sneak.

“She has only fainted!” exclaimed Glenn, examining the body of the pale
girl, and finding no wounds.

“She is recovering!” said Boone, feeling her pulse.

“God be praised!” exclaimed Roughgrove, when returning animation was
manifest.

“Oh! I know you won’t kill me! For pity’s sake spare me!” said Mary.

“It is your father, my poor child!” said Roughgrove, pressing the girl
to his heart.

It is your father, my poor child!

“It is your father, my poor child!” said Roughgrove, pressing the girl
to his heart.


“It is! it is!” cried the happy girl, clinging rapturously to the old
man’s neck, and then, seizing the hands of the rest, she seemed to be
half wild with delight.

“Dod—I—I mean that none of the black noctilerous savages shall ever
hurt you as long as Sneak lives,” said Sneak, looking down at his gun,
which had been broken off at the breech.

“How did you break that?” asked Boone.

“I broke it over the yaller feller’s head,” said he, “and I’d do it
agin, before he should hurt Miss Mary, if it _is_ the only one I’ve
got.”

“I have an extra rifle at home,” said Glenn, “which shall be yours, as
a reward for your gallant conduct.”

“Where is the chief? Is he dead?” asked Mary.

“If he ain’t dead, his head’s harder than my gun, that’s all,” said
Sneak.

“Oh, I’m so sorry!” said Mary.

“Why, my child?” asked Roughgrove.

“Because,” said Mary, “he’s a good-hearted Indian, and never would have
harmed me. When he heard you coming, and raised his tomahawk to kill
me, I looked in his face, and he could not strike, for there were tears
in his eyes! I know he never would have thought of killing me, when
calm, for he treated me very kindly before I escaped.”

“Maybe he ain’t dead—I’ll go and see,” said Sneak, repairing to the
late scene of conflict. When he arrived he found the young chief
sitting upright, having been only stunned; a gold band that confined
his head-dress prevented the blow from fracturing his skull. He was now
unresisting and sullen. Sneak made him rise up, and after binding his
hands behind him with a strong cord, led him forth.

“You did not intend to kill me, did you?” asked Mary, in soothing
tones. The chief regarded her not, but looked steadfastly downwards.

“He don’t understand you, Mary,” said Boone.

“Oh, yes he does,” continued Mary; “and he can speak our language, too,
for I heard him talking, and thought it was you, and that was the
reason why I came out of the pit.” Roughgrove addressed him in his own
language, but with no better success. The captured chief resolved not
to plead for his life. He would make no reply whatever to their
questions, but still gazed downwards in reckless sullenness.

“What shall we do with him?” asked Glenn, when the rest of the party,
(with the exception of Joe,) who had chased the savages far away, came
up and stared at the prisoner.

“Let us set him free!” said Roughgrove.

“Kill him!” cried several.

“No!” exclaimed Mary, “what do _you_ say, Mr. Boone?”

“It would be useless to kill him,” said Boone.

“Let him go, then,” said Glenn.

“No!” said Boone.

“Why?” asked Glenn.

“Because,” replied Boone, “he is a chief, and we may make him the means
of securing the settlement against future attacks. We will confine him
in your garrison as a hostage, and send some friendly Indian to the
Osages announcing his capture, and informing them that his life will be
spared provided they keep away from the settlement for a certain length
of time, at the expiration of which he shall be restored to them.”

“I am glad of that,” said Mary, “for I don’t believe he is a bad
Indian. We will treat him kindly, and then I think he will always be
our friend.”

“Take him along, and bind him fast in the sled, Sneak,” said Boone;
“but see that you do not injure him in the least.”

“I will. Oh, me and him are purty good friends now. Gee-whoa-haw,”
continued he, taking hold of the string behind, and endeavouring to
drive the silent captive like an ox. The young chief whirled round
indignantly, and with such force as to send Sneak sprawling several
paces to one side. He rose amid the laughter that ensued, and
remembering the words of Boone, conducted his prisoner away in a more
respectful manner.

“Where’s Joe?” at length inquired Glenn, seeing that he alone was
missing.

“Oh! I’m afraid he’s dead,” said Mary.

“If he is, I shall mourn his loss many a day,” said Glenn; “for with
all his defects, I would not be without him for the world.”

“Give yourself no uneasiness,” said Boone; “for he is as well at this
moment as you or I.”

“I hope so,” said Glenn; “but I have not seen him since we first fired
at the Indians.”

“Let us repair to that spot, and there we will find him, for I saw him
fall down when he discharged his musket. I venture to say he has not
moved an inch since.”

The party repaired to the place mentioned, and there they found him,
sure enough, lying quite still on his face beside the Indian that Sneak
had killed.

“He _is_ dead!” said Glenn, after calling to him and receiving no
answer.

“We’ll soon see,” said Boone, turning him over on his back. “I will
open a vein in his arm.”

“Bring a torch from the fire,” said Col. Cooper to one of the men.

“Oh!” sighed Joe, lifting his hands to his head.

“I thought he would soon come to life again,” said Boone, examining his
face with the torch that was brought, and then laughing outright. The
spectacle was ludicrous in the extreme. Joe was besmeared with blood,
and, when he opened his eyes and stared at the flaming light, he
resembled some sanguinary demon.

“Where in the world did all this blood come from?” exclaimed Glenn.

“I’m recovered now,” said Joe, rising up and assuming an air of
importance.

“What have you been doing?” asked Glenn.

“I’ve been doing as much as any of you, I’ll be bound,” replied Joe,
very gravely.

“Well, what have you done?” repeated Glenn.

“I’ve been fighting the last half hour, as hard as anybody ever fought
in this world. Only look at the stabs in that Indian!” said he,
pointing to the savage.

“Why, you scoundrel! Sneak killed this Indian,” said Glenn.

“Sneak thought he did,” replied Joe, “but he only wounded him. After a
while he got up and clinched me by the throat, and we had it over and
over on the snow, till we both got so exhausted we couldn’t do any
thing. When we rested, we went at it again, and it hasn’t been five
minutes since I stuck my knife in his breast. When he fell, I stuck him
four or five times, and then fainted myself.”

“Here is a wound in the savage’s breast,” said Glenn.

“But here’s another in the throat,” said Boone, showing where the
arteries had been severed by Sneak.

“Joe,” said Glenn, “you must abandon this habit of lying, if indeed it
is not a portion of your nature.”

“Hang it all, I ain’t lying—I know Sneak did cut his throat, but he
didn’t cut it deep—I cut it deeper, myself, after the Indian got up
again!” persisted he.

The party hastily glanced at the four or five dead savages under the
trees, that had fallen victims to their fire, and then returned to the
sled. Mary was placed beside the captive chief, and they set out on
their return, well satisfied with the result of the expedition.




CHAPTER XIII.

The return—The young chief in confinement—Joe’s fun—His reward—The
ring—A discovery—William’s recognition—Memories of childhood—A
scene—Roughgrove’s history—The children’s parentage.


The party on their return did not travel so rapidly as they had
advanced. They moreover halted in a grove which they espied about
midnight, and finding a spreading tree that had entirely shielded a
small space of ground from the snow, they kindled a fire, arranged
their robes, and reposed a few hours. The captive chief was still
sullen and unresisting. He was suffered to recline in the sled
enveloped in skins, with his hands and feet yet bound, and an extra
cord passed round his body, the end of which Sneak held in his hand
while he slept. When daylight appeared, they set forward again in a
moderate pace, and arrived at Glenn’s domicil at evening twilight. The
neighbours that Sneak had enlisted departed for their homes, and Boone
and Col. Cooper, after bidding our hero, Roughgrove, and Mary, a hearty
adieu, without entering the inclosure, recrossed the river to their own
settlement.

The remainder of the party, except the oarsmen, accepted Glenn’s
invitation to remain with him till morning. When the gate was thrown
open, the faithful hounds manifested great delight to behold their
master again, and also Mary, for they pranced so much in the path
before them that it was almost impossible to walk. They barked in
ecstasy. The poor fawn had been forgotten, neglected, and had suffered
much for food. Mary placed her arm round its neck and wept. Glenn
ordered Joe, who was in the stable caressing the horses, to feed the
drooping pet instantly.

The party then entered the house, leading in the chief, and soon after
Sneak had a bright fire blazing on the hearth.

The food that remained from the last repast amply sufficed, the captive
refusing to partake with them, and Joe having dined during the last
twelve miles of the journey on the way.

“How we’ll be able to keep this Indian here, when we go out, I should
like to know,” said Joe, regarding the manly and symmetrical form of
the young chief, who was now unbound, and sat silent and thoughtful by
the fire.

“I think he ought to be killed,” said Sneak.

“Oh, no!” said Mary; “he is not bad like the other Indians.” The
Indian, for the first time since his capture, raised his head while she
spoke, and looked searchingly in her face. “Oh!” continued Mary,
thinking of the horrors of savage warfare, and bursting into tears,
“you will never attempt to kill any of us again, will you?”

“No!” said the chief, in a low but distinct tone. Every one in the
house but Mary started.

“You understand our language, do you? Then why did you not answer my
questions?” asked Roughgrove, turning to the captive. The young chief
made no answer, but sat with his arms folded, and still regarding the
features of Mary.

“He’s a perfect fool!” said Sneak.

“He’s a snake in the grass, and’ll bite some of us some of these times,
before we know any thing about it,” said Joe.

“Be silent,” said Glenn. “If the hope that fills my breast should be
realized, the young chief will cause more rejoicing than sorrowing
among us. The wisdom of Providence surpasses all human understanding.
Events that bear a frightful import to the limited comprehensions of
mortals, may nevertheless be fraught with inestimable blessings. Even
the circumstance of your capture, Mary, however distressing at the time
to yourself and to all your friends, may some day be looked upon as a
happy and fortunate occurrence.”

“I hope so,” said Mary.

“God is great—is present everywhere, and governs every thing—let us
always submit to his just decrees without murmuring,” said the old
ferryman, his eyes brightening with fervent devotion.

“They’ve a notion to preach a little, I believe,” whispered Sneak to
Joe.

“Let ’em go ahead, then,” replied Joe, who was busily engaged with a
long switch, that he occasionally thrust in the fire, and when the end
was burnt to a coal, slyly applied it to the heel of the young chiefs
moccasin.

“You’d better not let him ketch you at that,” said Sneak.

“He’ll think its a tick biting him—I want to see if the Indians scratch
like other people,” said Joe.

Mary, being so requested by her father, began to relate every thing
that transpired up to her rescue, while she was in the possession of
the savages. The Indian riveted his eyes upon her during the recital,
and seemed to mark every word. Whether he understood all she said, or
was enchanted with her soft and musical tones, could not be
ascertained; but the listeners more than once observed with
astonishment his gleaming eyes, his attentive attitude, and the intense
interest exhibited in his face. It was during a moment when he was thus
absorbed that he suddenly sprang erect. Joe threw down his switch,
convulsed with internal laughter. Sneak leaned back against the wall,
and while he grinned at the amusing scene, seemed curious to know what
would be the result. Mary paused, and Glenn inquired the cause of the
interruption.

“Its nothing, hardly,” said Sneak: “only a spark of fire got agin the
Indian’s foot. He ain’t as good pluck as the other one we had—he could
stand burning at the stake without flinching.”

“Did either of you _place_ the fire against his foot?” demanded Glenn,
in something like anger. But before he could receive an answer, the
young chief, who had whirled round furiously, and cast a fierce look at
his tormentor, relaxing his knit brows into an expression of contempt,
very deliberately took hold of Joe’s ear, and turning on his heel like
a pivot, forced him to make many circles round him on the floor.

“Let go my ear!” roared Joe, pacing round in pain.

“Hold your holt, my snarvilerous yaller prairie dog!” cried Sneak,
inexpressibly amused.

“Let go my ear, I say!” cried Joe, still trotting round, with both
hands grasping the Indian’s wrist. “Mr. Glenn! Mr. Glenn!” continued
Joe, “he’s pinching a hole through my ear! Shoot him down, shoot him
down. There’s my gun, standing against the wall—but its not loaded!
Take my knife—oh, he’s tearing my ear off!” When the Indian thought he
was sufficiently punished, he led him back to his seat, and
relinquished his hold. He then resumed his own seat, and composedly
turning his eyes to Mary, seemed to desire her to proceed with the
narration. She did so, but when she spoke of her attempt to escape in
the prairie, of the young chief’s noble conduct, and his admiration of
her ring (and she pulled off her glove and exhibited it as she spoke,)
he again rose from his seat, and walking, apparently unconsciously, to
where she reclined upon her father’s knees, fixed his eyes upon the
jewel in a most mysterious manner. He no longer dwelt upon the maiden’s
sweet tones. He did nothing but gaze at the ring.

“He’s got a notion to steal that ring!” said Joe, with a sneer.

“Shot your mouth!” said Sneak, observing that Mary looked reproachfully
at Joe, and paused.

“Don’t talk that way, Joe!” said the offended girl. “If he wanted it,
why did he not take it when I was his prisoner? I will freely let him
have it now,” she continued, slipping it off from her finger.

“No! keep it, child—it is a family ring,” said Roughgrove.

“I will lend it to him—I know he will give it me again,” she continued,
placing it in the extended hand of the young chief, who thanked her
with his eyes, and resumed his seat. He now seemed to disregard every
thing that was said or done, and only gazed at the ring, which he held
first in one hand and then in the other, with the sparkling diamond
uppermost. Sometimes he would press his forehead with his hand and
cover his eyes, and then gaze at the ring again. Then staring wildly
around, and slightly starting, he would bite his fingers to ascertain
whether the scene was reality or a dream. Finally, giving vent to a
piteous sigh, while a tear ran down his stained cheek, he placed his
elbows upon his knees, and, bending forward, seemed to muse over some
event of the past, which the jewel before him had called to
remembrance.

Glenn narrowly watched every look and motion of the young chief, and
when Mary finished the account of her capture, he introduced the
subject of the lost child, Mary’s brother, that Roughgrove had spoken
about before starting in pursuit of the war-party.

“I can remember him!” said Mary, “and mother, too—they are both in
heaven now—poor brother! poor mother!”

The young chief raised his head quickly, and staring at the maiden’s
face, seemed to regard her tears and her features with an interest
similar to that of a child when it beholds a rare and curious toy.

“Has it not occurred to you,” said Glenn, addressing Roughgrove, “that
this young chief might possibly be your own son?”

“No!” replied the old man, promptly, and partially rising, “_he_ my
son—_he_ Mary’s brother—and once in the act of plunging the tomahawk—”

“But, father,” interrupted Mary, “he would never have harmed me—I know
he would not—for every time he looked me in the face he seemed to pity
me, and sometimes he almost wept to think I was away from my friends,
among savages, cold and distressed. But I don’t think he can be my
brother—my little brother I used to love so much—yet I could never
think how he should have fallen in the river without my knowing it.
Sometimes I remember it all as if it were yesterday. He was hunting
wild violets—”

“Oh! oh!” screamed the young chief, springing from his seat towards
Mary. Fear, pain, apprehension, joy and affection, all seemed to be
mingled in his heaving breast.

“He’s crazy, dod”—the word died upon Sneak’s lip.

“I should like to know who burnt his foot then,” said Joe.

“Silence! both of you,” said Glenn.

“What does he mean?” at length asked Roughgrove, staring at the young
chief.

“Let us be patient, and see,” said Glenn.

Ere long the Indian turned his eyes slowly downward, and resumed his
seat mournfully and in silence.

“Oh!” said Mary, “if he _is_ my poor brother, my heart will burst to
see him thus—a wild savage.”

“How old are you, Mary?” asked Glenn.

“Nineteen,” said she.

“Your brother, then, has been lost thirteen years. He may yet be
restored to you—re-taught our manners and speech—bless his aged
father’s declining years, and merit sister’s affection.”

“Oh! Mr. Glenn! is he then alive? is this he?” cried Mary.

“No, child!” said Roughgrove, “do not think of such a thing, for you
will be most bitterly disappointed. Your brother was _white_—look at
this Indian’s dark face!”

Glenn approached the chief, extending his hand in a friendly manner. It
was frankly grasped. He then gently drew the furs aside and exposed the
young man’s shoulder. It was as white as his own! Roughgrove, Mary, and
all, looked on in wonder. The young chief regarded it with singular
emotions himself. He seemed to associate it in some manner with the
ring he held, for he glanced from one to the other alternately.

“Did Mary wear that ring before the child was lost?” asked Glenn.

“No,” replied Roughgrove, “but her mother did.”

“I believe he is your son!” said Glenn. “Mary,” he continued, “have you
any trinkets or toys you used to play with?”

“Yes. Oh, let me get them!” she replied, and running to a corner of the
room where her father’s chests and trunks had been placed, she produced
a small drum and a brass toy cannon. “He used to play with these from
morning till night,” she continued, placing them on the floor. She had
not taken her hand away from them, before the young chief sprang to her
side and cried out—

“They’re mine! they’re mine! they’re William’s!”

“What was the child’s name?” asked Glenn, quickly.

“William! William!” cried Mary. “It is my brother! it is my poor
brother William!” and without a moment’s hesitation she threw her arms
round his neck, and sobbed upon his breast!

“The poor, poor child!” said Roughgrove, in tremulous tones, embracing
them both, his eyes filled with tears.

“Sister! sister!” said the youth, gazing in partial bewilderment at
Mary.

“Brother, brother! I am your sister!” said Mary, in tones of thrilling
tenderness.

“But mother! where’s mother?” asked the youth. The father and sister
bowed their heads in silence. The youth, after clinging fondly to Mary
a few minutes, started up abruptly and looked amazed, as if waking from
a sweet dream to the reality of his recent dreadful condition.

“Brother, why do you look so coldly at us? Why don’t you press us to
your heart?” said Mary, still clinging to him. The youth’s features
gradually assumed a grave and haughty cast, and, turning away, he
walked to the stool he had occupied, and sat down in silence.

“I will win him from the Indians,” said Mary, running after him, and
sitting down at his side.

“Ugh!” exclaimed the youth in displeasure, and moved a short distance
away.

“He’s not true grit—I ’most wish I had killed him,” said Sneak.

“Yes, and pinch me if I don’t burn him again, if I get a chance,” said
Joe.

“Silence!” said Glenn, sternly. For many minutes not a word was spoken.
At length Mary, who had been sobbing, raised her head and looked
tenderly in the face of her brother. Still he regarded her with
indifference. She then seized the toy-drum, which with the other
articles had been thrust out of view, and placed them before him. When
his eyes rested upon them; the severe and wild expressions of his
features again relaxed. The young war-chief was a child again. He
abandoned his seat and sat down on the floor beside his sister. Looking
her guilelessly in the face, an innocent and boyish smile played upon
his lips.

“You won’t go away again and leave your poor sister; will you,
William?” said Mary.

“No, indeed. And when the Indians come we’ll run away and go to mother,
won’t we, Mary?” said the youth, in a complete abandonment of time and
condition.

“He _is_ restored—restored at last!” exclaimed Roughgrove, walking
across the room to where the brother and sister sat. The youth sprang
to his feet, and darted a look of defiance at him. “Oh! wretched man
that I am! the murderous savages have converted the gentle lamb into a
wolf!” Roughgrove then repeated his words to the youth in the Osage
language. The youth replied in the same language, his eyes flashing
indignantly. He said it was not true; that the red man was great and
noble, and the pale face was a beast—and added that he had another
tomahawk and bows and arrows in his own country, and might see the day
when this insult would be terribly resented. The old man sank down on
his rude seat, and gave way to excruciating grief.

“Brother William!” cried Mary, tapping the drum. The youth cast down
his eyes to where she sat, and their fierceness vanished in a
twinkling. She placed the toy in his possession, and rose to bring some
other plaything she remembered.

“Sister, don’t go—I’ll tell mother!” cried the youth, in infantile
earnestness.

“I’ll come back presently, brother,” said Mary, tripping across the
room and searching a trunk.

“Make haste—but I’m not afraid—I’ll frighten all the Indians away.”
Saying this, he rattled the drum as rapidly as possible.

“See what I’ve got, brother,” said Mary, returning with a juvenile
book, and sitting down close at his side. He thrust the drum away, and,
laughing heartily, placed his arm round his sister and said: “Mother’s
got _my_ book; but you’ll let me look at yours, won’t you, sister?”

“Yes that I will, brother—see, this is the little old woman, and
there’s her dog—”

“Yes, and there’s the peddler,” cried the youth, pointing at the
picture.

“Now can’t you read it, brother?”

“To be sure I can—let me read:



“‘There was a little woman

As I have heard tell,

She went to market

Her eggs for to sell.’


“See! there she goes, with a basket on her arm and a cane in her hand.”

“Yes, and here she is again on this side, fast asleep, and her basket
of eggs sitting by her,” said Mary; “now let me read the next:



“‘She went to market,

All on a market day,

And she fell asleep

On the king’s highway.”


Now do you read about the peddler, brother. Mother used to say there
was a naughty word in it.”

“I will,” cried the youth, eagerly; but he paused and looked
steadfastly at the picture before him.

“Why don’t you read?” asked Mary, endeavouring to confine his thoughts
to the childish employment.

“That’s a pretty _skin_, ain’t it?” said he, pointing to the red shawl
painted on the picture.

“_Skin_!” said Mary; “why, that’s her shawl, brother.”

“I’ll steal one for my squaw,” said he.

“_Steal_, brother!” said the trembling girl.

“No I won’t, either, sister—don’t you know mother says we must never
steal, nor tell stories, nor say bad words.”

“That’s right, brother. But you haven’t got an ugly _squaw_, have you?”

“No indeed, sister, that I haven’t!”

“I thought you wouldn’t have any thing to do with the ugly squaws.”

“That I wouldn’t—mine’s a pretty one.”

“Oh, heaven!” cried the weeping girl, throwing herself on her brother’s
bosom. He kissed her, and strove to comfort her, and turned to the book
and continued to turn over the leaves, while Mary sat by in sadness,
but ever and anon replying to his childish questions, and still
striving to keep him thus diverted.

“Have you any of the clothes you wore when he was a child?” asked
Glenn, addressing Roughgrove.

“Yes,” replied the old man; and seizing upon the thought, he unlocked
the trunk that contained them, and put them on.

“Where’s mother?” suddenly asked the young chief.

“Oh, she’s dead!” said Mary.

“Dead? I know better!” said he, emphatically.

“Indeed she is, brother,” repeated Mary, in tears.

“When did she die?” he continued, in a musing attitude.

“A long time ago—when you were away,” said she.

“I wasn’t gone away long, was I?” he asked, with much simplicity.

“Oh, very long—we thought you were dead.”

“He was a very bad Indian to steal me away without asking mother. But
where’s father? Is he dead, too?” he continued, lifting his eyes and
beholding Roughgrove attired in a suit of velvet, and wearing broad
silver knee buckles. “Father! father!” he cried, eagerly clasping the
old man in his arms.

“My poor boy, I will be your father still!” said Roughgrove.

“I know you will,” said the youth, “for you always loved me a great
deal, and now that my poor mother’s dead, I’m sure you will love sister
and me more than ever.”

“Indeed I will, poor child! But you must not go back to the naughty
savages any more.”

The youth gazed round in silence, and made no reply. He was evidently
awakening to a consciousness of his condition. A frown of horror
darkened his brow as he contemplated the scenes of his wild abode among
the Indians; and, when he contrasted his recent mode of life with the
Elysian days of his childhood, now fresh in his memory, mingled
emotions of regret, fear, and bliss seemed to be contending in his
bosom. A cold dampness settled upon his forehead, his limbs trembled
violently, and distressful sighs issued from his heaving breast.
Gradually he sank down on a couch at his side, and closed his eyes.

When some minutes had elapsed, during which a death-like silence was
maintained, Mary approached lightly to where her father stood, and
inquired if her brother was ill.

“No,” said Roughgrove, in a whisper; “he only sleeps; but it is a very
sound slumber.”

“Now let us take off his Indian dress,” said Glenn, “and put on him
some of my clothes.” This was speedily effected, and without awaking
the youth, whose senses were benumbed, as if by some powerful opiate.

“Now, Mary,” said Roughgrove, “you must likewise have repose. You are
almost exhausted in body and mind. Sleep at your brother’s side, if you
will, poor girl.” Mary laid her head on William’s pillow, and was soon
in a deep slumber.

For several moments Roughgrove stood lost in thought, gazing
alternately at the reposing brother and sister, and Glenn. He looked
also at Sneak and Joe reclining by the fire; both were fast asleep. He
then resumed his seat, and motioned Glenn to do likewise. He bowed his
head a brief length of time in silence, apparently recalling to mind
some occurrence of more than ordinary import.

“My young friend,” said he, at length, while he placed his withered
hand upon Glenn’s knee, “do you remember that I said there was
_another_ secret connected with my family?”

“Distinctly,” replied Glenn; “and I have since felt so much anxiety to
be acquainted with it that I have several times been on the eve of
asking you to gratify my curiosity; but thinking it might be
impertinent, I have forborne. It has more than once occurred to me that
your condition in life must have been different from what it now is.”

“It has been different—far different. I will tell you all. I am a
native of England—a younger brother, of an ancient and honourable
family, but much decayed in fortune. I was educated for the ministry.
Our residence was on the Thames, a few miles distant from London, and I
was early entered in one of the institutions of the great city. While
attending college, it was my practice twice a month to visit my
father’s mansion on foot. I was fond of solitary musings, and the
exercise was beneficial to my weak frame. It was during one of those
excursions that I rescued a young lady from the rude assaults of two
ruffians. After a brief struggle, they fled. I turned to the one I had
so opportunely served, and was struck with her unparalleled beauty.
Young; a form of symmetrical loveliness; dark, languishing eyes, a
smooth forehead of lily purity, and auburn hair flowing in glossy
ringlets—it was not strange that an impression should be made on the
heart of a young student. She thanked me for my generous interposition
in such sweet and musical tones, that every word thrilled pleasantly
through my breast. She prevailed upon me to accompany her to her
mother’s cottage, but a few hundred paces distant; and during our walk
thither, she hung confidingly on my arm. Her aged mother overwhelmed me
with expressions of gratitude. She mildly chid her daughter for
wandering so far away in quest of flowers, and then withdrawing, left
us alone. Again my eyes met those of the blushing maiden—but it is
useless to dwell upon the particulars of our mutual passion. Suffice it
to say that she was the only child of her widowed mother, in moderate
but independent circumstances, and being hitherto secluded from the
society of the other sex, soon conceived (for my visits were frequent)
an affection as ardent as my own. At length I apprized my father of the
attachment, and asked his consent to our union. He refused to sanction
the alliance in the most positive terms, and commanded me never to
mention the subject again. He said that I was poor, and that he would
not consent to my marriage with any other than an heiress. I returned
to London, resolved to disobey his injunction, for I felt that my
happiness entirely depended upon my union with the lovely Juliet. But I
had never yet definitely expressed my desire to her. Yet there could be
no doubt from her smiles that my wishes would willingly be acceded to.
I determined to arrange every thing at our next interview, and a few
weeks afterwards I repaired to the cottage for that purpose. Instead of
meeting me with her ever blissful face, I found my Juliet in tears! She
was alone; but in the adjoining chamber I heard a man’s voice, and
feared that it was my father. I was mistaken. Juliet soon brushed away
her tears, and informed me that she had been _again_ assailed by the
same ruffians, and on the lawn within sight of the cottage. She said
that the gentleman in the next room was her deliverer. I seized her
hand, and when about to propose a plan to secure her against such
annoyances for ever, her mother entered and introduced the stranger to
me. His name was Nicholson, and he stated that he was a partner in a
large banking establishment in Lombard Street. He was past the bloom of
youth, but still his fine clothes and his reputed wealth were
displeasing to me. I was especially chagrined at the marked attention
shown him by Juliet’s mother. And my annoyance was increased by the
frequent lascivious glances he cast at the maiden. The more I marked
him, the more was my uneasiness. It soon occurred to me that I had seen
him before! He resembled a person I had seen driving rapidly along the
highway in a chariot, on the morning that I first beheld my Juliet. But
my recollection of his features was indistinct. There was a
condescending suavity in his manners, and sometimes a positive and
commanding tone in his conversation, that almost roused my enmity in
spite of my peaceful calling and friendly disposition. It was my
intention to remain at the cottage, and propose to Juliet after he had
departed. But my purpose was defeated, for he declared his intention to
enjoy the country air till evening, and I returned, disappointed and
dispirited, to the city.

“A few days afterwards I visited the cottage again. What was my
surprise and vexation to behold Mr. Nicholson there! He was seated,
with his patronizing smile, between Juliet and her mother, and
presenting them various richly bound books, jewels, &c., which seemed
to me to be received with much gratification. I was welcomed with the
usual frankness and pleasure by Juliet, but I thought her mother’s
reception was less cordial, and Mr. Nicholson regarded me with manifest
indifference. I made an ineffectual effort at vivacity, and after an
hour’s stay, during which my remarks gradually narrowed down to
monosyllables, (while Mr. Nicholson became excessively loquacious,) I
rose to depart. Juliet made an endeavour to accompany me to the door,
where I hoped to be assured of her true affection for me by her own
lips, but some pointed inquiry (I do not now recollect what) from
Nicholson, which was seconded in a positive manner by her mother,
arrested her steps, and while she hesitated, I bad her adieu, and
departed for the city, resolved never to see her again.

“It was about a month after the above occurrence that my resolution
gave way, and I was again on the road to the cottage, with my mind made
up to forgive and forget every thing that had offended me, and to offer
my hand where my heart seemed to be already irrevocably fixed. When I
entered who should I see but the eternal thwarter of my happiness, the
ever-present Nicholson! But horror! he was now the wedded lord of
Juliet! The ceremony was just over. There were but two or three
strangers present besides the clergyman. Bride, groom, guests, and all
were hateful to my sight. The minister, particularly, I thought had a
demoniac face, similar to that of one of the ruffians who had tested
the quality of my cane. Juliet cast a look at me with more of sadness
than joy in it. She offered me her hand in silent salutation, and it
trembled in my grasp. The deed was done. Pity for the maiden who had
been thus sacrificed to secure a superabundance of wealth which could
never be enjoyed, and sorrow at my own forlorn condition, weighed
heavily, oh, how heavily! on my heart. I returned to my lonely and
desolate lodgings without a malicious feeling for the one who had
robbed me of every hope of earthly enjoyment. I prayed that he might
make Juliet happy.

“But, alas! her happiness was of short duration. Scarce six months had
passed before Mr. Nicholson began to neglect his youthful and confiding
bride. She had still remained at her mother’s cottage, while, as she
stated, his establishment was being fitted up in town for their
reception. He at first drove out to the cottage every evening; but soon
afterwards fell into the habit of visiting his bride only two or three
times a week. He neither carried her into society nor brought home any
visitors. Yet he seemed to possess immense wealth, and bestowed it upon
Juliet with a liberal, nay, profuse hand. My young friend, what kind of
a character do you suppose this Mr. Nicholson to have been?” said the
old man, pausing, and turning to Glenn, who had been listening to the
narrative with marked attention.

“He was an impostor—a gambler,” replied Glenn, promptly.

“He _was_ an impostor! but no adventurous gambler, as you suppose. I
will proceed. About seven months after his marriage, he abandoned
Juliet altogether! Yet he did not forget her entirely. He may have felt
remorse for the ruin he had wrought—or perhaps a slight degree of
affection for his unborn—; and costly presents, and many considerable
sums of money, were sent by him to the cottage. But neither the aged
mother nor the deserted wife found the consolation they desired in his
prodigal gifts. They sent me a note, informing me of their distressful
condition, and requesting me to ascertain the locality of Mr.
Nicholson’s establishment, and, if possible, to find out the cause of
his unnatural conduct. I did all in my power to accomplish what they
desired. I repaired to the cottage, unable to give the least
intelligence of Mr. Nicholson. I had not been able to find any one who
had ever heard of him. Juliet became almost frantic. She determined to
seek him herself. At her urgent solicitation, I accompanied her to the
city in an open curricle. A pitying Providence soon terminated her
insupportable suspense. While we were driving through Hyde Park, we
were forcibly stopped to permit, among the throng, the passage of a
splendid equipage. The approaching carriage was likewise an open one.
Juliet glanced at the inmates, and uttering a wild piercing shriek,
fainted in my arms. I looked, and saw her quondam husband! He was
decked in the magnificent insignia of ROYALTY. Nobles were bowing,
high-born ladies smiling, and the multitude shouted, ‘There comes his
royal highness, the Prince of—’

“Man cannot punish him,” continued Roughgrove, “but God can. HE will
deal justly, both with the proud and the oppressed. But to return. He
saw Juliet. A few minutes after the gorgeous retinue swept past, one of
the prince’s attendants came with a note. Juliet was insensible. I took
it from the messenger’s hand, and started when I looked the villain in
the face. He had been the parson! He smiled at the recognition! I
hurled my cane at his head, and hastened back to the cottage with a
physician in attendance. Juliet soon recovered from her swoon. But a
frenzied desperation was manifest in her pale features. I left her in
her mother’s charge, and returned in agony to my lodgings. That night a
raging fever seized upon my brain, and for months I was the victim of
excruciating disease. When convalescent, but still confined to my room,
I chanced to run my eye over one of the daily papers, and was petrified
to see the name of Mrs. Nicholson, in the first article that attracted
my attention, in connection with an attempt upon the life of the king!
She had been seized with a fit of temporary insanity, and driving to
town, sought her betrayer with the intention of shedding his blood. She
waited at the gate of St. James’s palace until a carriage drove up in
which she expected to find the prince. It was the king—yet she did not
discover her error until the blow was made. The steel did not perform
its office, as you are aware from the history of England, in which this
event is recorded. The king humanely pardoned her on the spot. A single
word she uttered acquainted him with her history, and her piteous looks
made an extraordinary impression on his mind. He too, had, perhaps,
sported with innocent beauty. And now the spectre of the weeping maniac
haunted his visions. Soon he became one himself. The name of Juliet
fortunately was not published in the journals. It was by some means
incorrectly stated that the woman who attacked the king was named
_Margaret_ Nicholson, and so it remains on the page of history.

“As soon as I was able to leave my chamber, I repaired to the cottage.
Juliet was a _mother_. Reason had returned, and she strove to submit
with Christian humility to her pitiable lot. She received me with the
same sweet smile that had formerly beamed on her guileless face. Her
mother, the promoter of the fancied advantageous alliance, now seemed
to suffer most. They both clung to me as their only remaining friend,
and in truth I learned that all other friends had forsaken them. I
looked upon the deceived, outraged, but still innocent Juliet, with
pity. Her little cherub twins—”

“Twins!” echoed Glenn.

“Ay, twins,” replied Roughgrove, “and they lie behind you now, side by
side, on yonder bed.”

Glenn turned and gazed a moment in silence on the sleeping forms of
William, and Mary.

“Her poor little ones excited my compassion. They were not blamable for
their father’s crime, nor could they enjoy the advantages of his
exalted station. They were without a protector in the world. Juliet’s
mother was fast sinking under the calamity she had herself in a great
measure wrought. My heart melted when I contemplated the sad condition
of the only female I had ever loved. It was not long before the fires
of affection again gleamed brightly in my breast. Juliet had committed
no crime, either in the eyes of man or God. She did not intend to err.
She had acted in good faith. She had never designed to transgress
either the laws of earth or heaven, and although the disguised prince
did not wholly possess her heart, yet she deemed it a duty to be
governed by the advice of her parent. These things I explained to her,
and when her conscience was appeased by the facts which I demonstrated,
her peace in some measure returned, but she was still subject to
occasional melancholy reflections. Perhaps she thought of me—how my
heart had suffered (for, young as I was, the occurrence brought
premature gray hairs; and even now, although my head is white, I have
seen but little more than forty years)—and how happy we might have
travelled life’s journey together. I seized such a moment to renew my
proposals. She declined, but declined in tears. I returned to the city
with the intention to repeat the offer the next time we met. Not many
weeks elapsed before her aged mother was consigned to the tomb. Poor
Juliet’s condition was now immeasurably lamentable. She had neither
friend nor protector. I again urged my suit, and was successful. But
she required of me a promise to retire from the world for ever. I
cheerfully agreed, for I was disgusted with the vanity and wickedness
of my species. We came hither. You know the rest.”

When Roughgrove ceased speaking, the night was far advanced, and a
perfect silence reigned. Without uttering another word, he and Glenn
rose from their seats, and repairing to the remaining unoccupied couch,
ere long yielded to the influence of tranquil slumber.




CHAPTER XIV.

William’s illness—Sneak’s strange house—Joe’s courage—The bee hunt—Joe
and Sneak captured by the Indians—Their sad condition—Preparations to
burn them alive—Their miraculous escape.


Just before the dawn of day, Roughgrove and Glenn were awakened by
Mary. She was weeping at the bed-side of William.

“What’s the matter, child?” asked Roughgrove, rising up and lighting
the lamp.

“Poor brother!” said she, and her utterance failed her.

“He has a raging fever!” said Glenn, who had approached the bed and
placed his hand upon the young man’s temples.

“True—and I fear it will be fatal!” said Roughgrove, in alarm, as he
held the unresisting wrist of the panting youth.

“Fear not,” said Glenn; “God directs all things. This violent illness,
too, may in the end be a blessing. Let us do all in our power to
restore him to health, and leave the rest to Him. I was once an ardent
student of medicine, and the knowledge I acquired may be of some
avail.”

“I will pray for his recovery,” said Mary, bowing down at the foot of
the bed.

I will pray for his recovery.

“I will pray for his recovery,” said Mary, bowing down at the foot of
the bed.


“Dod—I mean—Joe, it’s most daylight,” said Sneak, rising up and rubbing
his eyes.

“Well, what if it is? what are you waking me up for?” replied Joe,
turning over on his rude pallet.

“Why, I’m going home.”

“Well, clear out them.”

“But you’ll have to get up and shut the gate after me”

“Plague take it all, I believe you’re just trying to spoil my nap!”
said Joe, much vexed.

“No I ain’t, Joe; I’m in earnest, indeed I am,” continued Sneak;
“bekaise I hain’t been inside of my house, now, for three or four days,
and who knows but the dod—mean the—Indians have been there and stole
all my muskrat skins?”

“If they have, then there’s no use in looking for them now.”

“If they have, dod—I mean, _burn_ me if I don’t foller em to the other
end of creation but I’ll have ’em back agin. But I ain’t much afeard
that they saw my house—they might rub agin it without knowing it was a
house.”

“That’s a pretty tale,” said Joe, now thoroughly awakened, and staring
incredulously in his companion’s face.

“It’s a fact.”

“Whereabouts is your house?”

“Why, it’s in the second valley we crossed when we went after the
wolves on the island.”

“Then your skins are gone,” said Joe, “for the Indians have been in
that valley.”

“I know they was there well enough,” said Sneak; “but didn’t I say they
couldn’t find the house, even if they was to scratch their backs agin
it?”

“What kind of a house is it?”

“’Spose you come along and see,” said Sneak, groping about in the dim
twilight for his cap, and the gun Glenn bad given him.

“I should like to see it, just out of curiosity,” replied Joe.

“Then go along with Sneak,” said Glenn, who approached the fire to
prepare some medicine; “it is necessary that every thing should be
quiet and still here.”

“If you’ll help me to feed and water the horses. Sneak, I’ll go home
with you,” said Joe. Sneak readily agreed to the proposition, and by
the time it was quite light, and yet before the sun rose, the labour
was accomplished, and they set out together for the designated valley.
Their course was somewhat different from that pursued when in quest of
the wolves, for Sneak’s habitation was about midway between the river
and the prairie, and they diverged in a westerly direction. But their
progress was slow During the night there had been a change in the
atmosphere, and a constant breeze from the south had in a great measure
softened the snow-crust, so that our pedestrians frequently broke
through.

“This is not the most agreeable walking I ever saw,” said Joe, breaking
through and tumbling down on his face.

“That’s jest as much like swimming as walking,” said Sneak, smiling at
the blunder of his companion.

“Smash it, Sneak,” continued Joe, rising up with some difficulty, “I
don’t half like this breaking-through business.”

“You must walk lighter, and then you won’t break through,” said Sneak;
“tread soft like I do, and put your feet down flat. I hain’t broke in
once—” But before the sentence was uttered, Sneak had broken through
himself, and stood half-submerged in the snow.

“Ha! ha! ha! you musn’t count your chickens before they’re hatched,”
said Joe, laughing; “but you may score one, now you have broken the
shell.”

“I got in that time,” said Sneak, now winding through the bushes with
much caution, as if it were truly in his power to diminish the weight
of his body by a peculiar mode of walking.

“This thaw ’ll be good for one thing, any how,” said Joe, after they
had progressed some time in silence.

“What’s that?” asked Sneak.

“Why, it ’ll keep the Indians away; they can’t travel through the slush
when the crust is melted off.”

“That’s as true as print,” replied Sneak; and if none of ’em follered
us back to the settlement, we needn’t look for ’em agin till spring.”

“I wonder if any of them _did_ follow us?” asked Joe, pausing abruptly.

“How can anybody tell till they see ’em?” replied Sneak. “What’re you
stopping for?”

“I’m going back,” said Joe.

“Dod—you’re a fool—that’s jest what you are. Hain’t We got our guns?
and if there _is_ any about, ain’t they in the bushes close to Mr.
Glenn’s house? and hain’t we passed through ’em long ago? But I don’t
keer any thing about your cowardly company—go back, if you want to,”
said Sneak, striding onward.

“Sneak, don’t go so fast. I haven’t any notion of going back,” said
Joe, springing nimbly to his companion’s side.

“I believe you’re afeard to go back by yourself,” said Sneak, laughing
heartily.

“Pshaw, Sneak, I don’t think any of ’em followed us, do you?” continued
Joe, peering at the bushes and trees in the valley, which they were
entering.

“No,” said Sneak; “I only wanted to skeer you a bit.”

“I’ve killed too many savages to be scared by them now,” said Joe,
carelessly striding onward.

“What was you a going back for, if you wasn’t skeered?”

“I wonder what always makes you think I’m frightened when I talk of
going into the house! Sneak, you’re _always_ mistaken. I wasn’t
thinking about myself—I only wanted to put Mr. Glenn on his guard.”

“Then what made you tell that wapper for, the other night, about
cutting that Indian’s throat?”

“How do you know it was a wapper?” asked Joe, somewhat what embarrassed
by Sneak’s home-thrust.

“Bekaise, don’t I know that I cut his juggler-vein myself? Didn’t the
blood gush all over me? and didn’t he fall down dead before he had time
to holler?” continued Sneak, with much warmth and earnestness.

“Sneak,” said Joe, “I’ve no doubt you thought he was dead—but then you
must know it’s nearly as hard to kill a man as a cat. You might have
been mistaken; every body is liable to be deceived—even a person’s eyes
deceive him sometimes. I don’t pretend to say that I haven’t been
mistaken before now, myself. It _may_ be possible that I was mistaken
about the Indian as well as you—I might have just _thought_ I saw him
move. But I was there longer than you, and the inference is that I
didn’t stand as good a chance to be deceived.”

“Well, I can’t answer all that,” said Sneak; “but I’ll swear I felt my
knife grit agin his neck-bone.”

Joe did not desire to pursue the subject any further, and they
proceeded on their way in silence, ever and anon breaking through the
snow-crust. The atmosphere became still more temperate when the bright
sun beamed over the horizon. Drops of water trickled down from the
snow-covered branches of the trees, and a few birds flitted overhead,
and uttered imperfect lays.

“Here we are,” said Sneak, halting in the midst of a clump of enormous
sycamore trees, over whose roots a sparkling rivulet glided with a
gurgling sound.

“I know we’re here,” said Joe; “but what are you stopping _here_ for?”

“Here’s where I live,” replied Sneak, with a comical smile playing on
his lips.

“But where’s your house?” asked Joe.

“Didn’t I say you couldn’t find it, even if you was to rub your back
agin it?”

“I know I’m not rubbing against your house now,” replied Joe, turning
round and looking up in the huge tree he had been leaning against.

“But you have been leaning agin my house,” continued Sneak, amused at
the incredulous face of his companion.

“I know better,” persisted Joe; “this big sycamore is the only thing
I’ve leant against since we started.”

“Jest foller me, and I’ll show you something,” said Sneak, stepping
round to the opposite side of the tree, where the ascent on the north
rose abruptly from the roots. Here he removed a thin flat stone of
about four feet in height, that stood in a vertical position against
the tree.

“You don’t live in there, Sneak, surely; why that looks like a wolf’s
den,” said Joe, perceiving a dark yawning aperture, and that the
immense tree was but a mere shell.

“Keep at my heels,” said Sneak, stooping down and crawling into the
tree.

“I’d rather not,” said Joe; “there may be a bear in it.”

Soon a clicking sound was heard within, and the next moment Joe
perceived the flickering rays of a small lamp that Sneak held in his
hand, illuminating the sombre recesses of the novel habitation.

“Why don’t you come in?” asked Sneak.

“Sneak, how do you know there ain’t a bear up in the hollow?” asked
Joe, crawling in timidly and endeavouring to peer through the darkness
far above, where even the rays of the lamp could not penetrate.

“I wonder if you think I’d let a bear sleep in my house,” continued
Sneak, searching among a number of boxes and rude shelves, to see if
any thing had been molested during his absence. Finding every thing
safe, he handed Joe a stool, and began to kindle a fire in a small
stone furnace. Joe sat down in silence, and looked about in
astonishment. And the scene was enough to excite the wonder of an
Irishman. The interior of the tree was full eight feet in diameter,
while the eye was lost above in undeveloped regions. Below, there was a
surface of smooth stones, which were comfortably carpeted over with
buffalo robes. At one side was a diminutive fireplace, or furnace,
constructed of three flat stones about three inches in thickness. The
largest was laid horizontally on the ground, and the others placed
upright on it, and attached to a clay chimney, that was by some means
confined to the interior side of the tree, and ran upward until it was
lost in the darkness. After gazing in amazement several minutes at this
strange contrivance, Joe exclaimed:

“Sneak, I don’t understand this! Where does that smoke go to?”

“Go out doors and see if you can’t see,” replied Sneak, placing more
fuel on the blazing fire.

“Go out of the _hole_ you mean to say,” said Joe, creeping out.

“You may call it jest what you like,” said Sneak; “but I’ll be switched
if many folks lives in _higher_ houses than I does.”

“Well, I’ll declare!” cried Joe.

“What ails you now?” asked Sneak, thrusting his head out of the
aperture, and regarding the surprise of Joe with much satisfaction.

“Why, I see the smoke pouring out of a hole in a _limb_ not much bigger
than my thigh!” cried Joe. This was true. Sneak had mounted up in the
tree before building his chimney, and finding a hollow bough that
communicated directly with the main trunk had cut through into the
cavity, and thus made a vent for the escape of the smoke.

“Come in now, and get something to eat,” said Sneak. This was an
invitation that Joe was never known to decline. After casting another
admiring glance at the blue vapour that issued from the bough some
ninety feet from the ground, he passed through the cavity with
alacrity.

“Where are you?” cried Joe, upon entering and looking round in vain for
his host, who had vanished in a most inexplicable manner. Joe stared in
astonishment. The lighted lamp remained on a box, that was designed for
the breakfast-table, and on which there was in truth an abundance of
dried venison and smoking potatoes. But where was Sneak?

“Sneak, what’s become of you?” continued Joe, eagerly listening for a
reply, and anxiously scanning the tempting repast set before him. “I
know you’re at some of your tricks,” he added, and sitting down at the
table, commenced in no indifferent manner to discuss the savoury
venison and potatoes.

“I’m only up stairs,” cried Sneak, in the darkness above; and throwing
down a rope made of hides, the upper end of which was fastened to the
tree within, he soon followed, slipping briskly down, and without delay
sprang to Joe’s assistance.

When the meal was finished, or rather, when every thing set before them
had vanished, Sneak rose up and thrust his long neck out of the
aperture.

“What are you looking at?” asked Joe.

“I’m looking at the warm sun shining agin yonder side of the hill,”
said Sneak; “how’d you like to go a bee-hunting?”

“A bee-hunting!” iterated Joe. “I wonder if you think we could find a
bee at this season of the year? and I should like to know what it’d be
worth when we found it.”

“Plague take the bee—I mean the _honey_—don’t you like wild honey?”
continued Sneak.

“Yes,” said Joe; “but how can you find any when there’s such a snow as
this on the ground?”

“When there’s a snow, that’s the time to find ’em,” said Sneak;
“peticuly when the sun shines warm. Jest come out here and look,” he
continued, stepping along, and followed by Joe; “don’t you see yander
big stooping limb?”

“Yes,” replied Joe, gazing at the bough pointed out.

“Well,” continued Sneak, “there’s a bee’s nest in that. Look here,” he
added, picking from the snow several dead bees that had been thrown
from the hive; “now this is the way with all wild bees (but these are
tame, for they live in my house), for when there comes a warm day
they’re sartin as fate to throw out the dead ones, and we can find
where they are as easy as any thing in the world.”

“Sneak, my mouth’s watering—suppose we take the axe and go and hunt for
some honey.”

“Let’s be off, then,” said Sneak, getting his axe, and preparing to
place the stone against the tree.

“Stop, Sneak,” said Joe; “let me get my gun before you shut the
_door_.”

“I guess we’d better leave our guns, and then we won’t be so apt to
break through,” replied Sneak, closing up the aperture.

“The bees won’t sting us, will they?” asked Joe, turning to his
companion when they had attained the high-timbered ridge that ran
parallel with the valley.

“If you chaw ’em in your mouth they will,” replied Sneak, striding
along under the trees with his head bent down, and minutely examining
every small dark object he found lying on the surface of the snow.

“I know that as well as you do,” continued Joe, “because that would
thaw them.”

“Well, if they’re froze, how _kin_ they sting you?”

“You needn’t be so snappish,” replied Joe. “I just asked for
information. I know as well as anybody they’re frozen or torpid.”

“Or what?” asked Sneak.

“Torpid,” said Joe.

“I’ll try to ’member that word,” continued Sneak, peeping under a
spreading oak that was surrounded by a dense hazel thicket.

“Do,” continued Joe, contemptuously, “and if you’ll only recollect all
you hear me say, you may get a tolerable education after a while.”

“I’ll be shivered if this ain’t the edication I wan’t,” said Sneak,
turning round with one or two dead bees in his hand, that he had found
near the root of the tree.

“Huzza!” cried Joe, “we’ll have a mess of honey now. I see the hole
where they are—its in a limb, and we won’t have to cut down the tree,”
and before Sneak could interpose, Joe mounted up among the branches,
and asked for the axe, saying he would have the bough off in five
minutes. Sneak gave it to him, and when he reached the place, (which
was not more than fifteen feet from the ground,) he commenced cutting
away with great eagerness. The cavity was large, and in a few minutes
the bough began to give way. In spite of Sneak’s gesticulations and
grimaces below, Joe did not bethink him that one of his feet still
rested on the bough beyond the place where he was cutting, but
continued to ply the axe with increasing rapidity. Presently the bough,
axe, and Joe, all fell together. Sneak was convulsed with laughter. Joe
sprang to his feet, and after feeling his limbs and ribs, announced
that no bones were broken, and laughed very heartily himself. They
began to split open the severed bough without los