aseaiitdc
emtt--

"Go home, then!"

At this coarse interruption an angry murmur ran through Denis's
companions, and several guns could be heard being loaded. Denis
restrained them by a sign.

This sign possessed a strange authority.

"Who is this man?" the combatants behind the barricade asked each other.
Suddenly they cried out,--

"He is a Representative of the People!"

Denis had, in fact, suddenly assumed his brother Gaston's sash.

What he had premeditated was about to be accomplished; the hour of the
heroic falsehood had arrived. He cried out,--

"Soldiers, do you know what the man is who is speaking to you at this
moment? He is not only a citizen, he is a Legislator! He is a
Representative chosen by Universal Suffrage! My name is Dussoubs, and I
am a Representative of the People. It is in the name of the National
Assembly, it is in the name of the Sovereign Assembly, it is in the name
of the People, and in the name of the Law, that I summon you to hear me.
Soldiers, you are the armed force. Well, then, when the Law speaks, the
armed force listens."

This time the silence was not broken.

We reproduce these words almost literally; such as they are, and such as
they have remained graven on the memory of those who heard them; but
what we cannot reproduce, and what should be added to these words, in
order to realize the effect, is the attitude, the accent, the thrill of
emotion, the vibration of the words issuing from this noble breast, the
intense impression produced by the terrible hour and place.

Denis Dussoubs continued: "He spoke for some twenty minutes," an
eye-witness has told me. Another has said, "He spoke with a loud voice;
the whole street heard him." He was vehement, eloquent, earnest; a judge
for Bonaparte, a friend for the soldiers. He sought to rouse them by
everything which could still vibrate in them; he recalled to them their
true wars, their true victories, the national glory, the ancient
military honor, the flag. He told them that all this was about to be
slain by the bullets from their guns. He adjured them, he ordered them
to join themselves to the People and to the Law; and then suddenly
coming back to the first words which he had pronounced, carried away by
that fraternity with which his soul overflowed, he interrupted himself
in the middle of a half-completed sentence, and cried out:--

"But to what purpose are all these words? It is not all this that is
wanted, it is a shake of the hand between brothers! Soldiers, you are
there opposite us, at a hundred paces from us, in a barricade, with the
sword drawn, with guns pointed; you are aiming directly at me; well
then, all of us who are here love you! There is not one of us who would
not give his life for one of you. You are the peasants of the fields of
France; we are the workmen of Paris. What, then, is in question? Simply
to see each other, to speak to each other, and not to cut each other's
throats. Shall we try this? Say! Ah! as for myself in this frightful
battle-field of civil war, I would rather die than kill. Look now, I am
going to get off this barricade and come to you. I am unarmed; I only
know that you are my brothers. I am confident, I am calm; and if one of
you presents his bayonet at me, I will offer him my hand."

He finished speaking.

A voice cried out from the opposite barricade, "Advance in order!"

Then they saw him slowly descend the dimly-lighted crest of the
barricade, paving-stone by paving-stone, and plunge with head erect into
the dark street.

From the barricade all eyes followed him with an inexpressible anxiety.
Hearts ceased beating, mouths no longer breathed.

No one attempted to restrain Denis Dussoubs. Each felt that he was going
where he ought to go. Charpentier wished to accompany him. "Would you
like me to go with you?" he cried out to him. Dussoubs refused, with a
shake of the head.

Dussoubs, alone and grave, advanced towards the Mauconseil Barricade.
The night was so dark that they lost sight of him immediately. They
could distinguish only for a few seconds his peaceable and intrepid
bearing. Then he disappeared. They could no longer see anything. It was
an inauspicious moment. The night was dark and dumb. There could only be
heard in this thick darkness the sound of a measured and firm step dying
away in the distance.

After some time, how long no one could reckon, so completely did emotion
eclipse thought amongst the witnesses of this marvellous scene, a
glimmer of light appeared in the barricade of the soldiers; it was
probably a lantern which was being brought or taken away. By the flash
they again saw Dussoubs, he was close to the barricade, he had almost
reached it, he was walking towards it with his arms stretched out like
Christ.

Suddenly the word of command, "Fire!" was heard.

A fusillade burst forth.

They had fired upon Dussoubs when he was at the muzzles of their guns.

Dussoubs fell.

Then he raised himself and cried, "Long live the Republic!"

Another bullet struck him, he fell again. Then they saw him raise
himself once more, and heard him shout in a loud voice, "I die with the
Republic."

These were his last words.

In this manner died Denis Dussoubs.

It was not vainly that he had said to his brother, "Your sash will be
there."

He was anxious that this sash should do its duty. He determined in the
depths of his great soul that this sash should triumph either through
the law or through death.

That is to say, in the first case it would save Right, in the second
save Honor.

Dying, he could say, "I have succeeded."

Of the two possible triumphs of which he had dreamed, the gloomy triumph
was not the less splendid.

The insurgent of the Elysée thought that he had killed a Representative
of the People, and boasted of it. The sole journal published by the
_coup d'état_ under these different titles _Patrie_, _Univers_,
_Moniteur_, _Parisien_, etc., announced on the next day, Friday, the
5th, "that the ex-Representative Dussoubs (Gaston) had been killed at
the barricade of the Rue Neuve Saint Eustache, and that he bore 'a red
flag in his hand.'"




CHAPTER IV.


WHAT WAS DONE DURING THE NIGHT--THE PASSAGE DU SAUMON

When those on the barricade of the Petit Carreau saw Dussoubs fall, so
gloriously for his friends, so shamefully for his murderers, a moment of
stupor ensued. Was it possible? Did they really see this before them?
Such a crime committed by our soldiers? Horror filled every soul.

This moment of surprise did not last long. "Long live the Republic!"
shouted the barricade with one voice, and it replied to the ambuscade by
a formidable fire.

The conflict began. A mad conflict on the part of the _coup d'état_, a
struggle of despair on the side of the Republic. On the side of the
soldiers an appalling and cold blooded resolution, a passive and
ferocious obedience, numbers, good arms, absolute chiefs, pouches filled
with cartridges. On the side of the People no ammunition, disorder,
weariness, exhaustion, no discipline, indignation serving for a leader.

It appears that while Dussoubs was speaking, fifteen grenadiers,
commanded by a sergeant named Pitrois, had succeeded in gliding in the
darkness along the houses, and, unperceived and unheard, had taken up
their position close to the barricade. These fifteen men suddenly formed
themselves together with lowered bayonets at twenty paces from the
barricade ready to scale it. A volley received them. They fell back,
leaving several corpses in the gutter. Major Jeannin cried out, "Finish
them off." The entire battalion which occupied the Mauconseil barricade,
then appeared with raised bayonets upon the uneven crest of this
barricade, and from there without breaking their line, with a sudden,
but regulated and inexorable movement, sprang into the street. The four
companies, in close order, and as though mingled and hardly visible,
seemed like a wave precipitating itself with a great noise from the
height of the barricade.

At the barricade of the Petit Carreau they noted the manoeuvre, and had
paused in their fire. "Present," cried Jeanty Sarre, "but do not fire;
wait for the order."

Each put his gun to his shoulder, then placed the barrels between the
paving-stones, ready to fire, and waited.

As soon as it had quitted the Mauconseil redoubt, the battalion rapidly
formed itself into an attacking column, and a moment afterwards they
heard the intermittent sound of an advance at the double. It was the
battalion which was coming upon them.

"Charpentier," said Jeanty Sarre, "you have good eyes. Are they midway?"

"Yes," said Charpentier.

"Fire," said Jeanty Sarre.

The barricade fired. The whole street was filled with smoke. Several
soldiers fell. They could hear the cries of the wounded. The battalion,
riddled with balls, halted and replied by platoon firing.

Seven or eight combatants whose bodies reached above the barricade,
which had been made hastily and was too low were hit. Three were killed
on the spot. One fell wounded by a ball in his stomach, between Jeanty
Sarre and Charpentier. He shrieked out with pain.

"Quick, to the ambulance:" said Jeanty Sarre.

"Where?"

"In the Rue du Cadran."

Jeanty Sarre and Charpentier picked up the wounded man, the one by the
feet, the other by the head, and carried him to the du Cadran
through the passage in the barricade.

During all this time there was continued file firing. There no longer
seemed anything in the street but smoke, the balls whistling and
crossing each other, the brief and repeated commands, some plaintive
cries, and the flash of the guns lighting up the darkness.

Suddenly a loud void died out, "Forwards!" The battalion resumed its
double-quick march and threw itself upon the barricade.

Then ensued a horrible scene. They fought hand to hand, four hundred on
the one side, fifty on the other. They seized each other by the collar,
by the throat, by the mouth, by the hair. There was no longer a
cartridge in the barricade, but there remained despair. A workman,
pierced through and through, snatched the bayonet from his belly, and
stabbed a soldier with it. They did not see each other, but they
devoured each other. It was a desperate scuffle in the dark.

The barricade did not hold out for two minutes. In several places, it
may be remembered, it was low. It was rather stridden over than scaled.
That was all the more heroic. One of the survivors[28] told the writer
of these lines, "The barricade defended itself very badly, but the men
died very well."

All this took place while Jeanty Sarre and Charpentier were carrying the
wounded man to the ambulance in the Rue du Cadran. His wounds having
been attended to, they came back to the barricade. They had just reached
it when they heard themselves called by name. A feeble voice close by
said to them, "Jeanty Sarre! Charpentier!" They turned round and saw one
of their men who was dying leaning against a wall, and his knees giving
way beneath him. He was a combatant who had left the barricade. He had
only been able to take a few steps down the street. He held his hand
over his breast, where he had received a ball fired at close quarters.
He said to them in a scarcely audible voice, "The barricade is taken,
save yourselves."

"No," said Jeanty Sarre, "I must unload my gun." Jeanty Sarre re-entered
the barricade, fired a last shot and went away.

Nothing could be more frightful than the interior of the captured
barricade.

The Republicans, overpowered by numbers, no longer offered any
resistance. The officers cried out, "No prisoners!" The soldiers billed
those who were standing, and despatched those who had fallen. Many
awaited their death with their heads erect. The dying raised themselves
up, and shouted, "Long live the Republic!" Some soldiers ground their
heels upon the faces of the dead, so that they should not be recognized.
There, stretched out amongst the corpses, in the middle of the
barricade, with his hair in the gutter, was seen the all-but namesake of
Charpentier, Carpentier, the delegate of the committee of the Tenth
Arrondissement, who had been killed, and had fallen backwards, with two
balls in his breast. A lighted candle which the soldiers had taken from
the wine-shop was placed on a paving stone.

The soldiers were infuriated. One would say that they were revenging
themselves. On whom? A workman, named Paturel, received three balls and
six bayonet-thrusts, four of which were in the head. They thought that
he was dead, and they did not renew the attack. He felt them search him.
They took ten francs which he had about him. He did not die till six
days later, and he was able to relate the details which are given here.
We may note, by the way, that the name of Paturel does not figure upon
any of the lists of the corpses published by M. Bonaparte.

Sixty Republicans were shut up in this redoubt of the Petit Carreau.
Forty-six were killed there. These men had come there that morning free,
proud to fight, and joyous to die. At midnight all was at an end. The
night wagons carried away on the next day nine corpses to the hospital
cemetery, and thirty-seven to Montmartre.

Jeanty Sarre escaped by a miracle, as well as Charpentier, and a third
whose name we have not been able to ascertain. They glided along the
houses and reached the Passage du Saumon. The grated doors which closed
the Passage during the night only reached to the centre of the archway.
They climbed it and got over the spikes, at the risk of tearing
themselves. Jeanty Sarre was the first to climb it; having reached the
summit, one of the spikes pierced his trousers, hooked them, and Jeanty
Sarre fell headforemost upon the pavement. He got up again, he was only
stunned. The other two followed him, and gliding along the bars, all
three found themselves in the Passage. It was dimly lighted by a lamp
which shone at one end. In the meanwhile, they heard the soldiers, who
were pursuing them, coming up. In order to escape by the Rue Montmartre,
they would have to climb the grated gateway at the other end of the
Passage; their hands were grazed, their knees were bleeding; they were
dying of weariness; they were in no condition to recommence a similar
ascent.

Jeanty Sarre knew where the keeper of the Passage lived. He knocked at
his window, and begged him to open. The keeper refused.

At this moment the detachment which had been sent in pursuit of them
reached the grated gateway which they had just climbed. The soldiers,
hearing a noise in the Passage, passed the barrels of their guns through
the bars. Jeanty Sarre squeezed himself against the wall behind one of
those projecting columns which decorate the Passage; but the column was
very thin, and only half covered him. The soldiers fired, and smoke
filled the Passage. When it cleared away, Jeanty Sarre saw Charpentier
stretched on the stones, with his face to the ground. He had been shot
through the heart. Their other companion lay a few paces from him,
mortally wounded.

The soldiers did not scale the grated gateway, but they posted a
sentinel before it. Jeanty Sarre heard them going away by the Rue
Montmartre. They would doubtless come back.

No means of flight. He felt all the doors round his prison successively.
One of them at length opened. This appeared to him like a miracle.
Whoever could have forgotten to shut the door? Providence, doubtless. He
hid himself behind it, and remained there for more than an hour,
standing motionless, scarcely breathing. He no longer heard any sound;
he ventured out. The sentinel was no longer there. The detachment had
rejoined the battalion.

One of his old friends, a man to whom he had rendered services such as
are not forgotten, lived in this very Passage du Saumon. Jeanty Sarre
looked for the number, woke the porter, told him the name of his friend,
was admitted, went up the stairs, and knocked at the door. The door was
opened, his friend appeared in his nightshirt, with a candle in his
hand.

He recognized Jeanty Sarre, and cried out, "You here! What a state you
are in! Where hove you come from? From what riot? from what madness? And
then you come to compromise us all here? To have us murdered? To have us
shot? Now then, what do you want with me?"

"I want you to give me a brush down," said Jeanty Sarre.

His friend took a brush and brushed him, and Jeanty Sarre went away.
While going down the stairs, Jeanty Sarre cried out to his friend,
"Thanks!"

Such is the kind of hospitality which we have since received in Belgium,
in Switzerland, and even in England.

The next day, when they took up the bodies they found on Charpentier a
note-book and a pencil, and upon Denis Dussoubs a letter. A letter to a
woman. Even these stoic souls love.

On the 1st of December, Denis Dussoubs began this letter. He did not
finish it. Here it is:--

  "MY DEAR MARIE,

  "Have you experienced that sweet pain of feeling regret for him who
  regrets you? For myself since I left you I have known no other
  affliction than that of thinking of you. Even in my affliction itself
  there was something sweet and tender, and although I was troubled, I
  was nevertheless happy to feel in the depths of my heart how greatly
  I loved you by the regret which you cost me. Why are we separated?
  Why have I been forced to fly from you? For we were so happy! When I
  think of our little evenings so free from constraint, of our gay
  country chats with your sisters, I feel myself seized with a bitter
  regret. Did we not love each other clearly, my darling? We had no
  secret from each other because we had no need to have one, and our
  lips uttered the thoughts of our hearts without our thinking to keep
  anything back.

  "God has snatched away from us all these blessings, and nothing will
  console me for having lost them; do you not lament with me the evils
  of absence?

  "How seldom we see those whom we love! Circumstances take us far from
  them, and our soul tormented and attracted out of ourselves lives in
  a perpetual anguish. I feel this sickness of absence. I imagine
  myself wherever you are. I follow your work with my eyes, or I listen
  to your words, seated beside you and seeking to divine the word which
  you are about to utter; your sisters sew by our side. Empty
  dreams--illusions of a moment--my hand seeks yours; where are you, my
  beloved one?

  "My life is an exile. Far from those whom I love and by whom I am
  loved, my heart calls them and consumes away in its grief. No, I do
  not love the great cities and their noise, towns peopled with
  strangers where no one knows you and where you know no one, where
  each one jostles and elbows the other without ever exchanging a
  smile. But I love our quiet fields, the peace of home, and the voice
  of friends who greet you. Up to the present I have always lived in
  contradiction with my nature; my fiery blood, my nature so hostile to
  injustice, the spectacle of unmerited miseries have thrown me into a
  struggle of which I do not foresee the issue, a struggle in which
  will remain to the end without fear and without reproach, that which
  daily breaks me down and consumes my life.

  "I tell you, my much-loved darling, the secret miseries of my heart;
  no, I do not blush for what my hand has just written, but my heart is
  sick and suffering, and I tell it to you. I suffer... I wish to blot
  out these lines, but why? Could they offend you? What do they contain
  that could wound my darling? Do I not know your affection, and do I
  not know that you love me? Yes, you have not deceived me, I did not
  kiss a lying mouth; when seated on my knees you lulled me with the
  charm of your words, I believed you. I wished to bind myself to a
  burning iron bar; weariness preys upon me and devours me. I feel a
  maddening desire to recover life. Is it Paris that produces this
  effect upon me? I always yearn to be in places where I am not. I live
  here to a complete solitude. I believe you, Marie...."

Charpentier's note-book only contained this line, which he had written
in the darkness at the foot of the barricade while Denis Dussoubs was
speaking:--

  Admonet et magna testatur voce per umbras.


[28] February 18. Louvain.




CHAPTER V.


OTHER DEEDS OF DARKNESS

Yvan had again seen Conneau. He corroborated the information given in
the letter of Alexandre Dumas to Bocage; with the fact we had the names.
On the 3d of December at M. Abbatucci's house, 31, Rue Caumartin, in the
presence of Dr. Conneau and of Piétri, a Corsican, born at Vezzani,
named Jacques François Criscelli,[29] a man attached to the secret and
personal service of Louis Bonaparte, had received from Piétri's own
mouth the offer of 25,000 francs "to take or kill Victor Hugo." He had
accepted, and said, "That is all very well if I am alone. But suppose
there are two of us?"

Piétri had answered,--

"Then there will be 50,000 francs."

This communication, accompanied by urgent prayers, had been made to me
by Yvan in the Rue de Monthabor, while we were still at Dupont White's.

This said, I continue my story.

The massacre of the 4th did not produce the whole of its effect until
the next day, the 5th. The impulse given by us to the resistance still
lasted for some hours, and at nightfall, in the labyrinth of houses
ranging from the Rue du Petit Carreau to the Rue du Temple, there was
fighting. The Pagevin, Neuve Saint Eustache, Montorgueil, Rambuteau,
Beaubourg, and Transnonain barricades were gallantly defended. There,
there was an impenetrable network of streets and crossways barricaded by
the People, surrounded by the Army.

The assault was merciless and furious.

The barricade of the Rue Montorgueil was one of those which held out the
longest. A battalion and artillery was needed to carry it. At the last
moment it was only defended by three men, two shop-clerks and a
lemonade-seller of an adjoining street. When the assault began the night
was densely dark, and the three combatants escaped. But they were
surrounded. No outlets. Not one door was open. They climbed the grated
gateway of the Passage Verdeau as Jeanty Sarre and Charpentier had
scaled the Passage du Saumon, had jumped over, and had fled down the
Passage. But the other grated gateway was closed, and like Jeanty Sarre
and Charpentier they had no time to climb it. Besides, they heard the
soldiers corning on both sides. In a corner at the entrance of the
Passage there were a few planks which had served to close a stall, and
which the stall-keeper was in the habit of putting there. They hid
themselves beneath these planks.

The soldiers who had taken the barricade, after having searched the
streets, bethought themselves of searching the Passage. They also
climbed over the grated gateway, looked about everywhere with lanterns,
and found nothing They were going away, when one of them perceived the
foot of one of these three unfortunate men which was projecting from
beneath the planks.

They killed all three of them on the spot with bayonet-thrusts. They
cried out, "Kill us at once! Shoot us! Do not prolong our misery."

The neighboring shop-keepers heard these cries, but dared not open their
doors or their windows, for fear, as one of them said the next day,
"that they should do the same to them."

The execution at an end, the executioners left the three victims lying
in a pool of blood on the pavement of the Passage. One of those
unfortunate men did not die until eight o'clock next morning.

No one had dared to ask for mercy; no one had dared to bring any help.
They left them to die there.

One of the combatants of the Rue Beaubourg was more fortunate. They were
pursuing him. He rushed up a staircase, reached a roof, and from there a
passage, which proved to be the top corridor of an hotel. A key was in
the door. He opened it boldly, and found himself face to face with a man
who was going to bed. It was a tired-out traveller who had arrived at
the hotel that very evening. The fugitive said to the traveller, "I am
lost, save me!" and explained him the situation in three words.

The traveller said to him, "Undress yourself, and get into my bed." And
then he lit a cigar, and began quietly to smoke. Just as the man of the
barricade had got into bed a knock came at the door. It was the solders
who were searching the house. To the questions which they asked him the
traveller answered, pointing to the bed, "We are only two here. We have
just arrived here. I am smoking my cigar, and my brother is asleep." The
waiter was questioned, and confirmed the traveller's statement. The
soldiers went away, and no one was shot.

We will say this, that the victorious soldiers killed less than on the
preceding day. They did not massacre in all the captured barricades. The
order had been given on that day to make prisoners. It might also be
believed that a certain humanity existed. What was this humanity? We
shall see.

At eleven o'clock at night all was at an end.

They arrested all those whom they found in the streets which had been
surrounded, whether combatants or not, they had all the wine-shops and
the _cafés_ opened, they closely searched the houses, they seized all
the men whom they could find, only leaving the women and the children.
Two regiments formed in a square carried away all these prisoners
huddled together. They took them to the Tuileries, and shut them up in
the vast cellar situated beneath the terrace at the waterside.

On entering this cellar the prisoners felt reassured. They called to
mind that in June, 1848, a great number of insurgents had been shut up
there, and later on had been transported. They said to themselves that
doubtless they also would be transported, or brought before the Councils
of War, and that they had plenty of time before them.

They were thirsty. Many of them had been fighting since that morning,
and nothing parches tire mouth so much as biting cartridges. They asked
for drink. Three pitchers of water were brought to them.

A sort of security suddenly fell upon them. Amongst them were several
who had been transported in June, 1848, and who had already been in that
cellar, and who said, "In June they were not so humane. They left us for
three days without food or drink." Some of them wrapped themselves up in
their overcoats or cloaks, lay down, and slept. At one o'clock in the
morning a great noise was heard outside. Soldiers, carrying torches,
appeared in the cellars, the prisoners who were sleeping woke with a
start, an officer ordered them to get up.

They made them go out anyhow as they had come in. As they went out they
coupled them two by two at random, and a sergeant counted them in a loud
voice. They asked neither their names, nor their professions, nor their
families, nor who they were, nor whence they came; they contented
themselves with the numbers. The numbers sufficed for what they were
about to do.

In this manner they counted 337. The counting having come to an end,
they ranged them in close columns, still two by two and arm-in-arm. They
were not tied together, but on each side of the column, on the right and
on the left, there were three files of soldiers keeping them within
their ranks, with guns loaded; a battalion was at their head, a
battalion in their rear. They began to march, pressed together and
enclosed in this moving frame of bayonets.

At the moment when the column set forward, a young law-student, a fair
pale Alsatian, of some twenty years, who was in their ranks, asked a
captain, who was marching by him with his sword drawn,--

"Where are we going?"

The officer made no reply.

Having left the Tuileries, they turned to the right, and followed the
quay as far as the Pont de la Concorde. They crossed the Pont de la
Concorde, and again turned to the right. In this manner they passed
before the esplanade of the Invalides, and reached the lonely quay of
Gros-Caillou.

As we have just said, they numbered 337, and as they walked two by two,
there was one, the last, who walked alone. He was one of the most daring
combatants of the Rue Pagevin, a friend of Lecomte the younger. By
chance the sergeant, who was posted in the inner file by his side, was a
native of the same province. On passing under a street-lamp they
recognized each other. They exchanged quickly a few words in a whisper.

"Where are we going?" asked the prisoner.

"To the military school," answered the sergeant. And he added, "Ah! my
poor lad!"

And then he kept at a distance from the prisoner.

As this was the end of the column, there was a certain space between the
last rank of the soldiers who formed the line, and the first rank of the
company which closed the procession.

As they reached the lonely boulevard of Gros-Caillon, of which we have
just spoken, the sergeant drew near to the prisoner, and said to him in
a rapid and low tone,--

"One can hardly see here. It is a dark spot. On the left there are
trees. Be off!"

"But," said the prisoner, "they will fire at me."

"They will miss you."

"But suppose they kill me?"

"It will be no worse than what awaits you."

The prisoner understood, shook the sergeant's hand, and taking advantage
of the space between the line of soldiers and rear-ground, rushed with a
single bound outside the column, and disappeared in the darkness beneath
the trees.

"A man is escaping!" cried out the officer who commanded the last
company. "Halt! Fire!"

The column halted. The rear-guard company fired at random in the
direction taken by the fugitive, and, as the sergeant had foreseen,
missed him. In a few moments the fugitive had reached the streets
adjoining the tobacco manufactory, and had plunged into them. They did
not pursue him. They had more pressing work on hand.

Besides, confusion might have arisen in their ranks, and to recapture
one they risked letting the 336 escape.

The column continued its march. Having reached the Pont d'Iéna, they
turned to the left, and entered into the Champ de Mars.

There they shot them all.

These 336 corpses were amongst those which were carried to Montmartre
Cemetery, and which were buried there with their heads exposed.

In this manner their families were enabled to recognize them. The
Government learned who they were after killing them.

Amongst these 336 victims were a large number of the combatants of the
Rue Pagevin and the Rue Rambuteau, of the Rue Neuve Saint Eustache and
the Porte Saint Denis. There were also 100 passers-by, whom they had
arrested because they happened to be there, and without any particular
reason.

Besides, we will at once mention that the wholesale executions from the
3d inst. were renewed nearly every night. Sometimes at the Champ de
Mars, sometimes at the Prefecture of Police, sometimes at both places at
once.

When the prisons were full, M. de Maupas said "Shoot!" The fusillades at
the Prefecture took place sometimes in the courtyard, sometimes in the
Rue de Jérusalem. The unfortunate people whom they shot were placed
against the wall which bears the theatrical notices. They had chosen
this spot because it is close by the sewer-grating of the gutter, so
that the blood would run down at once, and would leave fewer traces. On
Friday, the 5th, they shot near this gutter of the Rue de Jérusalem 150
prisoners. Some one[30] said to me, "On the next day I passed by there,
they showed the spot; I dug between the paving-stones with the toe of my
boot, and I stirred up the mud. I found blood."

This expression forms the whole history of the _coup d'état_, and will
form the whole history of Louis Bonaparte. Stir up this mud, you will
find blood.

Let this then be known to History:--

The massacre of the boulevard had this infamous continuation, the secret
executions. The _coup d'état_ after having been ferocious became
mysterious. It passed from impudent murder in broad day to hidden murder
at night.

Evidence abounds.

Esquiros, hidden in the Gros-Caillou, heard the fusillades on the Champ
de Mars every night.

At Mazas, Chambolle, on the second night of his incarceration, heard
from midnight till five o'clock in the morning, such volleys that he
thought the prison was attacked.

Like Montferrier, Desmoulins bore evidence to blood between the
paving-stones of the Rue de Jérusalem.

Lieutenant-Colonel Cailland, of the ex-Republican Guard, is crossing the
Pont Neuf; he sees some _sergents de ville_ with muskets to their
shoulders, aiming at the passers-by; he says to them, "You dishonor the
uniform." They arrest him. They search him. A _sergent de ville_ says to
him, "If we find a cartridge upon you, we shall shoot you." They find
nothing. They take him to the Prefecture of Police, they shut him up in
the station-house. The director of the station-house comes and says to
him, "Colonel, I know you well. Do not complain of being here. You are
confided to my care. Congratulate yourself on it. Look here, I am one of
the family, I go and I come, I see, I listen; I know what is going on; I
know what is said; I divine what is not said. I hear certain noises
during the night; I see contain traces in the morning. As for myself I
am not a bad fellow. I am taking care of you. I am keeping you out of
the way. At the present moment be contented to remain with me. If you
were not here you would be underground."

An ex-magistrate, General Leflô's brother-in-law, is conversing on the
Pont de la Concorde with some officers before the steps of the Chamber;
some policemen come up to him: "You are tampering with the army." He
protests, they throw him into a vehicle, and they take him to the
Prefecture of Police. As he arrives there he sees a young man, in a
blouse and a cap, passing on the quay, who is being shoved along by
three municipal guards with the butt-ends of their muskets. At an
opening of the parapet, a guard shouts to him, "Go in there." The man
goes in. Two guards shoot him in the back. He falls. The third guard
despatches him with a shot in his ear.

On the 13th the massacres were not yet at an end. On the morning of that
day, in the dim light of the dawn, a solitary passer-by, going along the
Rue Saint Honoré, saw, between two lines of horse-soldiers, three wagons
wending their way, heavily loaded. These wagons could be traced by the
stains of blood which dripped from them. They came from the Champ de
Mars, and were going to the Montmartre Cemetery. They were full of
corpses.


[29] It was this same Criscelli, who later on at Vaugirard in the Rue du
Trancy, killed by special order of the Prefect of Police a man named
Kech, "suspected of plotting the assassination of the Emperor."

[30] The Marquis Sarrazin de Montferrier, a relative of my eldest
brother. I can now mention his name.




CHAPTER VI.


THE CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE

Al danger being over, all scruples vanished. Prudent and wise people
could now give their adherence to the _coup d'état_, they allowed their
names to be posted up.

Here is the placard:

  "FRENCH REPUBLIC.

  "_In the name of the French People_.

  "The President of the Republic,

  "Wishing, until the reorganization of the Legislative Body and the
  Council of State, to be surrounded by men who justly possess the esteem
  and the confidence of the country,

  "Has created a Consultative committee, which is composed of MM.--

  "Abbatucci, ex-Councillor of the Court of Cassation (of the Loiret).
  General Achard (of the Moselle).
  André, Ernest (of the Seine).
  André (of the Charente).
  D'Argout, Governor of the Bank, ex-Minister.
  General Arrighi of Padua (of Corsica).
  General de Bar (of the Seine).
  General Baraguay-d'Hilliers (of Doubs).
  Barbaroux, ex-Procureur-General (of the Réunion).
  Baroche, ex-Minister of the Interior and of Foreign Affairs,
      Vice-President of the Committee (of the Charente-Inférieure).
  Barret (Ferdinand), ex-Minister (of the Seine).
  Barthe, ex-Minister, first President (of the Cour de Comptes).
  Bataille (of the Haute-Vienne).
  Bavoux (Evariste) (of the Seine-et-Marne).
  De Beaumont (of the Somme).
  Bérard (of the Lot-et-Garonne).
  Berger, Prefect of the Seine (of Puy-de-Dôme).
  Bertrand (of the Yonne).
  Bidault (of the Cher).
  Bigrel (of the Côtes-du-Nord).
  Billault, barrister.
  Bineau, ex-Minister (of the Maine-et-Loire).
  Boinvilliers, ex-President of the body of barristers (of the Seine).
  Bonjean, Attorney-General of the Court of Cassation (of the Drome).
  Boulatignier.
  Bourbousson (of Vaucluse).
  Bréhier (of the Manche).
  De Cambacérès (Hubert).
  De Cambacérès (of the Aisne).
  Carlier, ex-Prefect of Police.
  De Casabianca, ex-Minister (of Corsica).
  General de Castellane, Commander-in-Chief at Lyons.
  De Caulaincourt (of Calvados).
  Vice-Admiral Cécile (of the Seine-Inférieure).
  Chadenet (of the Meuse).
  Charlemagne (of the Indre).
  Chassaigne-Goyon (of Puy de Dôme).
  General de Chasseloup-Laubat (of the Seine-Inférieure).
  Prosper de Chasseloup-Laubat (Charente-Inférieure).
  Chaix d'Est-Ange, Barrister of Paris (of the Marne).
  De Chazelles, Mayor of Clermont-Ferrand (of Puy-de-Dôme).
  Collas (of the Gironde).
  De Crouseilhes, ex-Councillor of the Court of Cassation, ex-Minister
      (of the Basses-Pyrénées).
  Curial (of the Orne).
  De Cuverville (of the Côtes-du-Nord).
  Dabeaux (of the Haute-Garonne).
  Dariste (of the Basses-Pyrénées).
  Daviel, ex-Minister.
  Delacoste, ex-Commissary-General (of the Rhône).
  Delajus (of the Charente-Inférieure).
  Delavau (of the Indre).
  Deltheil (of the Lot).
  Denjoy (of the Gironde).
  Desjobert (of the Seine-Inférieure).
  Desmaroux (of the Allier).
  Drouyn de Lhuys, ex-Minister (of the Seine-et-Marne).
  Théodore Ducos, Minister of the Marine and of the Colonies (of the
      Seine).
  Dumas (of the Institut) ex-Minister (of the Nord).
  Charles Dupin, of the Institut (of the Seine-Inférieure).
  General Durrieu (of the Landes).
  Maurice Duval, ex-Prefect.
  Eschassériaux (of the Charente-Inférieure).
  Marshal Excelmans, Grand Chancellor of the Legion of Honor.
  Ferdinand Favre (of the Loire-Inférieure) General de Flahaut,
      ex-Ambassador.
  Fortoul, Minister of Public Instruction (of the Basses-Alpes).
  Achille Fould, Minister of Finance (of the Seine).
  De Fourment (of the Somme).
  Fouquier-d'Hérouël (of the Aisne).
  Fremy (of the Yonne).
  Furtado (of the Seine).
  Gasc (of the Haute Garonne).
  Gaslonde (of the Manche).
  De Gasparin (ex-Minister).
  Ernest de Girardin (of the Charente).
  Augustin Giraud (of Maine-et-Loire).
  Charles Giraud, of the Institut, member of the Court of Public
      Instruction, ex-Minister.
  Godelle (of the Aisne).
  Goulhot de Saint-Germain (of the Manche).
  General de Grammont (of the Loire).
  De Grammont (of the Haute-Saône).
  De Greslan (of the Réunion).
  General de Grouchy (of the Gironde).
  Kallez Claparède (of the Bas-Rhin).
  General d'Hautpoul, ex-Minister (of the Aude).
  Hébert (of the Aisne).
  De Heeckeren (of the Haut-Rhin).
  D'Hérembault (of the Pas-de-Calais).
  Hermann.
  Heurtier (of the Loire).
  General Husson (of the Aube).
  Janvier (of the Tarn-et-Garonne).
  Lacaze (of the Hautes-Pyrénées).
  Lacrosse, ex-Minister (of Finistère).
  Ladoucette (of the Moselle).
  Frédéric de Lagrange (of the Gers).
  De Lagrange (of the Gironde).
  General de La Hitte, ex-Minister.
  Delangle, ex-Attorney-General.
  Lanquetin, President of the Municipal Commission.
  De la Riboissière (of Ille-et-Vilaine).
  General Lawoestine.
  Lebeuf (of the Seine-et-Marne).
  Genéral Lebreton (of the Eure-et-Loir).
  Le Comte (of the Yonne).
  Le Conte (of the Côtes-du-Nord).
  Lefebvre-Duruflé, Minister of Commerce (of the Eure).
  Lélut (of the Haute-Saône).
  Lemarois (of the Manche).
  Lemercier (of the Charente). Lequien (of the Pas-de-Calais).
  Lestiboudois (of the Nord).
  Levavasseur (of the Seine-Inférieure).
  Le Verrier (of the Manche).
  Lezay de Marnésia (of Loir-et-Cher).
  General Magnan, Commander-in-chief of the Army of Paris.
  Magne, Minister of Public Works (of the Dordogne).
  Edmond Maigne (of the Dordogne).
  Marchant (of the Nord).
  Mathieu Bodet, Barrister at the Court of Cassation.
  De Maupas, Prefect of Police.
  De Mérode (of the Nord).
  Mesnard, President of the Chamber of the Court of Cassation.
  Meynadier, ex-Prefect (of the Lozère).
  De Montalembert (of the Doubs).
  De Morny (of the Puy-de-Dôme).
  De Mortemart (of the Seine-Inférieure).
  De Mouchy (of the Oise).
  De Moustiers (of the Doubs).
  Lucien Murat (of the Lot).
  General d'Ornano (of the Indre-et-Loire).
  Pepin Lehalleur (of the Seine-et-Marne).
  Joseph Périer, Governor of the Bank.
  De Persigny (of the Nord).
  Pichon, Mayor of Arras (of the Pas de Calais).
  Portalis, First President of the Court of Cassation.
  Pongerard, Mayor of Pennes (of the Ille-et-Vilaine).
  General de Préval.
  De Rancé (of Algeria).
  General Randon, ex-Minister, Governor-General of Algeria.
  General Regnauld de Saint-Jean-d'Angély, ex-Minister (of the
      Charente-Inférieure).
  Renouard de Bussière (of the Bas-Rhin).
  Renouard (of the Lozère).
  General Rogé.
  Rouher, Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice (of the Puy-de-Dôme).
  De Royer, ex-Minister, Attorney-General at the Court of Appeal of
      Paris.
  General de Saint-Arnaud, Minister of War.
  De Saint-Arnaud, Barrister at the Court of Appeal of Paris.
  De Salis (of the Moselle).
  Sapey (of the Isère).
  Schneider, ex-Minister.
  De Ségur d'Aguesseau (of the Hautes-Pyréneés).
  Seydoux (of the Nord).
  Amédée Thayer.
  Thieullen (of the Côtes-du-Nord).
  De Thorigny, ex-Minister.
  Toupot de Béveaux (of the Haute-Marne).
  Tourangin, ex-Prefect. Troplong, First President of the Court of
      Appeal.
  De Turgot, Minister for Foreign Affairs.
  Vaillant, Marshal of France.
  Vaisse, ex-Minister (of the Nord).
  De Vandeul (of the Haute-Marne).
  General Vast-Vimeux (of the Charente-Inférieure).
  Vauchelle, Mayor of Versailles.
  Viard (of the Meurthe).
  Vieillard (of the Manche).
  Vuillefroy.
  Vuitry, Under-Secretary of State at the Ministry of Finance De Wagram.

  "The President of the Republic,

  "LOUIS NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.

  "Minister of the Interior, DE MORNY."

The name of Bourbousson is found on this list.

It would be a pity if this name were lost.

At the same time as this placard appeared the protest of M. Daru, as
follows:--

  "I approve of the proceedings of the National Assembly at the Mairie
  of the Tenth Arrondissement on the 2d of December, 1851, in which I was
  hindered from participating by force.

  "DARU."

Some of these members of the Consultative Committee came from Mazas or
from Mount Valerien. They had been detained in a cell for four-and-twenty
hours, and then released. It may be seen that these legislators bore
little malice to the man who had made them undergo this disagreeable
taste of the law.

Many of the personages comprised in this menagerie possessed no other
renown but the outcry caused by their debts, clamoring around them.
Such a one had been twice declared bankrupt, but this extenuating
circumstance was added, "not under his own name:" Another who belonged
to a literary or scientific circle was reputed to have sold his vote. A
third, who was handsome, elegant, fashionable, dandified, polished,
gilded, embroidered, owed his prosperity to a connection which indicated
a filthiness of soul.

Such people as these gave their adherence with little hesitation to the
deed which "saved society."

Some others, amongst those who composed this mosaic, possessed no
political enthusiasm, and merely consented to figure in this list in
order to keep their situations and their salaries; they were under the
Empire what they had been before the Empire, neuters, and during the
nineteen years of the reign, they continued to exercise their military,
judicial, or administrative functions unobtrusively, surrounded with the
right and proper respect due to inoffensive idiots.

Others were genuine politicians, belonging to that learned school which
begins with Guizot, and does not finish with Parieu, grave physicians of
social order, who reassure the frightened middle-classes, and who
preserve dead things.

  "Shall I lose my eye?" asked Messer Pancrace.
  "Not at all, my friend, I hold it in my hand."

In this quasi Council of State there were a goodly number of men of the
Police, a race of beings then held in esteem, Carlier, Piétri, Maupas,
etc.

Shortly after the 2d of December under the title of Mixed Commissions,
the police substituted itself for justice, drew up judgments, pronounced
sentences, violated every law judicially without the regular magistracy
interposing the slightest obstacle to this irregular magistracy: Justice
allowed the police to do what it liked with the satisfied look of a team
of horses which had just been relieved.

Some of the men inscribed on the list of this commission refused: Léon
Faucher Goulard, Mortemart, Frédéric Granier, Marchand, Maillard
Paravay, Beugnot. The newspapers received orders not to publish these
refusals.

M. Beugnot inscribed on his card: "Count Beugnot, who does not belong to
the Consultative Committee."

M. Joseph Périer went from corner to corner of the streets, pencil in
hand, scratching out his name from all the placards, saying, "I shall
take back my name wherever I find it."

General Baraguay d'Hilliers did not refuse. A brave soldier nevertheless;
he had lost an arm in the Russian war. Later on, he has been Marshall of
France; he deserved better than to have been created a Marshal by Louis
Bonaparte. It did not appear likely that he would have come to this.
During the last days of November General Baraguay d'Hilliers, seated in a
large arm-chair before the high fireplace of the Conference Hall of the
National Assembly, was warming himself; some one, one of his colleagues,
he who is writing these lines, sat down near him on the other side of the
fireplace. They did not speak to each other, one belonging to the Right,
the other to the Left; but M. Piscatory came in, who belonged a little to
the Right and a little to the Left. He addressed himself to Baraguay
d'Hilliers: "Well, general, do you know what they are saying?"

"What?"

"That one of these days the President will shut the door in our faces."

General Baraguay d'Hilliers answered, and I heard the answer,--"If M.
Bonaparte should close the door of the Assembly against us, France will
fling it wide open again."

Louis Bonaparte at one moment thought of entitling this committee the
"Executive Commission." "No," said Morny to him, "that would be to
credit them with courage. They will willingly be supporters; they will
not be proscribers."

General Rulhière was dismissed for having blamed the passive obedience
of the army.

Let us here mention an incident. Some days after the 4th of December,
Emmanuel Arago met M. Dupin, who was going up the Faubourg Saint Honoré.

"What!" said Arago, "are you going to the Elysée?"

M. Dupin answered, "I never go to disreputable houses."

Yet he went there.

M. Dupin, it may be remembered, was appointed Attorney-General at the
Court of Cessation.




CHAPTER VII.


THE OTHER LIST

Opposite to the list of adherents should be placed the list of the
proscribed. In this manner the two sides of the _coup d'état_ can be
seen at a glance.

  "DECREE.

  "ARTICLE I.--The ex-Representatives of the Assembly, whose names are
  found beneath, are expelled from French territory, from Algeria, and
  from the Colonies, for the sake of public safety:--

  "Edmond Valentine.          Charrassin.
  Paul Racouchot.             Bandsept.
  Agricol Perdiguier.         Savoye.
  Eugène Cholat.              Joly.
  Louis Latrade.              Combier.
  Michel Renaud.              Boysset.
  Joseph Benoist (du Rhône).  Duché.
  Joseph Burgard.             Ennery.
  Jean Colfavru.              Guilgot.
  Joseph Faure (du Rhone).    Hochstuhl.
  Pierre-Charles Gambon.      Michot Boutet.
  Charles Lagrange.           Baune.
  Martin Nadaud.              Bertholon.
  Barthélemy Terrier.         Schoelcher.
  Victor Hugo.                De Flotte.
  Cassal.                     Joigneaux.
  Signard.                    Laboulaye.
  Viguier.                    Bruys.
  Esquiros.                   Gaston Dussoubs.
  Madier de Montjau.          Guiter.
  Noël Parfait.               Lafon.
  Emile Péan.                 Lamarque.
  Pelletier.                  Pierre Lafranc.
  Raspail.                    Jules Leroux.
  Théodore Bac.               Francisque Maigne.
  Bancel.                     Malardier.
  Belin (Drôme).              Mathieu (de la Drôme).
  Bosse.                      Millotte.
  Bourzat.                    Roselli-Mollet.
  Brive.                      Charras.
  Chavoix.                    Saint-Ferreol.
  Clément Dulac.              Sommier.
  Dupout (de Bussac).         Testelin (Nord).

  "ARTICLE II.--In the event, contrary to the present decree, of one of
  the persons named in Article I. re-entering the prohibited limits, he
  may be transported for the sake of public safety.

  "Given at the Palace of the Tuileries, at the Cabinet Council assembled,
  January 9th, 1852.

  "LOUIS BONAPARTE.

  "DE MORNY, Minister of the Interior."

There was besides a list of the "provisionally exiled," on which figured
Edward Quinet, Victor Chauffour, General Laidet, Pascal Duprat, Versigny,
Antony Thouret, Thiers, Girardin, and Rémusat. Four Representatives,
Mathé, Greppo, Marc-Dufraisse, and Richardet, were added to the list of
the "expelled." Representative Miot was reserved for the tortures of the
casemates of Africa. Thus in addition to the massacres, the victory of
the _coup d'état_ was paid for by these figures: eighty-eight
Representatives proscribed, one killed.

I usually dined at Brussels in a café, called the Café des Mille
Colonnes, which was frequented by the exiles. On the 10th of January I
had invited Michel de Bourges to lunch, and we were sitting at the same
table. The waiter brought me the _Moniteur Français_; I glanced over it.

"Ah," said I, "here is the list of the proscribed." I ran my eye over it,
and I said to Michel de Bourges, "I have a piece of bad news to tell
you." Michel de Bourges turned pale. I added, "You are not on the list."
His face brightened.

Michel de Bourges, so dauntless in the face of death, was faint-hearted
in the face of exile.




CHAPTER VIII.


DAVID D'ANGERS

Brutalities and ferocities were mingled together. The great sculptor,
David d'Angers, was arrested in his own house, 16, Rue d'Assas; the
Commissary of Police on entering, said to him,--

"Have you any arms in your house?"

"Yes," Said David, "for my defence."

And he added,--

"If I had to deal with civilized people."

"Where are these arms?" rejoined the Commissary. "Let us see them."

David showed him his studio full of masterpieces.

They placed him in a _fiacre_, and drove him to the station-house of the
Prefecture of Police.

Although there was only space for 120 prisoners, there were 700 there.
David was the twelfth in a dungeon intended for two. No light nor air. A
narrow ventilation hole above their heads. A dreadful tub in a corner,
common to all, covered but not closed by a wooden lid. At noon they
brought them soup, a sort of warm and stinking water, David told me. They
stood leaning against the wall, and trampled upon the mattresses which
had been thrown on the floor, not having room to lie down on them. At
length, however, they pressed so closely to each other, that they
succeeded in lying down at full length. Their jailers had thrown them
some blankets. Some of them slept. At day break the bolts creaked, the
door was half-opened and the jailers cried out to them, "Get up!" They
went into the adjoining corridor, the jailer took up the mattresses,
threw a few buckets of water on the floor, wiped it up anyhow, replaced
the mattresses on the damp stones, and said to them, "Go back again."
They locked them up until the next morning. From time to time they
brought in 100 new prisoners, and they fetched away 100 old ones (those
who had been there for two or three days). What became of them?--At night
the prisoners could hear from their dungeon the sound of explosions, and
in the morning passers-by could see, as we have stated, pools of blood in
the courtyard of the Prefecture.

The calling over of those who went out was conducted in alphabetical
order.

One day they called David d'Angers. David took up his packet, and was
getting ready to leave, when the governor of the jail, who seemed to be
keeping watch over him, suddenly came up and said quickly, "Stay, M.
David, stay."

One morning he saw Buchez, the ex-President of the Constituent Assembly,
coming into his cell "Ah!" said David, "good! you have come to visit the
prisoners?"--"I am a prisoner," said Buchez.

They wished to insist on David leaving for America. He refused. They
contented themselves with Belgium. On the 19th December he reached
Brussels. He came to see me, and said to me, "I am lodging at the Grand
Monarque, 89, Rue des Fripiers."[31]

And he added laughing, "The Great Monarch--the King. The old
clothesmen--the Royalists, '89. The Revolution." Chance occasionally
furnishes some wit.


[31] _Anglice_, "old clothes men."




CHAPTER IX.


OUR LAST MEETING

On the 3d of December everything was coming in in our favor. On the 5th
everything was receding from us. It was like a mighty sea which was going
out. The tide had come in gloriously, it went out disastrously. Gloomy
ebb and flow of the people.

And who was the power who said to this ocean, "Thou shalt go no farther?"
Alas! a pigmy.

These hiding-places of the abyss are fathomless.

The abyss is afraid. Of what?

Of something deeper than itself. Of the Crime.

The people drew back. They drew back on the 5th; on the 6th they
disappeared.

On the horizon there could be seen nothing but the beginning of a species
of vast night.

This night has been the Empire.

We found ourselves on the 5th what we were on the 2d. Alone.

But we persevered. Our mental condition was this--desperate, yes;
discouraged, no.

Items of bad news came to us as good news had come to us on the evening
of the 3d, one after another. Aubry du Nord was at the Concièrgerie. Our
dear and eloquent Crémieux was at Mazas. Louis Blanc, who, although
banished, was coming to the assistance of France, and was bringing to us
the great power of his name and of his mind, had been compelled, like
Ledru Rollin, to halt before the catastrophe of the 4th. He had not been
able to get beyond Tournay.

As for General Neumayer, he had not "marched upon Paris," but he had come
there. For what purpose? To give in his submission.

We no longer possessed a refuge. No. 15, Rue Richelieu, was watched, No.
11, Rue Monthabor, had been denounced. We wandered about Paris, meeting
each other here and there, and exchanging a few words in a whisper, not
knowing where we should sleep, or whether we should get a meal; and
amongst those heads which did not know what pillow they should have at
night there was at least one upon which a price was set.

They accosted each other, and this is the sort of conversation they
held:--

"What has became of So-and-So?"

"He is arrested."

"And So-and-So?"

"Dead."

"And So-and-So?"

"Disappeared."

We held, however, one other meeting. This was on the 6th, at the house of
the Representative Raymond, in the Place de la Madeleine. Nearly all of
us met there. I was enabled to shake the hands of Edgar Quinet, of
Chauffour, of Clément Dulac, of Bancel, of Versigny, of Emile Péan, and I
again met our energetic and honest host of the Rue Blanche, Coppens, and
our courageous colleague, Pons Stande, whom we had lost sight of in the
smoke of the battle. From the windows of the room where we were
deliberating we could see the Place de la Madeleine and the Boulevards
militarily occupied, and covered with a fierce and deep mass of soldiers
drawn up in battle order, and which still seemed to face a possible
combat. Charamaule came in.

He drew two pistols from his great cloak, placed them on the table, and
said, "All is at an end. Nothing feasible and sensible remains, except a
deed of rashness. I propose it. Are you of my opinion, Victor Hugo?"

"Yes," I answered.

I did not know what he was going to say, but I knew that he would only
say that which was noble.

This was his proposition.

"We number," resumed he, "about fifty Representatives of the People,
still standing and assembled together. We are all that remains of the
National Assembly, of Universal Suffrage, of the Law, of Right.
To-morrow, where shall we be? We do not know. Scattered or dead. The hour
of to-day is ours; this hour gone and past, we have nothing left but the
shadow. The opportunity is unique. Let us profit by it."

He stopped, looked at us fixedly with his steadfast gaze, and resumed,--

"Let us take the advantage of this chance of being alive and the good
fortune of being together. The group which is here is the whole of the
Republic. Well, then; let us offer in our persons all the Republic to the
army, and let us make the army fall back before the Republic, and Might
fall back before Right. In that supreme moment one of the two must
tremble, Might or Right, and if Right does not tremble Might will
tremble. If we do not tremble the soldiers will tremble. Let us march
upon the Crime. If the Law advances, the Crime will draw back. In either
case we shall have done our duty. Living, we shall be preservers, dead,
we shall be heroes. This is what I propose."

A profound silence ensued.

"Let us put on our sashes, and let us all go down in a procession, two by
two, into the Place de la Madeleine. You can see that Colonel before that
large flight of steps, with his regiment in battle array; we will go to
him, and there, before his soldiers, I will summon him to come over to
the side of duty, and to restore his regiment to the Republic. If he
refuses ..."

Charamaule took his two pistols in his hands.

"... I will blow out his brains."

"Charamaule," said I, "I will be by your side."

"I knew that well," Charamaule said to me.

He added,--

"This explosion will awaken the people."

"But," several cried out, "suppose it does not awaken them?"

"We shall die."

"I am on your side," said I to him.

We each pressed the other's hand. But objections burst forth.

No one trembled, but all criticised the proposal. Would it not be
madness? And useless madness? Would it not be to play the last card of
the Republic without any possible chance of success? What good fortune
for Bonaparte! To crush with one blow all that remained of those who were
resisting and of those who were combating! To finish with them once for
all! We were beaten, granted, but was it necessary to add annihilation to
defeat? No possible chance of success. The brains of an army cannot be
blown out. To do what Charamaule advised would be to open the tomb,
nothing more. It would be a magnificent suicide, but it would be a
suicide. Under certain circumstances it is selfish to be merely a hero. A
man accomplishes it at once, he becomes illustrious, he enters into
history, all that is very easy. He leaves to others behind him the
laborious work of a long protest, the immovable resistance of the exile,
the bitter, hard life of the conquered who continues to combat the
victory. Some degree of patience forms a part of politics. To know how
to await revenge is sometimes more difficult than to hurry on its
catastrophe. There are two kinds of courage--bravery and perseverance;
the first belongs to the soldier, the second belongs to the citizen. A
hap-hazard end, however dauntless, does not suffice. To extricate oneself
from the difficulty by death, it is only too easily done: what is
required, what is the reverse of easy, is to extricate one's country from
the difficulty. No, said those high-minded men, who opposed Charamaule
and myself, this to-day which you propose to us is the suppression of
to-morrow; take care, there is a certain amount of desertion in
suicide....

The word "desertion" grievously wounded Charamaule. "Very well," said he,
"I abandon the idea."

This scene was exceedingly grand, and Quinet later on, when in exile,
spoke to me of it with deep emotion.

We separated. We did not meet again.

I wandered about the streets. Where should I sleep? That was the question.
I thought that No. 19, Rue Richelieu would probably be as much watched as
No. 15. But the night was cold, and I decided at all hazards to re-enter
this refuge, although perhaps a hazardous one. I was right to trust myself
to it. I supped on a morsel of bread, and I passed a very good night. The
next morning at daybreak on waking I thought of the duties which awaited
me. I thought that I was abut to go out, and that I should probably not
come back to the room; I took a little bread which remained, and I
crumbled it on the window-sill for the birds.




CHAPTER X.


DUTY CAN HAVE TWO ASPECTS

Had it been in the power of the Left at any moment to prevent the _coup
d'état_?

We do not think so.

Nevertheless here is a fact which we believe we ought not to pass by in
silence. On the 16th November, 1851, I was in my study at home at 37, Rue
de la Tour d'Auvergne; it was about midnight. I was working. My servant
opened the door.

"Will you see M. ----, sir?"

And he mentioned a name.

"Yes," I said.

Some one came in.

I shall only speak reservedly of this eminent and distinguished man. Let
it suffice to state that he had the right to say when mentioning the
Bonapartes "my family."

It is known that the Bonaparte family is divided into two branches, the
Imperial family and the private family. The Imperial family had the
tradition of Napoleon, the private family had the tradition of Lucien: a
shade of difference which, however, had no reality about it.

My midnight visitor took the other corner of the fireplace.

He began by speaking to me of the memoirs of a very highminded and
virtuous woman, the Princess ----, his mother, the manuscript of which he
had confided to me, asking my advice as to the utility or the suitability
of their publication; this manuscript, besides being full of interest,
possessed for me a special charm, because the handwriting of the Princess
resembled my mother's handwriting. My visitor, to whom I gave it back,
turned over the leaves for a few moments, and then suddenly interrupting
himself, he turned to me and said,--

"The Republic is lost."

I answered,--

"Almost."

He resumed,--

"Unless you save it."

"I?"

"You."

"How so?"

"Listen to me."

Then he set forth with that clearness, complicated at times with
paradoxes, which is one of the resources of his remarkable mind, the
situation, at the same time desperate and strong, in which we were
placed.

This situation, which moreover I realized as well as he himself, was
this:--

The Right of the Assembly was composed of about 400 members, and the Left
of about 180. The four hundred of the majority belonged by thirds to
three parties, the Legitimist party, the Orleanist party, the Bonapartist
party, and in a body to the Clerical party. The 180 of the minority
belonged to the Republic. The Right mistrusted the Left, and had taken a
precaution against the minority.

A Vigilance Committee, composed of sixteen members of the Right, charged
with impressing unity upon this trinity of parties, and charged with the
task of carefully watching the Left, such was this precaution. The Left
at first had confined itself to irony, and borrowing from me a word to
which people then attached, though wrongly, the idea of decrepitude, had
called the sixteen Commissioners the "Burgraves." The irony subsequently
turning into suspicion, the Left had on its side ended by creating a
committee of sixteen members to direct the Left, and observe the Right;
these the Right had hastened to name the "Red Burgraves." A harmless
rejoinder. The result was that the Right watched the Left, and that the
Left watched the Right, but that no one watched Bonaparte. They were two
flocks of sheep so distrustful of one another that they forgot the wolf.
During that time, in his den at the Elysée, Bonaparte was working. He was
busily employing the time which the Assembly, the majority and the
minority, was losing in mistrusting itself. As people feel the loosening
of the avalanche, so they felt the catastrophe tottering in the gloom.
They kept watch upon the enemy, but they did not turn their attention in
the true direction. To know where to fix one's mistrust is the secret of
a great politician. The Assembly of 1851 did not possess this shrewd
certainty of eyesight, their perspective was bad, each saw the future
after his own fashion, and a sort of political short-sightedness blinded
the Left as well as the Right; they were afraid, but not where fear was
advisable; they were in the presence of a mystery, they had an ambuscade
before them, but they sought it where it did not exist, and they did not
perceive where it really lay. Thus it was that these two flocks of sheep,
the majority, and the minority faced each other affrightedly, and while
the leaders on one side and the guides on the other, grave and attentive,
asked themselves anxiously what could be the mewing of the grumbling, of
the Left on the one side, of the bleatings of the Right on the other,
they ran the risk of suddenly feeling the four claws of the _coup d'état_
fastened in their shoulders.

My visitor said to me,-

"You are one of the Sixteen!"

"Yes," answered I, smiling; "a 'Red Burgrave.'"

"Like me, a 'Red Prince.'"

And his smile responded to mine.

He resumed,--

"You have full powers?"

"Yes. Like the others."

And I added,--

"Not more than the others. The Left has no leaders."

He continued,--

"Yon, the Commissary of Police, is a Republican?'

"Yes."

"He would obey an order signed by you?"

"Possibly."

"_I_ say, without doubt."

He looked at me fixedly.

"Well, then, have the President arrested this night."

It was now my turn to look at him.

"What do you mean?"

"What I say."

I ought to state that his language was frank, resolute, and
self-convinced, and that during the whole of this conversation, and now,
and always, it has given me the impression of honesty.

"Arrest the President!" I cried.

Then he set forth that this extraordinary enterprise was an easy matter;
that the Army was undecided; that in the Army the African Generals
counterpoised the President; that the National Guard favored the
Assembly, and in the Assembly the Left; that Colonel Forestier answered
for the 8th Legion; Colonel Gressier for the 6th, and Colonel Howyne for
the 5th; that at the order of the Sixteen of the Left there would be an
immediate taking up of arms; that my signature would suffice; that,
nevertheless, if I preferred to call together the Committee, in Secret
Session, we could wait till the next day; that on the order from the
Sixteen, a battalion would march upon the Elysée; that the Elysée
apprehended nothing, thought only of offensive, and not of defensive
measures, and accordingly would be taken by surprise; that the soldiers
would not resist the National Guard; that the thing would be done without
striking a blow; that Vincennes would open and close while Paris slept;
that the President would finish his night there, and that France, on
awakening, would learn the twofold good tidings: that Bonaparte was out
of the fight, and France out of danger.

He added,--

"You can count on two Generals: Neumayer at Lyons, and Lawoëstyne at
Paris."

He got up and leaned against the chimney-piece; I can still see him
there, standing thoughtfully; and he continued:

"I do not feel myself strong enough to begin exile all over again, but I
feel the wish to save my family and my country."

He probably thought he noticed a movement of surprise in me, for he
accentuated and italicized these words.

"I will explain myself. Yes; I wish to save my family and my country. I
bear the name of Napoleon; but as you know without fanaticism. I am a
Bonaparte, but not a Bonapartist. I respect the name, but I judge it. It
already has one stain. The Eighteenth Brumaire. Is it about to have
another? The old stain disappeared beneath the glory; Austerlitz covered
Brumaire. Napoleon was absolved by his genius. The people admired him so
greatly that it forgave him. Napoleon is upon the column, there is an end
of it, let them leave him there in peace. Let them not resuscitate him
through his bad qualities. Let them not compel France to remember too
much. This glory of Napoleon is vulnerable. It has a wound; closed, I
admit. Do not let them reopen it. Whatever apologists may say and do, it
is none the less true that by the Eighteenth of Brumaire Napoleon struck
himself a first blow."

"In truth," said I, "it is ever against ourselves that we commit a
crime."

"Well, then," he continued, "his glory has survived a first blow, a
second will kill it. I do not wish it. I hate the first Eighteenth
Brumaire; I fear the second. I wish to prevent it."

He paused again, and continued,--

"That is why I have come to you to-night. I wish to succor this great
wounded glory. By the advice which I am giving you, if you can carry it
out, if the Left carries it out, I save the first Napoleon; for if a
second crime is superposed upon his glory, this glory would disappear.
Yes, this name would founder, and history would no longer own it. I will
go farther and complete my idea. I also save the present Napoleon, for he
who as yet has no glory will only have come. I save his memory from an
eternal pillory. Therefore, arrest him."

He was truly and deeply moved. He resumed,--

"As to the Republic, the arrest of Louis Bonaparte is deliverance for
her. I am right, therefore, in saying that by what I am proposing to you
I am saving my family and my country."

"But," I said to him, "what you propose to me is a _coup d'état_."

"Do you think so?"

"Without doubt. We are the minority, and we should commit an act which
belongs to the majority. We are a part of the Assembly. We should be
acting as though we were the entire Assembly. We who condemn all
usurpation should ourselves become usurpers. We should put our hands upon
a functionary whom the Assembly alone has the right of arresting. We, the
defenders of the Constitution, we should break the Constitution. We, the
men of the Law, we should violate the Law. It is a _coup d'état_."

"Yes, but a _coup d'état_ for a good purpose."

"Evil committed for a good purpose remains evil."

"Even when it succeeds?"

"Above all when it succeeds."

"Why?"

"Because it then becomes an example."

"You do not then approve of the Eighteenth Fructidor?"

"No."

"But Eighteenth Fructidors prevent Eighteenth Brumaires."

"No. They prepare the way for them."

"But reasons of State exist?"

"No. What exists is the Law."

"The Eighteenth Fructidor has been accepted by exceedingly honest minds."

"I know that."

"Blanqui is in its favor, with Michelet."

"I am against it, with Barbès."

From the moral aspect I passed to the practical aspect.

"This said," resumed I, "let us examine your plan."

This plan bristled with difficulties. I pointed them out to him.

"Count on the National Guard! Why, General Lawoëstyne had not yet got
command of it. Count on the Army? Why, General Neumayer was at Lyons,
and not at Paris. Would he march to the assistance of the Assembly?
What did we know about this? As for Lawoëstyne, was he not double-faced?
Were they sure of him? Call to arms the 8th Legion? Forestier was no
longer Colonel. The 5th and 6th? But Gressier and Howyne were only
lieutenant-colonels, would these legions follow them? Order the
Commissary Yon? But would he obey the Left alone? He was the agent of
the Assembly, and consequently of the majority, but not of the minority.
These were so many questions. But these questions, supposing them
answered, and answered in the sense of success, was success itself the
question? The question is never Success, it is always Right. But here,
even if we had obtained success, we should not have Right. In order to
arrest the President an order of the Assembly was necessary; we should
replace the order of the Assembly by an act of violence of the Left. A
scaling and a burglary; an assault by scaling-ladders on the constituted
authority, a burglary on the Law. Now let us suppose resistance; we
should shed blood. The Law violated leads to the shedding of blood. What
is all this? It is a crime."

"No, indeed," he exclaimed, "it is the _salus populi_."

And he added,--

"_Suprema Lex_."

"Not for me," I said.

I continued,--

"I would not kill a child to save a people."

"Cato did so."

"Jesus did not do so."

And I added,--

"You have on your side all ancient history, you are acting according to
the uprightness of the Greeks, and according to the uprightness of the
Romans; for me, I am acting according to the uprightness of Humanity.
The new horizon is of wider range than the old."

There was a pause. He broke it.

"Then he will be the one to attack!"

"Let it be so."

"You are about to engage in a battle which is almost lost beforehand."

"I fear so."

"And this unequal combat can only end for you, Victor Hugo, in death or
exile."

"I believe it."

"Death is the affair of a moment, but exile is long."

"It is a habit to be learned."

He continued,--

"You will not only be proscribed. You will be calumniated."

"It is a habit already learned."

He continued,--

"Do you know what they are saying already?"

"What?"

"They say that you are irritated against him because he has refused to
make you a Minister."

"Why you know yourself that--"

"I know that it is just the reverse. It is he who has asked you, and it
is you who have refused."

"Well, then--"

"They lie."

"What does it matter?"

He exclaimed,--

"Thus, you will have caused the Bonapartes to re-enter France, and you
will be banished from France by a Bonaparte!"[32]

"Who knows," said I, "if I have not committed a fault? This injustice is
perhaps a justice."

We were both silent. He resumed,--

"Could you bear exile?"

"I will try."

"Could you live without Paris?"

"I should have the ocean."

"You would then go to the seaside?"

"I think so."

"It is sad."

"It is grand."

There was another pause. He broke it.

"You do not know what exile is. I do know it. It is terrible. Assuredly,
I would not begin it again. Death is a bourne whence no one comes back,
exile is a place whither no one returns."

"If necessary," I said to him, "I will go, and I will return to it."

"Better die. To quit life is nothing, but to quit one's country--"

"Alas!" said I, "that is every thing."

"Well, then, why accept exile when it is in your power to avoid it? What
do you place above your country?"

"Conscience."

This answer made him thoughtful. However, he resumed.

"But on reflection your conscience will approve of what you will have
done."

"No."

"Why?"

"I have told you. Because my conscience is so constituted that it puts
nothing above itself. I feel it upon me as the headland can feel the
lighthouse which is upon it. All life is an abyss, and conscience
illuminates it around me."

"And I also," he exclaimed--and I affirm that nothing could be more
sincere or more loyal than his tone--"and I also feel and see my
conscience. It approves of what I am doing. I appear to be betraying
Louis; but I am really doing him a service. To save him from a crime is
to save him. I have tried every means. There only remains this one, to
arrest him. In coming to you, in acting as I do, I conspire at the same
time against him and for him, against his power, and for his honor. What
I am doing is right."

"It is true," I said to him. "You have a generous and a lofty aim."

And I resumed,--

"But our two duties are different. I could not hinder Louis Bonaparte
from committing a crime unless I committed one myself. I wish neither for
an Eighteenth Brumaire for him, nor for an Eighteenth Fructidor for
myself. I would rather be proscribed than be a proscriber. I have the
choice between two crimes, my crime and the crime of Louis Bonaparte. I
will not choose my crime."

"But then you will have to endure his."

"I would rather endure a crime than commit one."

He remained thoughtful, and said to me,--

"Let it be so."

And he added,--

"Perhaps we are both in the right."

"I think so," I said.

And I pressed his hand.

He took his mother's manuscript and went away. It was three o'clock in
the morning. The conversation had lasted more than two hours. I did not
go to bed until I had written it out.


[32] 14th of June, 1847. Chamber of Peers. See the work "Avant l'Exile."




CHAPTER XI.


THE COMBAT FINISHED, THE ORDEAL BEGINS

I did not know where to go.

On the afternoon of the 7th I determined to go back once more to 19, Rue
Richelieu. Under the gateway some one seized my arm. It was Madame D.
She was waiting for me.

"Do not go in," she said to me.

"Am I discovered?"

"Yes."

"And taken."

"No."

She added,--

"Come."

We crossed the courtyard, and we went out by a backdoor into the Rue
Fontaine Molière; we reached the square of the Palais Royal. The
_fiacres_ were standing there as usual. We got into the first we came
to.

"Where are we to go?" asked the driver.

She looked at me.

I answered,--

"I do not know."

"I know," she said.

Women always know where Providence lies.

An hour later I was in safety.

From the 4th, every day which passed by consolidated the _coup d'état_.
Our defeat was complete, and we felt ourselves abandoned. Paris was like
a forest in which Louis Bonaparte was making a _battue_ of the
Representatives; the wild beast was hunting down the sportsmen. We heard
the indistinct baying of Maupas behind us. We were compelled to
disperse. The pursuit was energetic. We entered into the second phase of
duty--the catastrophe accepted and submitted to. The vanquished became
the proscribed. Each one of us had his own concluding adventures. Mine
was what it should have been--exile; death having missed me. I am not
going to relate it here, this book is not my biography, and I ought not
to divert to myself any of the attention which it may excite. Besides,
what concerns me personally is told in a narrative which is one of the
testaments of exile.[33]

Notwithstanding the relentless pursuit which was directed against us, I
did not think it my duty to leave Paris as long as a glimmer of hope
remained, and as long as an awakening of the people seemed possible.
Malarmet sent me word in my refuge that a movement would take place at
Belleville on Tuesday the 9th. I waited until the 12th. Nothing stirred.
The people were indeed dead. Happily such deaths as these, like the
deaths of the gods, are only for a time.

I had a last interview with Jules Favre and Michel de Bourges at Madame
Didier's in the Rue de la Ville-Lévêque. It was at night. Bastide came
there. This brave man said to me,--

"You are about to leave Paris; for myself, I remain here. Take me as
your lieutenant. Direct me from the depths of your exile. Make use of me
as an arm which you have in France."

"I will make use of you as of a heart," I said to him.

On the 14th, amidst the adventures which my son Charles relates in his
book, I succeeded in reaching Brussels.

The vanquished are like cinders, Destiny blows upon them and disperses
them. There was a gloomy vanishing of all the combatants for Right and
for Law. A tragical disappearance.


[33] "Les Hommes de l'Exile," by Charles Hugo.




CHAPTER XII.


THE EXILED

The Crime having succeeded, all hastened to join it. To persist was
possible, to resist was not possible. The situation became more and more
desperate. One would have said that an enormous wall was rising upon the
horizon ready to close in. The outlet: Exile.

The great souls, the glories of the people, emigrated. Thus there was
seen this dismal sight--France driven out from France.

But what the Present appears to lose, the Future gains, the hand which
scatters is also the hand which sows.

The Representatives of the Left, surrounded, tracked, pursued, hunted
down, wandered for several days from refuge to refuge. Those who escaped
found great difficulty in leaving Paris and France. Madier de Montjan
had very black and thick eyebrows, he shaved off half of them, cut his
hair, and let his beard grow. Yvan, Pelletier, Gindrier, and Doutre
shaved off their moustaches and beards. Versigny reached Brussels on the
14th with a passport in the name of Morin. Schoelcher dressed himself up
as a priest. This costume became him admirably, and suited his austere
countenance and grave voice. A worthy priest helped him to disguise
himself, and lent him his cassock and his band, made him shave off his
whiskers a few days previously, so that he should not be betrayed by the
white trace of his freshly-cut beard, gave him his own passport, and
only left him at the railway station.[34]

De Flotte disguised himself as a servant, and in this manner succeeded
in crossing the frontier at Mouscron. From there he reached Ghent, and
thence Brussels.

On the night of December 26th, I had returned to the little room,
without a fire, which I occupied (No. 9) on the second story of the
Hôtel de la Porte-Verte; it was midnight; I had just gone to bed and was
falling asleep, when a knock sounded at my door. I awoke. I always left
the key outside. "Come in," I said. A chambermaid entered with a light,
and brought two men whom I did not know. One was a lawyer, of Ghent,
M. ----; the other was De Flotte. He took my two hands and pressed them
tenderly. "What," I said to him, "is it you?"

At the Assembly De Flotte, with his prominent and thoughtful brow, his
deep-set eyes, his close-shorn head, and his long beard, slightly turned
back, looked like a creation of Sebastian del Piombo wandering out of
his picture of the "Raising of Lazarus;" and I had before my eyes a
short young man, thin and pallid, with spectacles. But what he had not
been able to change, and what I recognized immediately, was the great
heart, the lofty mind, the energetic character, the dauntless courage;
and if I did not recognize him by his features, I recognized him by the
grasp of his hand.

Edgar Quinet was brought away on the 10th by a noble-hearted Wallachian
woman, Princess Cantacuzène, who undertook to conduct him to the
frontier, and who kept her word. It was a troublesome task. Quinet had
a foreign passport in the name of Grubesko, he was to personate a
Wallachian, and it was arranged that he should not know how to speak
French, he who writes it as a master. The journey was perilous. They ask
for passports along all the line, beginning at the terminus. At Amiens
they were particularly suspicious. But at Lille the danger was great.
The gendarmes went from carriage to carriage; entered them lantern in
hand, and compared the written descriptions of the travellers with their
personal appearance. Several who appeared to be suspicious characters
were arrested, and were immediately thrown into prison. Edgar Quinet,
seated by the side of Madame Cantacuzène awaited the turn of his
carriage. At length it came. Madame Cantacuzène leaned quickly forward
towards the gendarmes, and hastened to present her passport, but the
corporal waved back Madame Cantacuzène's passport saying, "It is
useless, Madame. We have nothing to do with women's passports," and he
asked Quinet abruptly, "Your papers?" Quinet held out his passport
unfolded. The gendarmes said to him, "Come out of the carriage, so that
we can compare your description." It happened, however, that the
Wallachian passport contained no description. The corporal frowned, and
said to his subordinates, "An irregular passport! Go and fetch the
Commissary."

All seemed lost, but Madame Cantacuzène began to speak to Quinet in the
most Wallachian words in the world, with incredible assurance and
volubility, so much so that the gendarme, convinced that he had to deal
with all Wallachia in person, and seeing the train ready to start,
returned the passport to Quinet, saying to him, "There! be off with
you!"--a few hours afterwards Edgar Quinet was in Belgium.

Arnauld de l'Ariège also had his adventures. He was a marked man, he had
to hide himself. Arnauld being a Catholic, Madame Arnauld went to the
priest; the Abbé Deguerry slipped out of the way, the Abbé Maret
consented to conceal him; the Abbé Maret was honest and good. Arnauld
d'Ariège remained hidden for a fortnight at the house of this worthy
priest. He wrote from the Abbé Maret's a letter to the Archbishop of
Paris, urging him to refuse the Pantheon, which a decree of Louis
Bonaparte took away from France and gave to Rome. This letter angered
the Archbishop. Arnauld, proscribed, reached Brussels, and there, at the
age of eighteen months, died the "little Red," who on the 3d of December
had carried the workman's letter to the Archbishop--an angel sent by God
to the priest who had not understood the angel, and who no longer knew
God.

In this medley of incidents and adventures each one had his drama.
Cournet's drama was strange and terrible.

Cournet, it may be remembered, had been a naval officer. He was one of
those men of a prompt, decisive character, who magnetized other men, and
who on certain extraordinary occasions send an electric shock through a
multitude. He possessed an imposing air, broad shoulders, brawny arms,
powerful fists, a tall stature, all of which give confidence to the
masses, and the intelligent expression which gives confidence to the
thinkers. You saw him pass, and you recognized strength; you heard him
speak, and you felt the will, which is more than strength. When quite a
youth he had served in the navy. He combined in himself in a certain
degree--and it is this which made this energetic man, when well directed
and well employed, a means of enthusiasm and a support--he combined the
popular fire and the military coolness. He was one of those natures
created for the hurricane and for the crowd, who have begun their study
of the people by their study of the ocean, and who are at their ease in
revolutions as in tempests. As we have narrated, he took an important
part in the combat. He had been dauntless and indefatigable, he was one
of those who could yet rouse it to life. From Wednesday afternoon
several police agents were charged to seek him everywhere, to arrest him
wherever they might find him, and to take him to the Prefecture of the
Police, where orders had been given to shoot him immediately.

Cournet, however, with his habitual daring, came and went freely in
order to carry on the lawful resistance, even in the quarters occupied
by the troops, shaving off his moustaches as his sole precaution.

On the Thursday afternoon he was on the boulevards at a few paces from a
regiment of cavalry drawn up in order. He was quietly conversing with
two of his comrades of the fight, Huy and Lorrain. Suddenly, he
perceives himself and his companions surrounded by a company of
_sergents de ville_; a man touches his arm and says to him, "You are
Cournet; I arrest you."

"Bah!" answers Cournet; "My name is Lépine."

The man resumes,--

"You are Cournet. Do not you recognize me? Well, then, I recognize you;
I have been, like you, a member of the Socialist Electoral Committee."

Cournet looks him in the face, and finds this countenance in his memory.
The man was right. He had, in fact, formed part of the gathering in the
Rue Saint Spire. The police spy resumed, laughing,--

"I nominated Eugène Sue with you."

It was useless to deny it, and the moment was not favorable for
resistance. There were on the spot, as we have said, twenty _sergents de
ville_ and a regiment of Dragoons.

"I will follow you," said Cournet.

A _fiacre_ was called up.

"While I am about it," said the police spy, "come in all three of you."

He made Huy and Lorrain get in with Cournet, placed them on the front
seat, and seated himself on the back seat by Cournet, and then shouted
to the driver,--

"To the Prefecture!"

The _sergents de ville_ surrounded the _fiacre_. But whether by chance
or through confidence, or in the haste to obtain the payment for his
capture, the man who had arrested Cournet shouted to the coachman, "Look
sharp, look sharp!" and the _fiacre_ went off at a gallop.

In the meantime Cournet was well aware that on arriving he would be shot
in the very courtyard of the Prefecture. He had resolved not to go
there.

At a turning in the Rue St Antoine he glanced behind, and noticed that
the _sergents de ville_ only followed the _fiacre_ at a considerable
distance.

Not one of the four men which the _fiacre_ was bearing away had as yet
opened their lips.

Cournet threw a meaning look at his two companions seated in front of
him, as much as to say, "We are three; let us take advantage of this to
escape." Both answered by an imperceptible movement of the eyes, which
pointed out the street full of passers-by, and which said, "No."

A few moments afterwards the _fiacre_ emerged from the Rue St. Antoine,
and entered the Rue de Fourcy. The Rue de Fourcy is usually deserted, no
one was passing down it at that moment.

Cournet turned suddenly to the police spy, and asked him,--

"Have you a warrant for my arrest?"

"No; but I have my card."

And he drew his police agent's card out of his pocket, and showed it to
Cournet. Then the following dialogue ensued between these two men,--

"This is not regular."

"What does that matter to me?"

"You have no right to arrest me."

"All the same, I arrest you."

"Look here; is it money that you want? Do you wish for any? I have some
with me; let me escape."

"A gold nugget as big as your head would not tempt me. You are my finest
capture, Citizen Cournet."

"Where are you taking me to?"

"To the Prefecture."

"They will shoot me there?"

"Possibly."

"And my two comrades?"

"I do not say 'No.'"

"I will not go."

"You will go, nevertheless."

"I tell you I will not go," exclaimed Cournet.

And with a movement, unexpected as a flash of lightning, he seized the
police spy by the throat.

The police agent could not utter a cry, he struggled: a hand of bronze
clutched him.

His tongue protruded from his mouth, his eyes became hideous, and
started from their sockets. Suddenly his head sank down, and reddish
froth rose from his throat to his lips. He was dead.

Huy and Lorrain, motionless, and as though themselves thunderstruck,
gazed at this gloomy deed.

They did not utter a word. They did not move a limb. The _fiacre_ was
still driving on.

"Open the door!" Cournet cried to them.

They did not stir, they seemed to have become stone.

Cournet, whose thumb was closely pressed in the neck of the wretched
police spy, tried to open the door with his left hand, but he did not
succeed, he felt that he could only do it with his right hand, and he
was obliged to loose his hold of the man. The man fell face forwards,
and sank down on his knees.

Cournet opened the door.

"Off with you!" he said to them.

Huy and Lorrain jumped into the street and fled at the top of their
speed.

The coachman had noticed nothing.

Cournet let them get away, and then, pulling the check string, stopped
the _fiacre_, got down leisurely, reclosed the door, quietly took forty
sous from his purse, gave them to the coachman, who had not left his
seat, and said to him, "Drive on."

He plunged into Paris. In the Place des Victoires he met the
ex-Constituent Isidore Buvignier, his friend, who about six weeks
previously had come out of the Madelonnettes, where he had been confined
for the matter of the _Solidarité Républicaine_. Buvignier was one of
the noteworthy figures on the high benches of the Left; fair,
close-shaven, with a stern glance, he made one think of the English
Roundheads, and he had the bearing rather of a Cromwellian Puritan than
of a Dantonist Man of the Mountain. Cournet told his adventure, the
extremity had been terrible.

Buvignier shook his head.

"You have killed a man," he said.

In "Marie Tudor," I have made Fabiani answer under similar
circumstances,--

"No, a Jew."

Cournet, who probably had not read "Marie Tudor," answered,--

"No, a police spy."

Then he resumed,--

"I have killed a police spy to save three men, one of whom was myself."

Cournet was right. They were in the midst of the combat, they were
taking him to be shot; the spy who had arrested him was, properly
speaking, an assassin, and assuredly it was a case of legitimate
defence. I add that this wretch, a democrat for the people, a spy for
the police, was a twofold traitor. Moreover, the police spy was the
jackal of the _coup d'état_, while Cournet was the combatant for the
Law.

"You must conceal yourself," said Buvignier; "come to Juvisy."

Buvignier had a little refuge at Juvisy, which is on the road to
Corbeil. He was known and loved there; Cournet and he reached there that
evening.

But they had hardly arrived when some peasants said to Buvignier, "The
police have already been here to arrest you, and are coming again
to-night."

It was necessary to go back.

Cournet, more in danger than ever, hunted, wandering, pursued, hid
himself in Paris with considerable difficulty. He remained there till
the 16th. He had no means of procuring himself a passport. At length, on
the 16th, some friends of his on the Northern Railway obtained for him a
special passport, worded as follows:--

"Allow M. ----, an Inspector on the service of the Company, to pass."

He decided to leave the next day, and take the day train, thinking,
perhaps rightly, that the night train would be more closely watched.

On the 17th, at daybreak, favored by the dim dawn, he glided from street
to street, to the Northern Railway Station. His tall stature was a
special source of danger. He, however, reached the station in safety.
The stokers placed him with them on the tender of the engine of the
train, which was about to start. He only had the clothes which he had
worn since the 2d; no clean linen, no trunk, a little money.

In December, the day breaks late and the night closes in early, which is
favorable to proscribed persons.

He reached the frontier at night without hindrance. At Neuvéglise he was
in Belgium; he believed himself in safety. When asked for his papers he
caused himself to be taken before the Burgomaster, and said to him, "I
am a political refugee."

The Burgomaster, a Belgian but a Bonapartist--this breed is to be
found--had him at once reconducted to the frontier by the gendarmes, who
were ordered to hand him over to the French authorities.

Cournet gave himself up for lost.

The Belgian gendarmes took him to Armentières. If they had asked for the
Mayor it would have been all at an end with Cournet, but they asked for
the Inspector of Customs.

A glimmer of hope dawned upon Cournet.

He accosted the Inspector of Customs with his head erect, and shook
hands with him.

The Belgian gendarmes had not yet released him.

"Now, sir," said Cournet to the Custom House officer, "you are an
Inspector of Customs, I am an Inspector of Railways. Inspectors do not
eat inspectors. The deuce take it! Some worthy Belgians have taken
fright and sent me to you between four gendarmes. Why, I know not. I am
sent by the Northern Company to relay the ballast of a bridge somewhere
about here which is not firm. I come to ask you to allow me to continue
my road. Here is my pass."

He presented the pass to the Custom House officer, the Custom House
officer read it, found it according to due form, and said to Cournet,--

"Mr. Inspector, you are free."

Cournet, delivered from the Belgian gendarmes by French authority,
hastened to the railway station. He had friends there.

"Quick," he said, "it is dark, but it does not matter, it is even all
the better. Find me some one who has been a smuggler, and who will help
me to pass the frontier."

They brought him a small lad of eighteen; fair-haired, ruddy, hardy, a
Walloon[35] and who spoke French.

"What is your name?" said Cournet.

"Henry."

"You look like a girl."

"Nevertheless I am a man."

"Is it you who undertake to guide me?"

"Yes."

"You have been a smuggler?"

"I am one still."

"Do you know the roads?"

"No. I have nothing to do with the roads."

"What do you know then?"

"I know the passes."

"There are two Custom House lines."

"I know that well."

"Will you pass me across them?"

"Without doubt."

"Then you are not afraid of the Custom House officers?"

"I'm afraid of the dogs."

"In that case," said Cournet, "we will take sticks."

They accordingly armed themselves with big sticks. Cournet gave fifty
francs to Henry, and promised him fifty more when they should have
crossed the second Custom House line.

"That is to say, at four o'clock in the morning," said Henry.

It was midnight.

They set out on their way.

What Henry called the "passes" another would have called the
"hindrances." They were a succession of pitfalls and quagmires. It had
been raining, and all the holes were pools of water.

An indescribable footpath wound through an inextricable labyrinth,
sometimes as thorny as a heath, sometimes as miry as a marsh.

The night was very dark.

From time to time, far away in the darkness, they could hear a dog bark.
The smuggler then made bends or zigzags, turned sharply to the right or
to the left, and sometimes retraced his steps.

Cournet, jumping hedges, striding over ditches, stumbling at every
moment, slipping into sloughs, laying hold of briers, with his clothes
in rags, his hands bleeding, dying with hunger, battered about, wearied,
worn out, almost exhausted, followed his guide gaily.

At every minute he made a false step; he fell into every bog, and got up
covered with mud. At length he fell into a pond. It was several feet
deep. This washed him.

"Bravo!" he said. "I am very clean, but I am very cold."

At four o'clock in the morning, as Henry had promised him, they reached
Messine, a Belgian village. The two Custom House lines had been cleared.
Cournet had nothing more to fear, either from the Custom House nor from
the _coup d'état_, neither from men nor from dogs.

He gave Henry the second fifty francs, and continued his journey on
foot, trusting somewhat to chance.

It was not until towards evening that he reached a railway station. He
got into a train, and at nightfall he arrived at the Southern Railway
Station at Brussels.

He had left Paris on the preceding morning, had not slept an hour, had
been walking all night, and had eaten nothing. On searching in his
pocket he missed his pocket book, but found a crust of bread. He was
more delighted at the discovery of the crust than grieved at the loss of
his pocket-book. He carried his money in a waistband; the pocket-book,
which had probably disappeared in the pond, contained his letters, and
amongst others an exceedingly useful letter of introduction from his
friend M. Ernest Koechlin, to the Representatives Guilgot and Carlos
Forel, who at that moment were refugees at Brussels, and lodged at the
Hôtel de Brabant.

On leaving the railway station he threw himself into a cab, and said to
the coachman,--

"Hôtel de Brabant."

He heard a voice repeat, "Hôtel de Brabant." He put out his head and saw
a man writing something in a notebook with a pencil by the light of a
street-lamp.

It was probably some police agent.

Without a passport, without letters, without papers, he was afraid of
being arrested in the night, and he was longing for a good sleep. A good
bed to-night, he thought, and to-morrow the Deluge! At the Hôtel de
Brabant he paid the coachman, but did not go into the hotel. Moreover,
he would have asked in vain for the Representatives Forel and Guilgot;
both were there under false names.

He took to wandering about the streets. It was eleven o'clock at night,
and for a long time he had begun to feel utterly worn out.

At length he saw a lighted lamp with the inscription "Hôtel de la
Monnaie."

He walked in.

The landlord came up, and looked at him somewhat askance.

He then thought of looking at himself.

His unshaven beard, his disordered hair, his cap soiled with mud, his
blood-stained hands, his clothes in rags, he looked horrible.

He took a double louis out of his waistband, and put it on the table of
the parlor, which he had entered and said to the landlord,--

"In truth, sir, I am not a thief, I am a proscript; money is now my only
passport. I have just come from Paris, I wish to eat first and sleep
afterwards."

The landlord was touched, took the double louis, and gave him bed and
supper.

Next day, while he was still sleeping, the landlord came into his room,
woke him gently, and said to him,--

"Now, sir, if I were you, I should go and see Baron Hody."

"Who and what is Baron Hody?" asked Cournet, half asleep.

The landlord explained to him who Baron Hody was. When I had occasion to
ask the same question as Cournet, I received from three inhabitants of
Brussels the three answers as follows:--

"He is a dog."

"He is a polecat."

"He is a hyena."

There is probably some exaggeration in these three answers.

A fourth Belgian whom I need not specify confined himself to saying to
me,--

"He is a beast."

As to his public functions, Baron Hody was what they call at Brussels
"The Administrator of Public Safety;" that is to say, a counterfeit of
the Prefect of Police, half Carlier, half Maupas.

Thanks to Baron Hody, who has since left the place, and who, moreover,
like M. de Montalembert, was a "mere Jesuit," the Belgian police at that
moment was a compound of the Russian and Austrian police. I have read
strange confidential letters of this Baron Hody. In action and in style
there is nothing more cynical and more repulsive than the Jesuit police,
when they unveil their secret treasures. These are the contents of the
unbuttoned cassock.

At the time of which we are speaking (December, 1851), the Clerical
party had joined itself to all the forms of Monarchy; and this Baron
Hody confused Orleanism with Legitimate right. I simply tell the tale.
Nothing more.

"Baron Hody. Very well, I will go to him," said Cournet.

He got up, dressed himself, brushed his clothes as well as he could, and
asked the landlord, "Where is the Police office?"

"At the Ministry of Justice."

In fact this is the case in Brussels; the police administration forms
part of the Ministry of Justice, an arrangement which does not greatly
raise the police and somewhat lowers justice.

Cournet went there, and was shown into the presence of this personage.

Baron Hody did him the honor to ask him sharply,--

"Who are you?"

"A refugee," answered Cournet; "I am one of those whom the _coup d'état_
has driven from Paris.

"Your profession?"

"Ex-naval officer."

"Ex-naval officer!" exclaimed Baron Hody in a much gentler tone, "did
you know His Royal Highness the Prince de Joinville?"

"I have served under him."

It was the truth. Cournet had served under M. de Joinville, and prided
himself on it.

At this statement the administrator of Belgian safety completely unbent,
and said to Cournet, with the most gracious smile that the police can
find, "That's all right, sir; stay here as long as you please; we close
Belgium to the Men of the Mountain, but we throw it widely open to men
like you."

When Cournet told me this answer of Hody's, I thought that my fourth
Belgian was right.

A certain comic gloom was mingled at times with these tragedies.
Barthelémy Terrier was a Representative of the people, and a proscript.
They gave him a special passport for a compulsory route as far as
Belgium for himself and his wife. Furnished with this passport he left
with a woman. This woman was a man. Préveraud, a landed proprietor at
Donjon, one of the most prominent men in the Department of Allier, was
Terrier's brother-in-law. When the _coup d'état_ broke out at Donjon,
Préveraud had taken up arms and fulfilled his duty, had combated the
outrage and defended the law. For this he had been condemned to death.
The justice of that time, as we know. Justice executed justice. For this
crime of being an honest man they had guillotined Charlet, guillotined
Cuisinier, guillotined Cirasse. The guillotine was an instrument of the
reign. Assassination by the guillotine was one of the means of order of
that time. It was necessary to save Préveraud. He was little and slim:
they dressed him as a woman. He was not sufficiently pretty for them not
to cover his face with a thick veil. They put the brave and sturdy hands
of the combatant in a muff. Thus veiled and a little filled out with
padding, Préveraud made a charming woman. He became Madame Terrier, and
his brother-in-law took him away. They crossed Paris peaceably, and
without any other adventure than an imprudence committed by Préveraud,
who, seeing that the shaft-horse of a wagon had fallen down, threw aside
his muff, lifted his veil and his petticoat, and if Terrier, in dire
alarm, had not stopped him, he would have helped the carter to raise his
horse. Had a _sergent de ville_ been there, Préveraud would have been
captured. Terrier hastened to thrust Préveraud into a carriage, and at
nightfall they left for Brussels. They were alone in the carriage, each
in a corner and face to face. All went well as far as Amiens. At Amiens
station the door was opened, and a gendarme entered and seated himself
by the side of Préveraud. The gendarme asked for his passport, Terrier
showed it him; the little woman in her corner, veiled and silent, did
not stir, and the gendarme found all in due form. He contented himself
with saying, "We shall travel together, I am on duty as far as the
frontier."

The train, after the ordinary delay of a few minutes, again started. The
night was dark. Terrier had fallen asleep. Suddenly Préveraud felt a
knee press against his, it was the knee of the policeman. A boot placed
itself softly on his foot, it was a horse-soldier's boot. An idyll had
just germinated in the gendarme's soul. He first tenderly pressed
Préveraud's knee, and then emboldened by the darkness of the hour and by
the slumbering husband, he ventured his hand as far as her dress, a
circumstance foreseen by Molière, but the fair veiled one was virtuous.
Préveraud, full of surprise and rage, gently pushed back the gendarme's
hand. The danger was extreme. Too much love on the part of the gendarme,
one audacious step further, would bring about the unexpected, would
abruptly change the eclogue into an official indictment, would reconvert
the amorous satyr into a stony-hearted policeman, would transform Tircis
into Vidocq; and then this strange thing would be seen, a passenger
guillotined because a gendarme had committed an outrage. The danger
increased every moment. Terrier was sleeping. Suddenly the train
stopped. A voice cried, "Quièvrain!" and the door was opened. They were
in Belgium. The gendarme, obliged to stop here, and to re-enter France,
rose to get out, and at the moment when he stepped on to the ground he
heard behind him these expressive words coming from beneath the lace
veil, "Be off, or I'll break your jaw!"


[34] See "Les Hommes de l'Exile."

[35] The name given to a population belonging to the Romanic family, and
more particularly to those of French descent, who occupy the region
along the frontiers of the German-speaking territory in the South
Netherlands from Dunkirk to Malmedy in Rhenish Prussia.




CHAPTER XIII.


THE MILITARY COMMISSIONS AND THE MIXED COMMISSIONS

Justice sometime meets with strange adventures.

This old phrase assumed a new sense.

The code ceased to be a safeguard. The law became something which had
sworn fealty to a crime. Louis Bonaparte appointed judges by whom one
felt oneself stopped as in the corner of a wood. In the same manner as
the forest is an accomplice through its density, so the legislation was
an accomplice by its obscurity. What it lacked at certain points in
order to make it perfectly dark they added. How? By force. Purely and
simply. By decree. _Sic jubeo_. The decree of the 17th of February was a
masterpiece. This decree completed the proscription of the person, by
the proscription of the name. Domitian could not have done better. Human
conscience was bewildered; Right, Equity, Reason felt that the master
had over them the authority that a thief has over a purse. No reply.
Obey. Nothing resembles those infamous times.

Every iniquity was possible. Legislative bodies supervened and instilled
so much gloom into legislation that it was easy to achieve a baseness in
this darkness.

A successful _coup d'état_ does not stand upon ceremony. This kind of
success permits itself everything.

Facts abound. But we must abridge, we will only present them briefly.

There were two species of Justice; the Military Commissions and the
Mixed Commissions.

The Military Commissions sat in judgment with closed doors. A colonel
presided.

In Paris alone there were three Military Commissions: each received a
thousand bills of indictment. The Judge of Instruction sent these
accusations to the Procureur of the Republic, Lascoux, who transmitted
them to the Colonel President. The Commission summoned the accused to
appear. The accused himself was his own bill of indictment. They
searched him, that is to say, they "thumbed" him. The accusing document
was short. Two or three lines. Such as this, for example,--

Name. Christian name. Profession. A sharp fellow. Goes to the Café.
Reads the papers. Speaks. Dangerous.

The accusation was laconic. The judgment was still less prolix. It was a
simple sign.

The bill of indictment having been examined, the judges having been
consulted, the colonel took a pen, and put at the end of the accusing
line one of three signs:--

     -     +     o

     -  signified consignment to Lambessa.

     +  signified transportation to Cayenne. (The dry guillotine. Death.)

     o  signified acquittal.

While this justice was at work, the man on whose case they were working
was sometimes still at liberty, he was going and coming at his ease;
suddenly they arrested him, and without knowing what they wanted with
him, he left for Lambessa or for Cayenne.

His family was often ignorant of what had become of him.

People asked of a wife, of a sister, of a daughter, of a mother,--

"Where is your husband?"

"Where is your brother?"

"Where is your father?"

"Where is your son?"

The wife, the sister, the daughter, the mother answered,--"I do not
know."

In the Allier eleven members of one family alone, the Préveraud family
of Donjon, were struck down, one by the penalty of death, the others by
banishment and transportation.

A wine-seller of the Batignolles, named Brisadoux, was transported to
Cayenne for this line in his deed of accusation: _his shop is frequented
by Socialists_.

Here is a dialogue, word for word, and taken from life, between a
colonel and his convicted prisoner:--

"You are condemned."

"Indeed! Why?"

"In truth I do not exactly know myself. Examine your conscience. Think
what you have done."

"I?"

"Yes, you."

"How I?"

"You must have done something."

"No. I have done nothing. I have not even done my duty. I ought to have
taken my gun, gone down into the street, harangued the people, raised
barricades; I remained at home stupidly like a sluggard" (the accused
laughs); "that is the offence of which I accuse myself."

"You have not been condemned for that offence. Think carefully."

"I can think of nothing."

"What! You have not been to the _café_?"

"Yes, I have breakfasted there."

"Have you not chatted there?"

"Yes, perhaps."

"Have you not laughed?"

"Perhaps I have laughed."

"At whom? At what?"

"At what is going on. It is true I was wrong to laugh."

"At the same time you talked?"

"Yes."

"Of whom?"

"Of the President."

"What did you say?"

"Indeed, what may be said with justice, that he had broken his oath."

"And then?"

"That he had not the right to arrest the Representatives."

"You said that?"

"Yes. And I added that he had not the right to kill people on the
boulevard...."

Here the condemned man interrupted himself and exclaimed,--

"And thereupon they send me to Cayenne!"

The judge looks fixedly at the prisoner, and answers,--"Well, then?"

Another form of justice:--

Three miscellaneous personages, three removable functionaries, a
Prefect, a soldier, a public prosecutor, whose only conscience is the
sound of Louis Bonaparte's bell, seated themselves at a table and
judged. Whom? You, me, us, everybody. For what crimes? They invented
crimes. In the name of what laws? They invented laws. What penalties did
they inflict? They invented penalties. Did they know the accused? No.
Did they listen to him? No. What advocates did they listen to? None.
What witnesses did they question? None. What deliberation did they enter
upon? None. What public did they call in? None. Thus, no public, no
deliberation, no counsellors, no witnesses, judges who are not
magistrates, a jury where none are sworn in, a tribunal which is not a
tribunal, imaginary offences, invented penalties, the accused absent,
the law absent; from all these things which resembled a dream there came
forth a reality: the condemnation of the innocent.

Exile, banishment, transportation, ruin, home-sickness, death, and
despair for 40,000 families.

That is what History calls the Mixed Commissions.

Ordinarily the great crimes of State strike the great heads, and content
themselves with this destruction; they roll like blocks of stone, all in
one piece, and break the great resistances; illustrious victims suffice
for them. But the Second of December had its refinements of cruelty; it
required in addition petty victims. Its appetite for extermination
extended to the poor and to the obscure, its anger and animosity
penetrated as far as the lowest class; it created fissures in the social
subsoil in order to diffuse the proscription there; the local
triumvirates, nicknamed "mixed mixtures," served it for that. Not one
head escaped, however humble and puny. They found means to impoverish
the indigent, to ruin those dying of hunger, to spoil the disinherited;
the _coup d'état_ achieved this wonderful feat of adding misfortune to
misery. Bonaparte, it seems, took the trouble to hate a mere peasant;
the vine-dresser was torn from his vine, the laborer from his furrow,
the mason from his scaffold, the weaver from his loom. Men accepted this
mission of causing the immense public calamity to fall, morsel by
morsel, upon the humblest walks of life. Detestable task! To crumble a
catastrophe upon the little and on the weak.




CHAPTER XIV.


A RELIGIOUS INCIDENT

A little religion can be mingled with this justice. Here is an example.

Frederick Morin, like Arnauld de l'Ariège, was a Catholic Republican. He
thought that the souls of the victims of the 4th of December, suddenly
cast by the volleys of the _coup d'état_ into the infinite and the
unknown, might need some assistance, and he undertook the laborious task
of having a mass said for the repose of these souls. But the priests
wished to keep the masses for their friends. The group of Catholic
Republicans which Frederick Morin headed applied successively to all the
priests of Paris; but met with a refusal. They applied to the
Archbishop: again a refusal. As many masses for the assassin as they
liked, but far the assassinated not one. To pray for dead men of this
sort would be a scandal. The refusal was determined. How should it be
overcome? To do without a mass would have appeared easy to others, but
not to these staunch believers. The worthy Catholic Democrats with great
difficulty at length unearthed in a tiny suburban parish a poor old
vicar, who consented to mumble in a whisper this mass in the ear of the
Almighty, while begging Him to say nothing about it.




CHAPTER XV.


HOW THEY CAME OUT OF HAM

On the night of the 7th and 8th of January, Charras was sleeping. The
noise of his bolts being drawn awoke him.

"So then!" said he, "they are going to put us in close confinement." And
he went to sleep again.

An hour afterwards the door was opened. The commandant of the fort
entered in full uniform, accompanied by a police agent carrying a torch.

It was about four o'clock in the morning.

"Colonel," said the Commandant, "dress yourself at once."

"What for?"

"You are about to leave."

"Some more rascality, I suppose!"

The Commandant was silent. Charras dressed himself.

As he finished dressing, a short young man, dressed in black, came in.
This young man spoke to Charras.

"Colonel, you are about to leave the fortress, you are about to quit
France. I am instructed to have you conducted to the frontier."

Charras exclaimed,--

"If I am to quit France I will not leave the fortress. This is yet
another outrage. They have no more the right to exile me than they had
the right to imprison me. I have on my side the Law, Right, my old
services, my commission. I protest. Who are you, sir?"

"I am the Private Secretary of the Minister of the Interior."

"Ah! it is you who are named Léopold Lehon."

The young man cast down his eyes.

Charras continued,--

"You come on the part of some one whom they call 'Minister of the
Interior,' M. de Morny, I believe. I know M. de Morny. A bald young man;
he has played the game where people lose their hair; and now he is
playing the game where people risk their heads."

The conversation was painful. The young man was deeply interested in the
toe of his boot.

After a pause, however, he ventured to speak,--

"M. Charras, I am instructed to say that if you want money--"

Charras interrupted him impetuously.

"Hold your tongue, sir! not another word. I have served my country
five-and-twenty years as an officer, under fire, at the peril of my
life, always for honor, never for gain. Keep your money for your own
set!"

"But, sir--"

"Silence! Money which passes through your hands would soil mine."

Another pause ensued, which the private secretary again broke,--

"Colonel, you will be accompanied by two police agents who have special
instructions, and I should inform you that you are ordered to travel
with a false passport, and under the name of Vincent."

"Good heavens!" said Charras; "this is really too much. Who is it
imagines that they will make me travel by order with a false passport,
and under a false name?" And looking steadily at M. Léopold Lehon,
"Know, sir, that my name is Charras and not Vincent, and that I belong
to a family whose members have always borne the name of their father."

They set out.

They journeyed by carriage as far as Creil, which is on the railway.

At Creil station the first person whom Charras saw was General
Changarnier.

"Ah! it is you, General."

The two proscripts embraced each other. Such is exile.

"What the deuce are they doing with you?" asked the General.

"What they are probably doing with you. These vagabonds are making me
travel under the name of Vincent."

"And me," said Changarnier, "under the name of Leblanc."

"In that case they ought at least to have called me Lerouge," said
Charras, with a burst of laughter.

In the meantime a group, kept at a distance by the police agents, had
formed round them. People had recognized them and saluted them. A little
child, whose mother could not hold him back, ran quickly to Charras and
took his hand.

They got into the train apparently as free as other travellers. Only
they isolated them in empty compartments, and each was accompanied by
two men, who sat one at the side and the other facing him, and who never
took their eyes off him. The keepers of General Changarnier were of
ordinary strength and stature. Those of Charras were almost giants.
Charras is exceedingly tall; they topped him by an entire head. These
men who were galley sergeants, had been carabineers; these spies had
been heroes.

Charras questioned them. They had served when quite young, from 1813.
Thus they had shared the bivouac of Napoleon; now they ate the same
bread as Vidocq. The soldier brought to such a sorry pass as this is a
sad sight.

The pocket of one of them was bulged out with something which he was
hiding there.

When this man crossed the station in company with Charras, a lady
traveller said,--

"Has he got M. Thiers in his pocket?"

What the police agent was hiding was a pair of pistols. Under their
long, buttoned-up and doubled-breasted frock coats these men were armed.
They were ordered to treat "those gentlemen" with the most profound
respect, but in certain circumstances to blow out their brains.

The prisoners had each been informed that in the eyes of the different
authorities whom they would meet on the road they would pass for
foreigners, Swiss or Belgians, expelled on account of their political
opinions, and that the police agents would keep their title of police
agents, and would represent themselves as charged with reconducting
these foreigners to the frontier.

Two-thirds of the journey were accomplished without any hindrance. At
Valenciennes an incident occurred.

The _coup d'état_ having succeeded, zeal reigned paramount. No task was
any longer considered despicable. To denounce was to please; zeal is one
of the forms of servitude towards which people lean the most willingly.
The general became a common soldier, the prefect became a commissary of
police, the commissary of police became a police spy.

The commissary of police at Valenciennes himself superintended the
inspection of passports. For nothing in the world would he have deputed
this important office to a subordinate inspector. When they presented
him the passport of the so-called Leblanc, he looked the so-called
Leblanc full in the face, started, and exclaimed,--

"You are General Changarnier!"

"That is no affair of mine," said the General.

Upon this the two keepers of the General protested and exhibited their
papers, perfectly drawn up in due form.

"Mr. Commissary, we are Government agents. Here are our proper
passports."

"Improper ones," said the General.

The Commissary shook his head. He had been employed in Paris, and had
been frequently sent to the headquarters of the staff at the Tuileries,
to General Changarnier. He knew him very well.

"This is too much!" exclaimed the police agents. They blustered,
declared that they were police functionaries on a special service, that
they had instructions to conduct to the frontier this Leblanc, expelled
for political reasons, swore by all the gods, and gave their word of
honor that the so-called Leblanc was really named Leblanc.

"I do not much believe in words of honor," said the Commissary.

"Honest Commissary," muttered Changarnier, "you are right. Since the 2d
of December words of honor and oaths are no more than worthless paper
money."

And then he began to smile.

The Commissary became more and more perplexed. The police agents ended
by invoking the testimony of the prisoner himself.

"Now, sir, tell him your name yourself."

"Get out of the difficulty yourselves," answered Changarnier.

All this appeared most irregular to the mind of a provincial alguazil.

It seemed evident to the Commissary of Valenciennes that General
Changarnier was escaping from Ham under a false name with a false
passport, and with false agents of police, in order to mislead the
authorities, and that it was a plot to escape which was on the point of
succeeding.

"Come down, all three of you!" exclaimed the Commissary.

The General gets down, and on putting foot to the ground notices Charras
in the depths of his compartment between his two bullies.

"Oho! Charras, you are there!" he cries.

"Charras!" exclaimed the Commissary. "Charras there! Quick! the
passports of these gentlemen!" And looking Charras in the face,--

"Are you Colonel Charras?"

"Egad!" said Charras.

Yet another complication. It was now the turn of Charras's bullies to
bluster. They declared that Charras was the man called Vincent,
displayed passports and papers, swore and protested. The Commissary's
suspicions were fully confirmed.

"Very well," said he, "I arrest everybody."

And he handed over Changarnier, Charras, and the four police agents to
the gendarmes. The Commissary saw the Cross of Honor shining in the
distance. He was radiant.

The police arrested the police. It happens sometimes that the wolf
thinks he has seized a victim and bites his own tail.

The six prisoners--for now there were six prisoners--were taken into a
parlor at the railway station. The Commissary informed the town
authorities. The town authorities hastened hither, headed by the
sub-prefect.

The sub-prefect, who was named Censier, comes in, and does not know
whether he ought to salute or to question, to grovel in the dust or to
keep his hat on his head. These poor devils of magistrates and local
officials were very much exercised in their minds. General Changarnier
had been too near the Dictatorship not to make them thoughtful. Who can
foresee the course of events? Everything is possible. Yesterday called
itself Cavaignac, to-day calls itself Bonaparte, to-morrow may call
itself Changarnier. Providence is really cruel not to let sub-prefects
have a peep at the future.

It is sad for a respectable functionary, who would ask for nothing
better than to be servile or arrogant according to circumstances, to be
in danger of lavishing his platitudes on a person who is perhaps going
to rot forever in exile, and who is nothing more than a rascal, or to
risk being insolent to a vagabond of a postscript who is capable of
coming back a conqueror in six months' time, and of becoming the
Government in his turn. What was to be done? And then they were spied
upon. This takes place between officials. The slightest word would be
maliciously interpreted, the slightest gesture would be laid to their
discredit. How should he keep on good terms at the same time this
Cabbage, which is called To-day, and that Goat, which is called
To-morrow? To ask too many questions would offend the General, to render
to many salutations would annoy the President. How could he be at the
same time very much a sub-prefect, and in some degree a lacquey? How
could he combine the appearance of obsequiousness, which would please
Changarnier, with the appearance of authority, which would please
Bonaparte?

The sub-prefect thought to get out of the difficulty by saying,
"General, you are my prisoner," and by adding, with a smile, "Do me the
honor of breakfasting with me?" He addressed the same words to Charras.

The General refused curtly.

Charras looked at him fixedly, and did not answer him.

Doubts regarding the identity of the prisoners came to the mind of the
sub-prefect. He whispered to the Commissary "Are you quite sure?"
"Certainly," said the Commissary.

The sub-prefect decided to address himself to Charras, and dissatisfied
with the manner in which his advances had been received, asked him
somewhat sharply, "But, in short, who are you?"

Charras answered, "We are packages."

And turning to his keepers who were now in their turn in keeping:--

"Apply to our exporters. Ask our Custom House officers. It is a mere
matter of goods traffic."

They set the electric telegraph to work. Valenciennes, alarmed,
questioned Paris. The sub-prefect informed the Minister of the Interior
that, thanks to a strict supervision, which he had trusted to no one but
himself, he had just effected an important capture, that he had just
discovered a plot, had saved the President, had saved society, had saved
religion, etc., that in one word he had just arrested General
Changarnier and Colonel Charras, who had escaped that morning from the
fort of Ham with false passports, doubtless for the purpose of heading a
rising, etc., and that, in short, he asked the Government what was to be
done with the two prisoners.

At the end of an hour the answer arrived:--"Let them go on their way."

The police perceived that in a burst of zeal they had pushed profundity
to the point of stupidity. That sometimes happens.

The next train carried away the prisoners, restored, not to liberty, but
to their keepers.

They passed Quiévrain.

They got down from the carriage, and got in again.

When the train again started Charras heaved the deep, joyous sigh of a
freed man, and said, "At last!"

He raised his eyes, and perceived his two jailers by his side.

They had got up behind him into the carriage.

"Ah, indeed!" he said to them; "you there!"

Of these two men there was only one who spoke, that one answered,--

"Yes, Colonel."

"What are you doing here?"

"We are keeping watch over you."

"But we are in Belgium."

"Possibly."

"Belgium is not France."

"Ah, that may be."

"But suppose I put my head out of the carriage? Suppose I call out?
Suppose I had you arrested? Suppose I reclaimed my liberty?"

"You will not do all that, Colonel."

"How will you prevent me?"

The police agent showed the butt-end of his pistol and said "Thus."

Charras burst out laughing, and asked them, "Where then are you going to
leave me?"

"At Brussels."

"That is to say, that at Brussels you will salute me with your cap; but
that at Mons you will salute me with your pistol."

"As you say, Colonel."

"In truth," said Charras, "it does not matter to me. It is King
Leopold's business. The Bonaparte treats countries as he has treated the
Representatives. He has violated the Assembly, he violates Belgium. But
all the same, you are a medley of strange rascals. He who is at the top
is a madman, those who are beneath are blockheads. Very well, my
friends, let me go to sleep."

And he went to sleep.

Almost the same incident happened nearly at the same moment to Generals
Changarnier and Lamoricière and to M. Baze.

The police agents did not leave General Changarnier until they had
reached Mons. There they made him get down from the train, and said to
him, "General, this is your place of residence. We leave you free."

"Ah!" said he, "this is my place of residence, and I am free? Well,
then, good-night."

And he sprang lightly back into the carriage just as the train was
starting, leaving behind him two galley sergeants dumfounded.

The police released Charras at Brussels, but did not release General
Lamoricière. The two police agents wished to compel him to leave
immediately for Cologne. The General, who was suffering from rheumatism
which he had caught at Ham, declared that he would sleep at Brussels.

"Be it so," said the police agents.

They followed him to the Hôtel de Bellevue. They spent the night there
with him. He had considerable difficulty to prevent them from sleeping
in his room. Next day they carried him off, and took him to
Cologne-violating Prussian territory after having violated Belgian
territory.

The _coup d'état_ was still more impudent with M. Baze.

They made M. Baze journey with his wife and his children under the name
of Lassalle. He passed for the servant of the police agent who
accompanied him.

They took him thus to Aix-la-Chapelle.

There, in the middle of the night, in the middle of the street, the
police agents deposited him and the whole of his family, without a
passport, without papers, without money. M. Baze, indignant, was obliged
to have recourse to threats to induce them to take him and identify him
before a magistrate. It was, perhaps, part of the petty joys of
Bonaparte to cause a Questor of the Assembly to be treated as a vagrant.

On the night of the 7th of January, General Bedeau, although he was not
to leave till the next day, was awakened like the others by the noise of
bolts. He did not understand that they were shutting him in, but on the
contrary, believed that they were releasing M. Baze, his neighbor in the
adjoining cell. He cried through the door, "Bravo, Baze!"

In fact, every day the Generals said to the Questor, "You have no
business here, this is a military fortress. One of these fine mornings
you will be thrust outside like Roger du Nord."

Nevertheless General Bedeau heard an unusual noise in the fortress. He
got up and "knocked" for General Leflô, his neighbor in the cell on the
other side, with whom he exchanged frequent military dialogues, little
flattering to the _coup d'état_. General Leflô answered the knocking,
but he did not know any more than General Bedeau.

General Bedeau's window looked out on the inner courtyard of the prison.
He went to this window and saw lanterns flashing hither and thither,
species of covered carts, horsed, and a company of the 48th under arms.
A moment afterwards he saw General Changarnier come into the courtyard,
get into a carriage, and drive off. Some moments elapsed, then he saw
Charras pass. Charras noticed him at the window, and cried out to him,
"Mons!"

In fact he believed he was going to Mons, and this made General Bedeau,
on the next day, choose Mons as his residence, expecting to meet Charras
there.

Charras having left, M. Léopold Lehon came in accompanied by the
Commandant of the fort. He saluted Bedeau, explained his business, and
gave his name. General Bedeau confined himself to saying, "They banish
us; it is an illegality, and one more indignity added to the others.
However, with the people who send you one is no longer surprised at
anything."

They did not send him away till the next day. Louis Bonaparte had said,
"We must 'space out' the Generals."

The police agent charged with escorting General Bedeau to Belgium was
one of those who, on the 2d of December, had arrested General Cavaignac.
He told General Bedeau that they had had a moment of uneasiness when
arresting General Cavaignae: the picket of fifty men, which had been
told off to assist the police having failed them.

In the compartment of the railway carriage which was taking General
Bedeau into Belgium there was a lady, manifestly belonging to good
society, of very distinguished appearance, and who was accompanied by
three little children. A servant in livery, who appeared to be a German,
had two of the children on his knees, and lavished a thousand little
attentions on them. However, the General, hidden by the darkness, and
muffled up, like the police agents, in the collar of his mantle, paid
little attention to this group. When they reached Quièvrain, the lady
turned to him and said, "General, I congratulate you, you are now in
safety."

The General thanked her, and asked her name.

"Baroness Coppens," she answered.

It may be remembered that it was at M. Coppens's house, 70, Rue Blanche,
that the first meeting of the Left had taken place on December 2d.

"You have charming children there, madam," said the General, "and," he
added, "an exceedingly good servant."

"It is my husband," said Madame Coppens.

M. Coppens, in fact, had remained five weeks buried in a hiding-place
contrived in his own house. He had escaped from France that very night
under the cover of his own livery. They had carefully taught their
children their lesson. Chance had made them get into the same carriage
as General Bedeau and the two bullies who were keeping guard over him,
and throughout the night Madame Coppens had been in terror lest, in the
presence of the policeman, one of the little ones awakening, should
throw its arms around the neck of the servant and cry "Papa!"




CHAPTER XVI.


A RETROSPECT

Louis Bonaparte had tested the majority as engineers test a bridge; he
had loaded it with iniquities, encroachments, enormities, slaughters on
the Place du Havre, cries of "Long live the Emperor," distributions of
money to the troops, sales of Bonapartist journals in the streets,
prohibition of Republican and parliamentary journals, reviews at Satory,
speeches at Dijon; the majority bore everything.

"Good," said he, "It will carry the weight of the _coup d'état_."

Let us recall the facts. Before the 2d of December the _coup d'état_ was
being constructed in detail, here and there, a little everywhere, with
exceeding impudence, and yet the majority smiled. The Representative
Pascal Duprat had been violently treated by police agents. "That is very
funny," said the Right. The Representative Dain was seized. "Charming."
The Representative Sartin was arrested. "Bravo." One fine morning when
all the hinges had been well tested and oiled, and when all the wires
were well fixed, the _coup d'état_ was carried out all at once,
abruptly. The majority ceased to laugh, but the trick, was done. It had
not perceived that for a long time past, while it was laughing at the
strangling of others, the cord was round its own neck.

Let us maintain this, not to punish the past, but to illuminate the
future. Many months before being carried out, the _coup d'état_ had been
accomplished. The day having come, the hour having struck, the mechanism
being completely wound up, it had only to be set going. It was bound not
to fail, and nothing did fail. What would have been an abyss if the
majority had done its duty, and had understood its joint responsibility
with the Left, was not even a ditch. The inviolability had been
demolished by those who were inviolable. The hand of gendarmes had
become as accustomed to the collar of the Representatives as to the
collar of thieves: the white tie of the statesman was not even rumpled
in the grasp of the galley sergeants, and one can admire the Vicomte de
Falloux--oh, candor!--for being dumfounded at being treated like Citizen
Sartin.

The majority, going backwards, and ever applauding Bonaparte, fell into
the hole which Bonaparte had dug for it.




CHAPTER XVII.


CONDUCT OF THE LEFT

The conduct of the Republican Left in this grave crisis of the 2d of
December was memorable.

The flag of the Law was on the ground, in the mire of universal treason,
under the feet of Louis Bonaparte; the Left raised this flag, washed
away the mire with its blood, unfurled it, waved it before the eyes of
the people, and from the 2d to the 5th of December held Bonaparte at
bay.

A few men, a mere handful, 120 Representatives of the people escaped by
chance from arrest, plunged in darkness and in silence, without even
possessing that cry of the free press which sounds the tocsin to human
intellects, and which encourages the combatants, without generals under
their orders, without soldiers, without ammunition, went down into the
streets, resolutely barred the way against the _coup d'état_, and gave
battle to this monstrous crime, which had taken all its precautions,
which was mail-clad in every part, armed to the teeth, crowding round it
forests of bayonets, and making a pack of mortars and cannons give
tongue in its favor.

They had that presence of mind, which is the most practical kind of
courage; they had, while lacking everything else, the formidable
improvisation of duty, which never loses heart. They had no
printing-offices, they obtained them; they had no guns, they found them;
they had no balls, they cast them; they had no powder, they manufactured
it; they had nothing but paving-stones, and from thence they evolved
combatants.

It is true that these paving-stones were the paving-stones of Paris,
stones which change themselves into men.

Such is the power of Right, that, during four days these hundred and
twenty men, who had nothing in their favor but the goodness of their
cause, counterbalanced an army of 100,000 soldiers. At one moment the
scale turned on their side. Thanks to them, thanks to their resistance,
seconded by the indignation of honest hearts, there came an hour when
the victory of the law seemed possible, and even certain. On Thursday,
the 4th, the _coup d'état_ tottered, and was obliged to support itself
by assassination. We seen that without the butchery of the boulevards,
if he had not saved his perjury by a massacre, if he had not sheltered
his crime by another crime, Louis Bonaparte was lost.

During the long hours of this struggle, a struggle without a truce, a
struggle against the army during the day and against the police during
the night,--an unequal struggle, where all the strength and all the rage
was on one side, and, as we have just said, nothing but Right on the
other, not one of these hundred and twenty Representatives, not a single
one failed at the call of duty, not one shunned the danger, not one drew
back, not one wearied,--all these heads placed themselves resolutely
under the axe, and for four days waited for it to fall.

To-day captivity, transportation, expatriation, exile, the axe has
fallen on nearly all these heads.

I am one of those who have had no other merit in this struggle than to
rally into one unique thought the courage of all; but let me here
heartily render justice to those men amongst whom I pride myself with
having for three years served the holy cause of human progress, to this
Left, insulted, calumniated, unappreciated, and dauntless, which was
always in the breach, and which did not repose for a single day, which
recoiled none the more before the military conspiracy than before the
parliamentary conspiracy, and which, entrusted by the people with the
task of defending them, defended them even when abandoned by themselves;
defended them in the tribune with speech, and in the street with the
sword.

When the Committee of Resistance in the sitting at which the decree of
deposition and of outlawry was drawn up and voted, making use of the
discretionary power which the Left had confided to it, decided that all
the signatures of the Republican Representatives remaining at liberty
should be placed at the foot of the decree, it was a bold stroke; the
Committee did not conceal from itself that it was a list of proscription
offered to the victorious _coup d'état_ ready drawn up, and perhaps in
its inner conscience it feared that some would disavow it, and protest
against it. As a matter of fact, the next day we received two letters,
two complaints. They were from two Representatives who had been omitted
from the list, and who claimed the honor of being reinstated there. I
reinstate these two Representatives here, in their right of being
proscripts. Here are their names--Anglade and Pradié.

From Tuesday, the 2d, to Friday, the 5th of December, the
Representatives of the Left and the Committee, dogged, worried, hunted
down, always on the point of being discovered and taken, that is to
say--massacred; repaired for the purpose of deliberating, to
twenty-seven different houses, shifted twenty-seven times their place of
meeting, from their first gathering in the Rue Blanche to their last
conference at Raymond's. They refused the shelters which were offered
them on the left bank of the river, wishing always to remain in the
centre of the combat. During these changes they more than once traversed
the right bank of Paris from one end to the other, most of the time on
foot, and making long circuits in order not to be followed. Everything
threatened them with danger; their number, their well-known faces, even
their precautions. In the populous streets there was danger, the police
were permanently posted there; in the lonely streets there was danger,
because the goings and comings were more noticed there.

They did not sleep, they did not eat, they took what they could find, a
glass of water from time to time, a morsel of bread here and there.
Madame Landrin gave us a basin of soup, Madame Grévy the remainder of a
cold pie. We dined one evening on a little chocolate which a chemist had
distributed in a barricade. At Jeunesse's, in the Rue de Grammont,
during the night of the 3rd, Michel de Bourges took a chair, and said,
"This is my bed." Were they tired? They did not feel it. The old men,
like Ronjat, the sick, like Boysset, all went forward. The public peril,
like a fever, sustained them.

Our venerable colleague, Lamennais, did not come, but he remained three
days without going to bed, buttoned up in his old frock coat, his thick
boots on his feet, ready to march. He wrote to the author these three
lines, which it is impossible not to quote:--"You are heroes without me.
This pains me greatly. I await your orders. Try, then, to find me
something to do, be it but to die."

In these meetings each man preserved his usual demeanor. At times one
might have thought it an ordinary sitting in one of the bureaux of the
Assembly. There was the calm of every day, mingled with the firmness of
decisive crises. Edgar Quinet retained all his lofty judgment, Noël
Parfait all his mental vivacity, Yvan all his vigorous and intelligent
penetration, Labrousse all his animation. In a corner Pierre Lefranc,
pamphleteer and ballad-writer, but a pamphleteer like Courier, and a
ballad-writer like Béranger smiled at the grave and stern words of
Dupont de Bussac. All that brilliant group of young orators of the Left,
Baneel with his powerful ardor, Versigny and Victor Chauffour with their
youthful daring. Sain with his coolheadedness which reveals strength,
Farconnet with his gentle voice and his energetic inspiration, lavishing
his efforts in resisting the _coup d'état_, sometimes taking part in the
deliberations, at others amongst the people, proving that to be an
orator one must possess all the qualifications of a combatant. De
Flotte, indefatigable, was ever ready to traverse all Paris. Xavier
Durrieu was courageous, Dulac dauntless, Charamaule fool-hardy. Citizens
and Paladins. Courage! who would have dared to exhibit none amongst all
these men, of whom not one trembled? Untrimmed beards, torn coats,
disordered hair, pale faces, pride glistening in every eye. In the
houses where they were received they installed themselves as best they
could. If there were no sofas or chairs, some, exhausted in strength,
but not in heart, seated themselves on the floor. All became copyists of
the decrees and proclamations; one dictated, ten wrote. They wrote on
tables, on the corners of furniture, on their knees. Frequently paper
was lacking, pens were wanting. These wretched trifles created obstacles
at the most critical times. At certain moments in the history of peoples
an inkstand where the ink is dried up may prove a public calamity.
Moreover, cordiality prevailed among all, all shades of difference were
effaced. In the secret sittings of the Committee Madier de Montjau, that
firm and generous heart, De Flotte, brave and thoughtful, a fighting
philosopher of the Devolution, Carnot, accurate, cold, tranquil,
immovable, Jules Favre, eloquent, courageous, admirable through his
simplicity and his strength, inexhaustible in resources as in sarcasms,
doubled, by combining them, the diverse powers of their minds.

Michel de Bourges, seated in a corner of the fireplace, or leaning on a
table enveloped in his great coat, his black silk cap on his head, had
an answer for every suggestion, gave back to occurrences blow for blow,
was on his guard for danger, difficulty, opportunity, necessity, for his
is one of those wealthy natures which have always something ready either
in their intellect or in their imagination. Words of advice crossed
without jostling each other. These men entertained no illusion. They
knew that they had entered into a life-and-death struggle. They had no
quarter to expect. They had to do with the Man who had said, "Crush
everything." They knew the bloody words of the self-styled Minister,
Merny. These words the placards of Saint-Arnaud interpreted by decrees,
the Praetorians let loose in the street interpreted them by murder. The
members of the Insurrectionary Committee and the Representatives
assisting at the meetings were not ignorant that wherever they might be
taken they would be killed on the spot by bayonet-thrusts. It was the
fortune of this war. Yet the prevailing expression on every face was
serenity; that profound serenity which comes from a happy conscience. At
times this serenity rose to gaiety. They laughed willingly and at
everything. At the torn trousers of one, at the hat which another had
brought back from the barricade instead of his own, at the comforter of
a third. "Hide your big body," they said to him. They were children, and
everything amused them. On the morning of the 4th Mathien de la Drôme
came in. He had organized for his part a committee which communicated
with the Central Committee, he came to tell us of it. He had shaved off
his fringe of beard so as not to be recognized in the streets. "You look
like an Archbishop," said Michel de Bourges to him, and there was a
general laugh. And all this, with this thought which every moment
brought back; the noise which is heard at the door, the key which turns
in the lock is perhaps Death coming in.

The Representatives and the Committee were at the mercy of chance. More
than once they could have been captured, and they were not; either owing
to the scruples of certain police agents (where the deuce will scruples
next take up their abode?) or that these agents doubted the final
result, and feared to lay their hand heedlessly upon possible victors.
If Vassal, the Commissary of Police, who met us on the morning of the
4th, on the pavement of the Rue des Moulins, had wished, we might have
been taken that day. He did not betray us. But these were exceptions.
The pursuit of the police was none the less ardent and implacable. At
Marie's, it may be remembered that the _sergents de ville_ and the
gendarmes arrived ten minutes after we had left the house, and that they
even ransacked under the beds with their bayonets.

Amongst the Representatives there were several Constituents, and at
their head Bastide. Bastide, in 1848, had been Minister for Foreign
Affairs. During the second night, meeting in the Rue Popincourt, they
reproached him with several of his actions. "Let me first get myself
killed," he answered, "and then you can reproach me with what you like."
And he added, "How can you distrust me, who am a Republican up to the
hilt?" Bastide would not consent to call our resistance the
"insurrection," he called it the "counter-insurrection." he said,
"Victor Hugo is right. The insurgent is at the Elysée." It was my
opinion, as we have seen, that we ought to bring the battle at once to
an issue, to defer nothing, to reserve nothing; I said, "We must strike
the _coup d'état_ while it is hot." Bastide supported me. In the combat
he was impassive, cold, gay beneath his coldness. At the Saint Antoine
barricade, at the moment when the guns of the _coup d'état_ were leveled
at the Representatives of the people, he said smilingly to Madier de
Montjau, "Ask Schoelcher what he thinks of the abolition of the penalty
of death." (Schoelcher, like myself, at this supreme moment, would have
answered, "that it ought to be abolished") In another barricade Bastide,
compelled to absent himself for a moment, placed his pipe on a
paving-stone. They found Bastide's pipe, and they thought him dead. He
came back, and it was hailing musket-balls; he said, "My pipe?" he
relighted it and resumed the fight. Two balls pierced his coat.

When the barricades were constructed, the Republican Representatives
spread themselves abroad; and distributed themselves amongst them.
Nearly all the Representatives of the Left repaired to the barricades,
assisting either to build them or to defend them. Besides the great
exploit at Saint Antoine barricade, where Schoelcher was so admirable,
Esquiros went to the barricade of the Rue de Charonne, De Flotte to
those of the Pantheon and of the Chapelle Saint Denis, Madier de
Montjau to those of Belleville and the Rue Aumaire, Doutre and Pelletier
to that of the Mairie of the Fifth Arrondissement, Brives to that of Rue
Beaubourg, Arnauld de l'Ariège to that of Rue de Petit-Repîsoir, Viguier
to that of the Rue Pagevin, Versigny to that of the Rue Joigneaux;
Dupont de Bussac to that of the Carré Saint Martin; Carlos Forel and
Boysset to that of the Rue Rambuteau. Doutre received a sword-cut on his
head, which cleft his hat; Bourzat had four balls in his overcoat;
Baudin was killed; Gaston Dussoubs was ill and could not come; his
brother, Denis Dussoubs, replaced him. Where? In the tomb.

Baudin fell on the first barricade, Denis Dussoubs on the last.

I was less favored than Bourzat; I only had three balls in my overcoat,
and it is impossible for me to say whence they came. Probably from the
boulevard.

After the battle was lost there was no general helter-skelter, no rout,
no flight. All remained hidden in Paris ready to reappear, Michel in the
Rue d'Alger, myself in the Rue de Navarin. The Committee held yet
another sitting on Saturday, the 6th, at eleven o'clock at night. Jules
Favre, Michel de Bourges, and myself, we came during the night to the
house of a generous and brave woman, Madame Didier. Bastide came there
and said to me, "If you are not killed here, you are going to enter upon
exile. For myself, I am going to remain in Paris. Take me for your
lieutenant." I have related this incident.

They hoped for the 9th (Tuesday) a resumption of arms, which did not
take place. Malarmet had announced it to Dupont de Bussac, but the blow
of the 4th had prostrated Paris. The populace no longer stirred. The
Representatives did not resolve to think of their safety, and to quit
France through a thousand additional dangers until several days
afterwards, when the last spark of resistance was extinguished in the
heart of the people, and the last glimmer of hope in heaven.

Several Republican Representatives were workmen; they have again become
workmen in exile. Nadaud has resumed his trowel, and is a mason in
London. Faure (du Rhône), a cutler, and Bansept, a shoemaker, felt that
their trade had become their duty, and practise it in England. Faure
makes knives, Bansept makes boots. Greppo is a weaver, it was he who
when a proscript made the coronation robe of Queen Victoria. Gloomy
smile of Destiny. Noël Parfait is a proof-reader at Brussels; Agricol
Perdiguier, called Avignonnais-la-Vertu, has girded on his leathern
apron, and is a cabinet-maker at Antwerp. Yesterday these men sat in the
Sovereign Assembly. Such things as these are seen in Plutarch.

The eloquent and courageous proscript, Emile Deschanel, has created at
Brussels, with a rare talent of speech, a new form of public
instruction, the Conferences. To him is due the honor of this
foundation, so fruitful and so useful.

Let us say in conclusion that the National Legislative Assembly lived
badly but died well.

At this moment of the fall, irreparable for the cowards, the Right was
worthy, the Left was great.

Never before has History seen a Parliament fall in this manner.

February had blown upon the Deputies of the legal country, and the
Deputies had vanished. M. Sauzet had sunk down behind the tribune, and
had gone away without even taking his hat.

Bonaparte, the other, the first, the true Bonaparte, had made the "Five
Hundred" step out of the windows of the Orangery of Saint Cloud,
somewhat embarrassed with their large mantles.

Cromwell, the oldest of the Bonapartes, when he achieved his Eighteenth
Brumaire, encountered scarcely any other resistance than a few
imprecations from Milton and from Ludlaw, and was able to say in his
boorishly gigantic language, "I have put the King in my knapsack and the
Parliament in my pocket."

We must go back to the Roman Senate in order to find true Curule chairs.

The Legislative Assembly, let us repeat, to its honor, did not lose
countenance when facing the abyss. History will keep an account of it.
After having betrayed so many things, it might have been feared that
this Assembly would end by betraying itself. It did nothing of the kind.
The Legislature, one is obliged to remember, had committed faults upon
faults; the Royalist majority had, in the most odious manner, persecuted
the Republican minority, which was bravely doing its duty in denouncing
it to the people; this Assembly had had a very long cohabitation and a
most fatal complicity with the Man of Crime, who had ended by strangling
it as a robber strangles his concubine in his bed; but whatever may be
said of this fateful Assembly, it did not exhibit that wretched
vanishing away which Louis Bonaparte hoped for; it was not a coward.

This is due to its having originated from universal suffrage. Let us
mention this, for it is an instructive lesson. The virtue of this
universal suffrage, which had begotten the Assembly and which the
Assembly had wished to slay, it felt in itself to its last hour.

The sap of a whole people does not spread in vain throughout an
Assembly, even throughout the most decrepit. On the decisive day this
sap asserts itself.

The Legislative Assembly, laden as it may be with formidable
responsibilities, will, perhaps, be less overwhelmed than it deserves by
the reprobation of posterity.

Thanks to universal suffrage, which it had deceived, and which
constituted its faith and its strength at the last moment, thanks to the
Left, which it had oppressed, scoffed at, calumniated, and decimated,
and which cast on it the glorious reflection of its heroism, this
pitiful Assembly died a grand death.




CHAPTER XVIII.


PAGE WRITTEN AT BRUSSELS

Well then, yes, I will kick open the door of this Palace, and I will
enter with you, History! I will seize by the collar all the
perpetrators, continually caught red-handed in the commission of all
these outrages! I will suddenly illuminate this cavern of night with the
broad daylight of truth!

Yes, I will bring in the daylight! I will tear down the curtain, I will
open the window, I will show to every eye such as it really is,
infamous, horrible, wealthy, triumphant, joyous, gilded,
besmirched--this Elysée! this Court! this group! this heap! call it what
you will! this galley-crew! where writhe and crawl, and pair and breed
every baseness, every indignity, every abomination: filibusters,
buccaneers, swearers of oaths, Signers of the Cross, spies, swindlers,
butchers, executioners, from the brigand who vends his sword, to the
Jesuit who sells his God second-hand! This sink where Baroche elbows
Teste! where each brings his own nastiness! Magnan his epaulets;
Montalembert his religion, Dupin his person!

And above all the innermost circle, the Holy of Holies, the private
Council, the smug den where they drink--where they eat--where they
laugh--where they sleep--where they play--where they cheat--where they
call Highnesses "Thou,"--where they wallow! Oh! what ignominies! It is
them! It is there! Dishonor, baseness, shame, and opprobrium are there!
Oh History! A hot iron for all these faces.

It is there that they amuse themselves, and that they jest, and that
they banter, and that they make sport of France! It is there that they
pocket hap-hazard, amid great shouts of laughter, the millions of louis
and the millions of votes! See them, look at them! They have treated the
Law like a girl, they are content! Right is slaughtered, Liberty is
gagged, the flag is dishonored, the people are under their feet. They
are happy! And who are they? What are these men? Europe knows not. One
fine morning it saw them come out of a crime. Nothing more. A parcel of
rascals who vainly tried to become celebrated, and who have remained
anonymous. Look! they are all there! See them, I tell you! Look at them,
I tell you! Recognize them if you can. Of what sex are they? To what
species do they belong? Who is this one? Is he a writer? No; he is a
dog. He gobbles human flesh. And that one? Is he a dog? No, he is a
courtier--he has blood on his paw.

New men, that is what they term them. New, in truth! Unlooked-for,
strange, unprecedented, monstrous! Perjury, iniquity, robbery,
assassination, erected into ministerial departments, swindling applied
to universal suffrage, government under false pretences, duty called
crime, crime called duty, cynicism laughing in the midst of
atrocity,--it is of all this that their newness is compounded.

Now, all is well, they have succeeded, they have a fair wind, they enjoy
themselves to the full. They have cheated France, they are dividing the
spoil. France is a bag, and they put their hand in it. Rummage, for
Heaven's sake! Take, while you are there; help yourselves, draw out,
plunder, steal! One wants money, another wants situations, another wants
a decorative collar round his neck, another a plume in his hat, another
embroidery on his sleeve, another women, another power; another news for
the Bourse, another a railway, another wine. I should think, indeed,
that they are well satisfied. Picture to yourself a poor devil who,
three years ago, borrowed ten sous of his porter, and who to-day,
leaning voluptuously on the _Moniteur_, has only to sign a decree to
take a million. To make themselves perfectly happy, to be able to devour
the finances of the State, to live at the expense of the Treasury like a
son of the family, this is what is called their policy. Their ambition
has a true name, it is gluttony.

They ambitious? Nonsense! They are gluttons. To govern is to gamble.
This does not prevent betrayal. On the contrary, they spy upon each
other, they betray each other. The little traitors betray the great
traitors. Pietri looks askance at Maupas, and Maupas at Carlier. They
all lie in the same reeking sewer! They have achieved the _coup d'état_
in common. That is all. Moreover they feel sure of nothing, neither of
glances, nor of smiles, nor of hidden thoughts, nor of men, nor of
women, nor of the lacquey, nor of the prince, nor of words of honor, nor
of birth certificates. Each feels himself fraudulent, and knows himself
suspected. Each has his secret aims. Each alone knows why he has done
this. Not one utters a word about his crime, and no one bears the name
of his father. Ah! may God grant me life, and may Jesus pardon me, I
will raise a gibbet a hundred yards high, I will take hammer and nails,
and I will crucify this Beauharnais called Bonaparte, between this Leroy
called Saint-Arnoud, and this Fialin called Persigny!

And I would drag you there also, all of you accomplices! This Morny,
this Romieu, this Fould, the Jew senator, this Delangle, who bears on
his back this placard: JUSTICE! and this Troplong, this judicial
glorifier of the violation of the laws, this lawyer apologist of the
_coup d'état_, this magistrate flatterer of perjury, this judge
panegyrist of murder, who will go down to posterity with a sponge filled
with mud and with blood in his hand.

I begin the battle therefore. With whom? With the present ruler of
Europe. It is right that this spectacle should be given to the world.
Louis Bonaparte is the success, is the intoxicated triumph, is the gay
and ferocious despotism, opening out under the victory, he is the mad
fulness of power, seeking limits and finding none, neither in things nor
in men; Louis Bonaparte holds France, _Urbem Roman habit_; and whoever
holds France holds the world; he is master of the votes, master of the
consciences, master of the people; he nominates his successor, reigns
forever over future electoral scrutinies, disposes of eternity, and
places futurity in an envelope; his Senate, his Legislative Body, his
Council of State, with heads lowered and mingled confusedly behind him,
lick his feet; he drags along in a leash the bishops and cardinals; he
tramples on the justice which curses him, and on the judges who adore
him, thirty correspondents inform the Continent that he has frowned, and
every electric telegraph vibrates if he raises his little finger; around
him is heard the rustling of sabres, and the drums beat the salute; he
sits under the shadow of the eagle in the midst of bayonets and of
citadels, the free nations tremble and hide their liberties for fear
that he should steal them, the great American Republic herself falters
in his presence, and dares not withdraw her Ambassador from him; the
kings, surrounded by their armies, look at him smilingly, with their
hearts full of fear. Where will he begin? With Belgium? With
Switzerland? With Piedmont? Europe expects to be overrun. He is capable
of all, and he dreams of all.

Well, then! Before this master, this triumpher, this conqueror, this
dictator, this Emperor, this all-powerful, there rises a solitary man, a
wanderer, despoiled, ruined, prostrate, proscribed, and attacks him.
Louis Napoleon has ten thousand cannons, and five hundred thousand
soldiers; the writer has his pen and his ink-stand. The writer is
nothing, he is a grain of dust, he is a shadow, he is an exile without a
refuge, he is a vagrant without a passport, but he has by his side and
fighting with him two powers, Right, which is invincible, and Truth,
which is immortal.

Assuredly, for this struggle to the death, for this formidable duel,
Providence could have chosen a more illustrious champion, a grander
athlete. But what matter men, there, where it is the idea with combats!
Such as it is, it is good, let us repeat, that this spectacle should be
given to the world. What is this in truth? It is intellect, an atom
which resists strength--a colossus.

I have only one stone in my sling, but that stone is a good one; that
stone is justice.

I attack Louis Bonaparte at this hour, when he is erect; at this hour,
when he is master. He is in his zenith. So much the better; it is that
which suits me.

Yes, I attack Louis Bonaparte. I attack him before the world; I attack
him in the presence of God and men; I attack him resolutely,
desperately; for the love of the people and of France. He is about to be
Emperor, let it be so. Let there be at least one brow which resists. Let
Louis Bonaparte know that an Empire may be taken, but that a Conscience
cannot be taken.




CHAPTER XIX.


THE INFALLIBLE BENEDICTION

The Pope approved.

When the mails brought to Rome intelligence of the event of the 2d of
December, the Pope went to a review held by General Gémeau, and begged
him to congratulate Prince Louis Napoléon for him.

There was a precedent for this.

On the 12th December, 1572, Saint-Goard, Ambassador of Charles the
Ninth, King of France, to Philip the Second, King of Spain, wrote from
Madrid to his master, Charles the Ninth, "The news of the events of the
day of Saint Bartholomew have reached the Catholic King. Contrary to his
wont and custom, he has shown so much joy, that he has manifested it
more openly than he has ever done for all the happy events and good
fortune which have previously befallen him. So that I went to him on
Sunday morning at Saint Hieronimus, and having approached him, he burst
out laughing, and with every demonstration of extreme pleasure and
contentment, began to praise your Majesty."[36]

The hand of Pius IX. remained extended over France, when it had become
the Empire.

Then, under the shadow of this benediction, began an era of prosperity.


[36] "Archives of the house of Orange," page 125, Supplement.




CONCLUSION--THE FALL.




CHAPTER I.


I was coming back from my fourth exile--an exile in Belgium, a small
matter. It was one of the last days of September, 1871. I was
re-entering France by the Luxembourg frontier. I had fallen asleep in
the carriage. Suddenly the jolt of the train coming to a standstill
awoke me. I opened my eyes.

The train had stopped in the middle of a charming landscape.

I was in the half-consciousness of an interrupted sleep; and ideas, as
yet half-dreams, hazy and diffuse, hovered between myself and reality. I
experienced the undefinable and confused sensation of awakening.

A river flowed by the side of the railway, clear, around a bright and
verdant island. This vegetation was so thick that the moor-hens, on
reaching it, plunged beneath it and disappeared. The river wound through
a valley, which appeared like a huge garden. Apple-trees were there,
which reminded one of Eve, and willows, which made one think of Galatea.
It was, as I have said, in one of those equinoctial months when may be
felt the peculiar charm of a season drawing to a close. If it be winter
which is passing away, you hear the song of approaching spring; if it be
summer which is vanishing, you see glimmering on the horizon the
undefinable smile of autumn. The wind lulled and harmonized all those
pleasant sounds which compose the murmur of the fields; the tinkling of
the sheep-bells seemed to soothe the humming of the bees; the last
butterflies met together with the first grapes; this hour of the year
mingles the joy of being still alive with the unconscious melancholy of
fast approaching death; the sweetness of the sun was indescribable.
Fertile fields streaked with furrows, honest peasants' cottages; under
the trees a turf covered with shade, the lowing of cattle as in Virgil,
and the smoke of hamlets penetrated by rays of sunshine; such was the
complete picture. The clanging of anvils rang in the distance, the
rhythm of work amidst the harmony of nature. I listened, I mused
vaguely. The valley was beautiful and quiet, the blue heavens seemed as
though resting upon a lovely circle of hills; in the distance were the
voices of birds, and close to me the voices of children, like two songs
of angels mingled together; the universal purity enshrouded me: all this
grace and all this grandeur shed a golden dawn into my soul....

Suddenly a fellow-traveller asked,--

"What place is this?"

Another answered,--

"Sedan."

I shuddered.

This paradise was a tomb.

I looked around. The valley was circular and hollow, like the bottom of
a crater; the winding river resembled a serpent; the high hills, ranged
one behind the other, surrounded this mysterious spot like a triple line
of inexorable walls; once there, there is no means of exit. It reminded
me of the amphitheatres. An indescribable disquieting vegetation which
seemed to be an extension of the Black Forest, overran all the heights,
and lost itself in the horizon like a huge impenetrable snare; the sun
shone, the birds sang, carters passed by whistling; sheep, lambs, and
pigeons were scattered about, leaves quivered and rustled; the grass, a
densely thick grass, was full of flowers. It was appalling.

I seemed to see waving over this valley the flashing of the avenging
angel's sword.

This word "Sedan" had been like a veil abruptly torn aside. The
landscape had become suddenly filled with tragedy. Those shapeless eyes
which the bark of trees delineates on the trunks were gazing--at what?
At something terrible and lost to view.

In truth, that was the place! And at the moment when I was passing by
thirteen months all but a few days had elapsed. That was the place where
the monstrous enterprise of the 2d of December had burst asunder. A
fearful shipwreck.

The gloomy pathways of Fate cannot be studied without profound anguish
of the heart.




CHAPTER II.


On the 31st of August, 1870, an army was reassembled, and was, as it
were, massed together under the walls of Sedan, in a place called the
Givonne Valley. This army was a French army--twenty-nine brigades,
fifteen divisions, four army corps--90,000 men. This army was in this
place without any one being able to divine the reason; without order,
without an object, scattered about--a species of heap of men thrown down
there as though with the view of being seized by some huge hand.

This army either did not entertain, or appeared not to entertain, for
the moment any immediate uneasiness. They knew, or at least they thought
they knew, that the enemy was a long way off. On calculating the stages
at four leagues daily, it was three days' march distant. Nevertheless,
towards evening the leaders took some wise strategic precautions; they
protected the army, which rested in the rear on Sedan and the Meuse, by
two battle fronts, one composed of the 7th Corps, and extending from
Floing to Givonne, the other composed of the 12th Corps, extending from
Givonne to Bazeilles; a triangle of which the Meuse formed the
hypothenuse. The 12th Corps, formed of the three divisions of
Lacretelle, Lartigue, and Wolf, ranged on the right, with the artillery,
between the brigades formed a veritable barrier, having Bazeilles and
Givonne at each end, and Daigny in its centre; the two divisions of
Petit and Lhéritier massed in the rear upon two lines supported this
barrier. General Lebrun commanded the 12th Corps. The 7th Corps,
commanded by General Douay, only possessed two divisions--Dumont's
division and Gilbert's division--and formed the other battle front,
covering the army of Givonne to Floing on the side of Illy; this battle
front was comparatively weak, too open on the side of Givonne, and only
protected on the side of the Meuse by the two cavalry divisions of
Margueritte and Bonnemains, and by Guyomar's brigade, resting in squares
upon Floing. Within this triangle were encamped the 5th Corps, commanded
by General Wimpfen, and the 1st Corps, commanded by General Ducrot.
Michel's cavalry division covered the 1st Corps on the side of Daigny;
the 5th supported itself upon Sedan. Four divisions, each disposed upon
two lines--the divisions of Lhéritier, Grandchamp, Goze, and
Conseil-Duménil--formed a sort of horseshoe, turned towards Sedan, and
uniting the first battle front with the second. The cavalry division of
Ameil and the brigade of Fontanges served as a reserve for these four
divisions. The whole of the artillery was upon the two battle fronts.
Two portions of the army were in confusion, one to the right of Sedan
beyond Balan, the other to the left of Sedan, on this side of Iges.
Beyond Balan were the divisions of Vassoigne and the brigade of Reboul,
on this side of Iges were the two cavalry divisions of Margueritte and
Bonnemains.

These arrangements indicated a profound feeling of security. In the
first place the Emperor Napoleon III. would not have come there if he
had not been perfectly tranquil. This Givonne Valley is what Napoleon I.
called a "washhand basin." There could not be a more complete enclosure.
An army is so much at home there that it is too much so; it runs the
risk of no longer being able to get out. This disquieted some brave and
prudent leaders such as Wimpfen, but they were not listened to. If
absolutely necessary, said the people of the Imperial circle, they could
always be sure of being able to reach Mézières, and at the worst the
Belgian frontier. Was it, however, needful to provide for such extreme
eventualities? In certain cases foresight is almost an offence. They
were all of one mind, therefore, to be at their ease.

If they had been uneasy they would have cut the bridges of the Meuse;
but they did not even think of it. To what purpose? The enemy was a long
way off. The Emperor, who evidently was well informed, affirmed it.

The army bivouacked somewhat in confusion, as we have said, and slept
peaceably throughout this night of August 31, having, whatever might
happen, or believing that they had, the retreat upon Mézières open
behind it. They disdained to take the most ordinary precautions, they
made no cavalry reconnaissances, they did not even place outposts. A
German military writer has stated this.[37] Fourteen leagues at least
separated them from the German army, three days' march; they did not
exactly know where it was; they believed it scattered, possessing little
unity, badly informed, led somewhat at random upon several points at
once, incapable of a movement converging upon one single point, like
Sedan; they believed that the Crown Prince of Saxony was marching on
Chalons, and that the Crown Prince of Prussia was marching on Metz; they
were ignorant of everything appertaining to this army, its leaders, its
plan, its armament, its effective force. Was it still following the
strategy of Gustavus Adolphus? Was it still following the tactics of
Frederick II.? No one knew. They felt sure of being at Berlin in a few
weeks. What nonsense! The Prussian army! They talked of this war as of a
dream, and of this army as of a phantom.

During this very night, while the French army was sleeping, this is what
was taking place.


[37] M. Harwik.




CHAPTER III.


At a quarter to two in the morning, at his headquarters at Mouzon,
Albert, Crown Prince of Saxony, set the Army of the Meuse in motion; the
Royal Guard were beat to arms, and two divisions marched, one upon
Villers-Cernay, by Escambre and Fouru-aux-Bois, the other upon
Francheval by Suchy and Fouru-Saint-Remy. The Artillery of the Guard
followed.

At the same moment the 12th Saxon Corps was beaten to arms, and by the
high road to the south of Douzy reached Lamécourt, and marched upon La
Moncelle; the 1st Bavarian Corps marched upon Bazeilles, supported at
Reuilly-sur-Meuse by an Artillery Division of the 4th Corps. The other
division of the 4th Corps crossed the Meuse at Mouzon, and massed itself
in reserve at Mairy, upon the right bank. These three columns maintained
close communication with each other. The order was given to the advanced
guards to begin no offensive movement before five o'clock, and silently
to occupy Fouru-aux-Bois, Fouru-Saint-Remy, and Douay. They had left
their knapsacks behind them. The baggage-wagons did not stir. The Crown
Prince of Saxony was on horseback on the heights of Amblimont.

At the same time, at his headquarters at Chémery, Blumenthal was having
a bridge built over the Meuse by the Wurtemburg division. The 11th
Corps, astir before daylight, crossed the Meuse at Dom-le-Mesnil and at
Donchery, and reached Vrigne-sur-Bois. The artillery followed, and held
the road from Vrigne to Sedan. The Wurtemburg division kept the bridge
which it had built, and held the road from Sedan to Mézières. At five
o'clock, the 2d Bavarian Corps, with the artillery at its head, detached
one of its divisions, and sent it by Bulson upon Frénois; the other
division passed by Noyers, and drew up before Sedan, between Frénois and
Wadelincourt. The artillery of the Reserve was drawn up on the heights
of the left bank, opposite Donchery.

At the same time the 6th Cavalry Division was sent from Mazeray, and
passing by Boutancourt and Bolzicourt, reached the Meuse at Flize; the
2d Cavalry Division quitted its encampment, and took up its position to
the south of Boutancourt; the 4th Cavalry Division took up its position
to the south of Frénois; the 1st Bavarian Corps installed itself at
Remilly; the 5th Cavalry Division and the 6th Corps were posted to
observe, and all in line, and order, massed upon the heights waited for
the dawn to appear. The Crown Prince of Prussia was on horseback on the
hill of Frénois.

At the same moment, upon every point of the horizon, other and similar
movements were taking place from every side. The high hills were
suddenly overrun by an immense black army. Not one shout of command. Two
hundred and fifty thousand men came silently to encircle the Givonne
Valley.

This is what the circle consisted of,--

The Bavarians, the right wing, at Bazeilles on the Meuse; next to the
Bavarians the Saxons, at La Moncelle and Daigny; opposite Givonne, the
Royal Guard; the 5th Corps at Saint Menges; the 2d at Flaigneux; the
Wurtemburgers at the bend of the Meuse, between Saint Menges and
Donchery; Count Stolberg and his cavalry at Donchery; in front, towards
Sedan, the 2d Bavarian Army.

All this was carried out in a ghostly manner, in order, without a
whisper, without a sound, through forests, ravines, and valleys. A
tortuous and ill-omened march. A stealthy gliding onwards of reptiles.

Scarcely could a murmur be heard beneath the thick foliage. The silent
battle swarmed in the darkness awaiting the day.

The French army was sleeping.

Suddenly it awoke.

It was a prisoner.

The sun rose, brilliant on the side of God--terrible on the side of man.




CHAPTER IV.


Let us review the situation.

The Germans have numbers on their side; they are three against one,
perhaps four; they own to 250,000 men, and it is certain that their
attacking front extended for 30 kilomètres; they have on their side the
positions, they crown the heights, they fill the forests, they are
covered by all these escarpments, they are masked by all this shade;
they possess an incomparable artillery. The French army is in a valley,
almost without artillery and without supplies, utterly naked beneath
their hail of lead. The Germans have on their side the ambuscade, and
the French have only on their side heroism. Death is glorious, but
surprise is profitable.

A surprise, that is the true description of this brilliant exploit.

Is it fair warfare? Yes. But if this is fair, what is unfair warfare? It
is the same thing.

This said, the story of the Battle of Sedan has been told.

I should have wished to stop there. But I cannot. Whatever horror the
historian may feel, History is a duty, and this duty must be fulfilled.
There is no incline more inexorable than this: to tell the truth; he who
ventures on it rolls to the very bottom. It must be so. The guardian of
Justice is doomed to justice.

The Battle of Sedan is more than a battle which has been fought; it is a
syllogism which is completed; a formidable premeditation of destiny.
Destiny never hurries, but it always comes. At its hour, there it is. It
allows years to pass by, and at the moment when men are least thinking
of it, it appears. Of this character is the fatal, the unexpected
catastrophe named Sedan. From time to time in History, Divine logic
makes an onslaught. Sedan is one of those onslaughts.

Thus on the 1st of September, at five o'clock in the morning the world
awoke under the sun, and the French army under the thunderbolt.




CHAPTER V.


Bazeilles takes fire, Givonne takes fire, Floing takes fire; the battle
begins with a furnace. The whole horizon is aflame. The French camp is
in this crater, stupefied, affrighted, starting up from sleeping,--a
funereal swarming. A circle of thunder surrounds the army. They are
encircled by annihilation. This mighty slaughter is carried on on all
sides simultaneously. The French resist, and they are terrible, having
nothing left but despair. Our cannon, almost all old-fashioned and of
short range, are at once dismounted by the fearful and exact aim of the
Prussians. The density of the rain of shells upon the valley is so
great, that "the earth is completely furrowed," says an eye-witness, "as
though by a rake." How many cannon? Eleven hundred at least. Twelve
German batteries upon La Moncelle alone; the 3d and 4th _Abtheilung_, an
awe-striking artillery, upon the crests of Givonne, with the 2d horse
battery in reserve; opposite Doigny ten Saxon and two Wurtemburg
batteries; the curtain of trees of the wood to the north of
Villers-Cernay masks the mounted _Abtheilung_, which is there with the