
eness.




CHAPTER VIII

A POLITICAL INTERLUDE


Duncombe laid down his cue and strolled towards the sideboard, where his
guest was already mixing himself a whisky and soda.

"By the by, Runton," he said, "have you seen anything of our friend Von
Rothe since that little affair at your place?"

Lord Runton shook his head.

"Not once," he answered. "He behaved very decently about it on the
whole; treated it quite lightly--but he wouldn't let me go near the
police. It was a long way the most unpleasant thing that ever happened
in my house."

"Never any further light upon it, I suppose?" Duncombe asked.

Lord Runton shook his head.

"None. Of course we could have traced them both without a doubt if we
had put it in the hands of the police, but Von Rothe wouldn't hear of
it. He tried to treat it lightly, but I know that he was very much
worried."

"Do you yourself believe," Duncombe asked, "that it was a political
affair or an ordinary robbery?"

"I think that it was the former," Lord Runton answered. "Those people
were not common adventurers. By the by, George, have you got over your
little weakness yet?" he added with a smile.

Duncombe shrugged his shoulders.

"Nearly made a fool of myself, didn't I?" he remarked, with a levity
which did not sound altogether natural.

"She was an uncommonly fascinating young woman," Lord Runton said, "but
she didn't seem to me very old at the game. She was clever enough to
fool Von Rothe, though. He admits that he told her that he was expecting
a special messenger from Berlin."

Duncombe seemed to have had enough of the subject. He got up and filled
his pipe.

"Is Jack coming down this week?" he asked.

"No! He wired this morning that he can't get away. Sefton isn't coming,
either. Between ourselves, George, something seems to be going on at the
Foreign Office which I don't understand."

"What do you mean?" Duncombe asked. "There has been no hint at any sort
of trouble in the papers."

"That's just what I don't understand," Lord Runton continued. "It is
certain that there is an extraordinary amount of activity at Portsmouth
and Woolwich, but even the little halfpenny sensational papers make no
more than a passing allusion to it. Then look at the movements of our
fleet. The whole of the Mediterranean Fleet is at Gibraltar, and the
Channel Squadron is moving up the North Sea as though to join the Home
Division. All these movements are quite unusual."

"What do you make of them then?" Duncombe asked.

"I scarcely know," Lord Runton answered. "But I can tell you this. There
have been three Cabinet Councils this week, and there is a curious air
of apprehension in official circles in town, as though something were
about to happen. The service clubs are almost deserted, and I know for a
fact that all leave in the navy has been suspended. What I don't
understand is the silence everywhere. It looks to me as though there
were really going to be trouble. The Baltic Fleet sailed this morning,
you know."

Duncombe nodded.

"But," he said, "even if they were ill disposed to us, as no doubt
Russia is just now, what could they do? One squadron of our fleet could
send them to the bottom."

"No doubt," Lord Runton answered. "But supposing they found an ally?"

"France will never go to war with us for Russia's benefit," Duncombe
declared.

"Granted," Lord Runton answered, "but have you watched Germany's
attitude lately?"

"I can't say that I have," Duncombe admitted, "but I should never look
upon Germany as a war-seeking nation."

"No, I dare say not," Lord Runton answered. "Nor would a great many
other people. Every one is willing to admit that she would like our
Colonies, but no one will believe that she has the courage to strike a
blow for them. I will tell you what I believe, Duncombe. I believe that
no Great Power has ever before been in so dangerous a position as we are
in to-day."

Duncombe sat up in his chair. The weariness passed from his face, and he
was distinctly interested. Lord Runton, without being an ardent
politician, was a man of common-sense, and was closely connected with
more than one member of the Cabinet.

"Are you serious, Runton?" he asked.

"Absolutely! Remember, I was in Berlin for two years, and I had many
opportunities of gaining an insight into affairs there. What I can see
coming now I have expected for years. There are two great factors which
make for war. One is the character of the Emperor himself, and the other
the inevitable rot, which must creep like a disease into a great army
kept always upon a war footing, through a decade or more of inactivity.
The Emperor is shrewd enough to see this. Nothing can possibly exist at
its best which is not used for the purpose to which it owes its
existence. That is why we have this flood of literature just now telling
us of the gross abuses and general rottenness of the German army.
Another five years of idleness, and Germany's position as the first
military nation will have passed away. Like every other great power, it
is rusting for want of use. The Emperor knows this."

Duncombe for many reasons was fascinated by his friend's quiet words.
Apart from their obvious plausibility, they brought with them many
startling suggestions. Had chance, he wondered, really made Phyllis
Poynton and her brother pawns in the great game? He felt himself stirred
to a rare emotion by the flood of possibilities which swept in suddenly
upon him. Lord Runton noted with surprise the signs of growing
excitement in his listener.

"Go on, Runton. Anything else?"

Lord Runton helped himself to a cigarette, and leaned across to light
it.

"Of course," he continued, "I know that there are a great many people
who firmly believe that for commercial reasons Germany would never seek
a quarrel with us. I will agree with them so far as to say that I do not
believe that a war with England would be popular amongst the bourgeois
of Germany. On the other hand, they would be quite powerless to prevent
it. The Emperor and his ministers have the affair in their own hands. A
slight break in our diplomatic relations, some trifle seized hold of by
the Press and magnified at once into an insult, and the war torch is
kindled. To-day war does not come about by the slowly growing desire of
nations. The threads of fate are in the hands of a few diplomatists at
Berlin and London--a turn of the wrist, and there is tension which a
breath can turn either way. You ask me why the Emperor should choose
England for attack. There are many reasons: first, because England alone
could repay him for the struggle; secondly, because he is intensely and
miserably jealous of our own King, who has avoided all his own
hot-headed errors, and has yet played a great and individual part in the
world's affairs; thirdly, because England is most easily attacked. I
could give you other reasons if you wanted them."

"Quite enough," Duncombe answered. "What do you suppose would be the
_casus belli_?"

"The progress of the Russian fleet through English waters," Lord Runton
answered promptly. "Russia's interest in such a misunderstanding would
be, of course, immense. She has only to fire on an English ship, by
mistake of course, and the whole fat would be in the fire. England
probably would insist upon the squadron being detained, Germany would
protest against any such action. We might very well be at war with
Russia and Germany within ten days. Russia would immediately either make
terms with Japan, or abandon any active operations in Manchuria and move
upon India. Germany would come for us."

"Is this all purely imagination?" Duncombe asked, "or have you anything
to go on?"

"So far as I am concerned," Lord Runton said slowly, "I, of course, know
nothing. But I have a strong idea that the Government have at least a
suspicion of some secret understanding between Russia and Germany. Their
preparations seem almost to suggest it. Of course we outsiders can only
guess, after all, at what is going on, but it seems to me that there is
a chance to-day for our Government to achieve a diplomatic _coup_."

"In what direction?"

"An alliance with France. Mind, I am afraid that there are
insurmountable obstacles, but if it were possible it would be checkmate
to our friend the Emperor, and he would have nothing left but to climb
down. The trouble is that in the absence of any definite proof of an
understanding between Russia and Germany, France could not break away
from her alliance with the former. Our present arrangement would ensure,
I believe, a benevolent neutrality, but an alliance, if only it could be
compassed, would be the greatest diplomatic triumph of our days. Hullo!
Visitors at this hour. Wasn't that your front-door bell, Duncombe?"

"It sounded like it," Duncombe answered. "Perhaps it is your man."

"Like his cheek, if it is!" Lord Runton answered, rising to his feet and
strolling towards the sideboard. "I told him I would telephone round to
the stables when I was ready. I suppose it is rather late, though I
sha'n't apologize for keeping you up."

"I hope you won't," Duncombe answered. "I have never been more
interested in my life--for many reasons. Don't bother about your man.
Groves will see to him. Help yourself to another whisky and soda, and
come and sit down."

There was a knock at the door, and the butler appeared.

"There are three gentlemen outside, sir, who wish to see you," he
announced to Duncombe. "They will not give their names, but they say
that their business is important, or they would not have troubled you so
late."

Duncombe glanced at the clock. It was past midnight.

"Three gentlemen," he repeated, "at this time of night. But where on
earth have they come from, Groves?"

"They did not say, sir," the man answered. "One of them I should judge
to be a foreigner. They have a motor car outside."

Lord Runton held out his hand.

"Well, it's time I was off, anyhow," he remarked. "Come over and have
lunch to-morrow. Don't bother about me. I'll stroll round to the stables
and start from there. Good night."

Duncombe hesitated. He was on the point of asking his friend to stay,
but before he could make up his mind Runton had lit a cigarette and
strolled away.

"You can show the gentlemen in here, Groves," Duncombe said.

"Very good, sir."

The man disappeared. Duncombe, after a moment's hesitation, crossed the
room, and opening an oak cupboard, slipped a small revolver into his
pocket.




CHAPTER IX

ARRESTED!


One of his three visitors Duncombe recognized immediately. It was
Monsieur Louis. Of the other two one was a Frenchman, a somewhat
sombre-looking person, in a black beard and gold-rimmed eyeglasses, the
other as unmistakably an Englishman of the lower middle class. His broad
shoulders and somewhat stiff bearing seemed to suggest some sort of
drill. Looking them over, Duncombe found himself instinctively wondering
whether the personal strength of these two, which was obvious, might
become a factor in the coming interview.

The Baron naturally was spokesman. He bowed very gravely to Duncombe,
and did not offer his hand.

"I must apologize, Sir George," he said, "for disturbing you at such an
inopportune hour. Our business, however, made it necessary for us to
reach you with as little delay as possible."

"Perhaps you will be good enough to explain," Duncombe answered, "what
that business is."

The Baron raised his hands with a little protesting gesture.

"I regret to tell you, Sir George," he announced, "that it is of a most
unpleasant nature. I could wish that its execution had fallen into other
hands. My companions are Monsieur Ridalle, of the French detective
service, and our other friend here, whom I do not know, is a constable
from the Norwich Police Court. My own connections with the police
service of my country you have already, without doubt, surmised."

"Go on," Duncombe said.

"I regret to say," Monsieur Louis continued, "that my friends here are
in charge of a warrant for your arrest. You will find them possessed of
all the legal documents, French and English. We shall have to ask you to
come to Norwich with us to-night."

"Arrest!" Duncombe repeated. "On what charge?"

"An extremely serious one," the Baron answered gravely. "The charge of
murder!"

Duncombe stared at him in amazement.

"Murder!" he repeated. "What rubbish!"

"The murder of Mademoiselle de Mermillon in her lodging on the night of
the seventh of June last," the Baron said gravely. "Please do not make
any remarks before these men. The evidence against you is already
sufficiently strong."

Duncombe laughed derisively.

"What sort of a puppet show is this?" he exclaimed. "You know as well as
any man living how that poor girl came to her end. This is a cover for
something else, of course. What do you want of me? Let's get at it
without wasting time."

"What we want of you is, I am afraid, only too simple," the Baron
answered, shrugging his shoulders. "We must ask you to accompany us at
once to Norwich Castle. You will have to appear before the magistrates
in the morning, when they will sign the extradition warrant. Our friend
here, Monsieur Ridalle, will then take charge of you. Perhaps you would
like to look through the documents. You will find them all in perfect
order."

Duncombe mechanically glanced through the French and English papers
which were spread out before him. They had certainly a most
uncomfortable appearance of being genuine. He began to feel a little
bewildered.

"You mean to say that you have come here to arrest me on this charge?
That you want me to go away with you to-night?" he asked.

"It is not a matter of wanting you to come," the Baron answered coldly.
"It is a matter of necessity."

Duncombe moved towards the fireplace.

"Will you allow me the privilege of a few moments' conversation with you
in private?" he said to the Baron. "Your companions will perhaps excuse
you for a moment."

The Baron followed without remark. They stood facing one another upon
the hearthrug. Duncombe leaned one elbow upon the mantlepiece, and
turned towards his companion.

"Look here," he said, "those papers seem genuine enough, and if you
insist upon it I will go with you to Norwich. I shall take care not to
let you out of my sight, and if when we get there I find that this is
any part of one of your confounded conspiracies you will find that the
penalties for this sort of thing in England are pretty severe. However,
no doubt you are well aware of that. The question is this. What do you
really want from me?"

Monsieur Louis, who had lit a cigarette, withdrew it from his mouth and
examined the lighted end for a moment in silence.

"The documents," he said, "are genuine. You are arraigned in perfectly
legal fashion. Upon the affidavits there the magistrates must grant the
extradition warrant without hesitation. We have nothing to fear in that
direction."

"The police," Duncombe remarked, "are perfectly aware of my innocence."

Monsieur shrugged his shoulders.

"The evidence," he said, "is remarkably convincing."

"Police-concocted evidence," Duncombe remarked, "would necessarily be
so. I admit that you hold a strong card against me. I don't believe,
however, that you have gone to all this trouble without some ulterior
motive. What is it? What can I offer you in exchange for these
documents?"

Monsieur Louis smiled.

"You are a man of common-sense, Sir George," he said. "I will speak to
you without reserve. It is possible that you might be able to offer the
Government department of my country to which I am attached an inducement
to interest themselves in your behalf. Mind, I am not sure. But if my
information is correct there is certainly a possibility."

"The Government department of your country to which you are attached,"
Duncombe repeated thoughtfully. "Let me understand you. You mean the
secret service police?"

Monsieur Louis glanced a little nervously over his shoulder.

"Never mind what I mean, Sir George," he said quickly. "There are things
which we do not speak of openly. This much is sufficient. I represent a
power which can influence and direct even the criminal courts of justice
of France."

"What bribe have I to offer you?" Duncombe asked. "Information? You know
more than I do. I am afraid you have been misled."

"I think not," Monsieur Louis said quickly. "I will tell you what we
want. A paper was left in your charge by Miss Phyllis Poynton at the
time she was visiting at Runton Place."

"What of it?" Duncombe asked.

The Frenchman's face was suddenly tense with excitement. He recovered
himself almost at once, but his voice shook, and a new earnestness found
its way into his manner.

"Miss Poynton and her brother are with us," he said. "It is we who have
been their benefactors. You know a good deal of their peculiar
circumstances. A sudden need has arisen for the production of that paper
within twenty-four hours. Give it to me now, and I will run the greatest
risk I have ever run in my career. I will tear those warrants through."

"Have you any authority from Miss Poynton?" Duncombe asked.

"There was no time to procure it," Monsieur Louis explained. "Events
march rapidly to-day. To be effective that paper must be in Paris
to-morrow. The necessity for its production arose only a few hours ago."

"You ask me, then," Duncombe said slowly, "to hand over to you a paper
which was placed in my charge by Miss Poynton?"

"In effect--yes!"

"I cannot do it!"

Monsieur Louis shrugged his shoulders.

"I do not insist," he remarked. "I may be permitted to remind you,
however, that I have offered a great price."

"Perhaps!" Duncombe answered quietly.

Monsieur Louis turned to his assistants.

"Sir George Duncombe will accompany us," he said. "I can give you ten
minutes, Sir George," he added, "in case you care to change your
clothes."

"And supposing I refuse to come?" Duncombe asked.

Monsieur Louis smiled.

"You would scarcely be so foolish," he remarked. "In that case I should
send the policeman here to the nearest station with the warrants and a
demand for help. Our documents are in perfect order, and our case
complete. You would scarcely be so foolish, I think, as to set yourself
in direct opposition to the law!"

Duncombe was silent for several moments. Then he rang the bell. Monsieur
Louis looked at him inquiringly, but before he could frame a question
the butler was in the room.

"Pack my things for a week, Groves," Duncombe ordered. "I am going away
to-night."

The man bowed and withdrew. Monsieur Louis merely shrugged his
shoulders.

"A week!" he remarked. "You will be fortunate if you ever see your home
again. Come, Sir George, be reasonable! I give you my word of honor that
it is altogether to the interest of Miss Poynton that those papers be
immediately produced. If she were here herself she would place them in
my hands without a moment's hesitation."

"Possibly!" Duncombe answered. "Suppositions, however, do not interest
me. I undertook the charge of what she gave me, and I shall fulfil my
trust."

Monsieur Louis turned to the policeman.

"Officer," he said, "this is Sir George Duncombe. Do your duty."

The man stepped forward and laid his hand upon Sir George's shoulder.

"Very sorry, sir," he said. "I am forced to arrest you on this warrant
for the murder of Florence Mermillon on the night of the seventh of
June. You will be brought before the magistrates at Norwich to-morrow."

Duncombe waved his hand towards the sideboard.

"If you gentlemen," he remarked, "would care for a little refreshment
before you start?"

"It is against the rules, sir, thank you," the man answered. "I should
be glad to get away as soon as possible."

Duncombe filled both his pockets with cigars and cigarettes. Then he
turned towards the door.

"I am quite ready," he said.

They followed him out. There was a few minutes' delay waiting for
Duncombe's bag.

"Your address, Sir George?" Groves inquired, as he brought it down.

"A little doubtful," Duncombe answered. "I will wire."

"In front, please, Sir George," Monsieur Louis insisted.

So they drove off, Duncombe in the front seat, the other three behind.
The car gathered speed rapidly. In less than an hour they were half-way
to Norwich. Then suddenly the driver took a sharp corner and turned down
a long desolate lane.

"You're off the main road," Duncombe explained. "You should have kept
straight on for Norwich."

The man took no notice. He even increased his speed. Duncombe was in the
act of turning round when he felt the sudden swish of a wet cloth upon
his face. He tried to break away, but he was held from behind as in a
vise. Then his head fell back, and he remembered no more.




CHAPTER X

THE CHECKMATING OF MONSIEUR LOUIS


At three o'clock in the morning Groves, in a discarded dressing-gown of
his master's, opened the front door and peered cautiously out into the
darkness. Monsieur Louis, who was standing upon the door-step, pushed
past him into the hall.

"Your master has sent me back to fetch some papers," he announced,
displaying a bunch of keys. "I am sorry to disturb you like this, but
the matter is important. Please bring me a cup of coffee into the
library in half an hour."

Groves, who was sorely perplexed, stood with his back to the door which
Monsieur Louis had approached.

"Really, sir," he answered, "I scarcely know what to say. I am afraid
that I cannot allow you to interfere with any of my master's property in
his absence."

Monsieur Louis held out the keys.

"Quite right!" he said. "It is an awkward situation, of course. Your
master did not tell you the reason of his sudden departure, I suppose?"

"Not a word, sir."

"There can be no harm in telling you this much, at any rate," Monsieur
Louis continued smoothly. "Your master, through no fault of his own, got
mixed up in a very unpleasant affair in Paris, and he will have to
appear in the courts there. I am his friend, and wish to do all that I
can to help him. We have been talking the matter over, and I have
strongly advised him to produce some papers which I think will help him
materially. The police officer in whose charge he is would not allow him
to return, so he handed me his keys and asked me to fetch them. I can
assure you that I am your master's friend, and wish to do all that I can
to help him. If he had not trusted me he would not have given me his
keys, which no doubt you recognize."

Groves reluctantly stood on one side.

"I suppose I must let you in, sir," he said, "but I wish that the master
had sent me a line."

"We had neither pencil nor paper," Monsieur Louis said, "and the affair
was urgent. I must be back in Norwich by eight o'clock."

"I will prepare the coffee, sir," Groves said, turning away. "If you
require more light the switches are behind the door."

"Very good," Monsieur Louis said. "You need not have the slightest
anxiety. I am here on your master's behalf."

Groves hesitated, and looked for a moment curiously around the room. He
seemed as though he had something else to say, but checked himself at
the last moment and withdrew. Monsieur Louis drew a little breath of
relief.

He did not immediately proceed to work. He threw off his overcoat and
lit a cigarette. His fingers were steady enough, but he was conscious of
an unwonted sense of excitement. He was face to face with destiny. He
had played before for great stakes, but never such as these. A single
false step, an evil turn in the wheel of fortune, spelt death--and he
was afraid to die. He moved to the sideboard. Everything there was as
they had left it. He poured out some brandy and drank it off.

With fresh courage he moved to the safe, which stood in the corner of
the room. It must be there, if anywhere, that this precious document
lay. He tried his keys one by one. At last he found the right one. The
great door swung slowly open.

He was spared all anxiety. There, on the top of a pile of legal-looking
documents, leases, title-deeds, and the like, was a long envelope, and
across it in Duncombe's sprawling writing these few words:--

     "Entrusted to me by Miss Poynton.--Sept. 4th."

He grasped it in his fingers and tore open the envelope. As he read the
single page of closely written writing his eyes seemed almost to
protrude. He gave a little gasp. No wonder there were those who reckoned
this single page of manuscript worth a great fortune. Every sentence,
every word told its own story. It was a page of the world's history.

Then a strange thing happened. Some part of him rebelled against the
instinct which prompted him carefully to fold and place in his
breast-pocket this wonderful find of his. His nerves seemed suddenly
frozen in his body. There was a curious numb sensation at the back of
his neck which forbade him to turn round. His hands shook, his teeth
chattered. The sweat of death was upon his forehead and despair in his
heart. He had heard nothing, seen nothing; yet he knew that he was no
longer alone.

When at last he turned round he turned his whole body. The muscles of
his neck were numbed still his knees shook, and his face was ghastly.
Monsieur Louis of the Cafe Montmartre, brave of tongue and gallant of
bearing, had suddenly collapsed. Monsieur Louis, the drug-sodden
degenerate of a family whose nobles had made gay the scaffolds of the
Place de la Republique, cowered in his place.

It was the worst upon which he looked with chattering teeth, but without
surprise. The door of the inner room was open, and upon the threshold
stood Toquet, small, dark, and saturnine--Toquet, with something which
glittered in his hand, so that Monsieur Louis, already the prey of a
diseased and ghastly imagination, felt the pain of the bullet in his
heart. On an easy-chair by the fireside Henri de Bergillac was lounging,
with a queer smile upon his lips.

"My friend," he said quietly, though the scorn which underlay his words
seemed to bite the air, "you have solved for us a double problem: first,
how to account for the absence of our host; and secondly, how to open
that very formidable-looking safe. You will be so good as to place upon
the table that document which you hold in your hands."

For a single second Monsieur Louis hesitated. Some lingering vestige of
a courage, purely hereditary, showed him in one lightning-like flash how
at least he might carry with him to a swift grave some vestige of his
ruined self-respect. A traitor to his old friends, he might keep faith
with the new. He had time to destroy. Even the agonies of death might
last long enough to complete the task. But the impulse was only
momentary. He shuddered afresh at the thought that he might have yielded
to it. He threw it upon the table.

The Vicomte rose to his feet, glanced through the closely written page
with something of the same excitement which had inspired its recent
possessor, and carefully buttoned it up in his breast-pocket. Then he
turned once more to the man who stood before them broken and trembling.

"Louis," he said, "you are the first traitor whom our society has
hatched. I look upon you with curiosity as a thing I once called my
friend. What imbecility prompted you to this?"

Monsieur Louis found nerve to shrug his shoulders.

"A million francs!" he answered.

"Heavens, but what folly!" the Vicomte murmured. "Did we not all know
that a German was in Paris who offered a million, or two million francs
for the missing page of that treaty? Do you think that he was not
watched day and night? Bah! I have no patience to talk of this. What
have you done with our host?"

"Arrested him for--Flossie! He is in a ditch half-way to Norwich."

"Hurt?"

"No! Chloroformed."

"How did you get here?"

"In an automobile from Lynn!"

"Good! It waits for you?"

"Yes."

"We will take it. My good friend here, Toquet, is familiar with the
neighborhood. As Mr. Fielding, the American millionaire, you learned the
excellence of these roads for quick travelling, did you not, _mon ami_?
So!"

"You leave me here?" Monsieur Louis faltered.

"Ay, to rot if you will!" the Vicomte answered with sudden harshness.

"I will atone," Monsieur Louis faltered. "It was a single false step."

De Bergillac looked down upon him with unspeakable contempt.

"Atone! Listen, Louis! In this country you are safe. Crawl away into
some hiding-place and make what you will of the rest of your days, but I
will promise you this. If ever you set your feet upon one inch of France
you shall meet with your deserts. There are many things which those who
play the great game must pardon, but there is one crime for which no
atonement is possible, and you have committed it. You are a traitor!"

De Bergillac turned away. The effeminacy of his manner seemed to have
disappeared under the strain of his extreme anger. It was his race,
after all, which had asserted itself. And then the door was thrown
suddenly open and a wild-looking figure confronted them.

It was Duncombe, muddy from head to foot, pale and with a slight wound
upon the temple, from which the blood had trickled down his face. He saw
the open safe, and Monsieur Louis a pitiful figure, and he did not
hesitate. He scarcely glanced at the others. He strode forward and
seized the Baron by the collar.

"Give me back what you have stolen, you blackguard!" he exclaimed.

Monsieur Louis was breathless. It was the young Vicomte who interposed.

"Our friend," he remarked suavely, "has not been successful in his
little effort. The document he came to purloin is in my pocket, and
here, Sir George, is my warrant for retaining possession of it."

He held out a note which Duncombe took and read with a little sigh of
relief.

"Good!" he exclaimed. "You have the document?"

De Bergillac tapped his breast-pocket.

"It is here," he said.

Duncombe turned to Monsieur Louis.

"My arrest, then," he remarked, "was part of the game?"

"Exactly!" De Bergillac answered. "This little document entrusted to
your care by the young English lady was worth one million francs to the
man who suborned our friend here. It was worth while--this little
enterprise. The pity of it is that it has failed. Sir George, I go to
Paris to-night. I offer you a safe conduct if you care to accompany me.
_L'affaire Poynton_ does not exist any more."

"Can you give me ten minutes to change my clothes?" Duncombe asked
eagerly.

"No more," De Bergillac answered. "I will get rid of our friend here."

There was a knock at the door. Groves entered with coffee. At the sight
of his master he nearly dropped the tray.

"It's all right," Duncombe said, smiling. "We had a little spill, and
I've lost my bag. Pack me some more things quickly."

"Very good, sir," Groves answered, and withdrew precipitately.

De Bergillac laid his hand upon Duncombe's arm.

"There is only one thing, my friend," he said. "I trust that it is Mr.
Guy Poynton who is your friend, and not his beautiful sister? Eh? I am
answered! The misfortune! Never mind! I will drink my coffee to _les
beaux yeux des autres_!"




CHAPTER XI

THE MAKING OF HISTORY


Three men were the sole occupants of the great room whose windows looked
out upon the Louvre.

The table around which they were seated was strewn with papers and maps.
The door of the room was locked, and a sentry stood outside in the
passage. The three men were busy making history.

The man who occupied the seat at the head of the table was the Monsieur
Grisson to whom Guy Poynton, at the instigation of the Duc de Bergillac,
had told his story. It was he who was spokesman.

"The situation," he said, "is one which bristles with difficulties. We
will assume for a moment the truth of what we have certainly reasonable
ground to believe. Russia has shown every sign of disappointment with us
for our general attitude during the war. Our understanding with England
has provoked a vigorous though unofficial protest from her
representatives here. Since then our relations have become to a certain
extent strained. Germany, ever on the look-out for complications which
might lead to her own advantage, steps in. Her attitude towards Russia
is changed to one of open and profound sympathy. Russia, in her
desperate straits, rises like a starving fish to a fat fly. Here it is
that our secret service steps in."

"Our secret service--and her allies," one of the other men murmured.

"Exactly! We pass now to the consideration of facts which need one thing
only to justify our course of action. Evidence is brought to us that a
secret meeting took place between the Czar of Russia and the Emperor of
Germany. From all the information which we have collected that meeting
was possible. I personally believe that it took place. A treaty is said
to have been drawn up between them, having for its object the
embroilment of England with Russia, and an alliance of Germany with
Russia so far as regards her quarrel with England. We know that Germany
is secretly mobilizing men and ships. We know that the ambition of the
Emperor is to possess himself of the Colonies of Great Britain, if not
actually to hold his court in London. We know that his jealousy of King
Edward amounts to a disease. We know that he is a man of daring and
violent temper, with an indomitable will and an unflinching belief in
his own infallibility and the infallibility of his army and navy. We
know that he has at least a dozen schemes for a sudden attack upon
England, and mighty though the navy of Great Britain is, it is not in
our opinion strong enough to protect her shore from the combined Baltic
and German fleets and also protect her Colonies. England, through our
friendship, has been warned. She proposes with most flattering alacrity
the only possible counter-stroke--an alliance with ourselves. We must
decide within twelve hours. The treaty lies upon my desk there. Upon us
must rest the most momentous decision which any Frenchman within our
recollection has been called upon to make. What have you to say,
gentlemen?"

There was a short silence. Then the man who sat at Monsieur Grisson's
right hand spoke.

"The issues before us," he said slowly, "are appalling. Every
Frenchman's blood must boil at the thought of Germany greedily helping
herself to the mighty wealth and power of Great Britain--becoming by
this single master-stroke the strongest nation on earth, able to dictate
even to us, and to send her word unchallenged throughout the world. It
is a hideous picture! It must mean the abandonment forever of the hope
of every true Frenchman. Every minute will become a menace to us.
Wilhelm, the arrogant, with British gold and British ships at his back,
will never forget to flaunt himself before us to our eternal
humiliation."

"You are taking it for granted," his neighbor remarked, "that Germany
will be successful."

"The odds are in her favor," was the quiet reply. "The navy of Great
Britain is immense, but her sea front, so to speak, is enormous. She is
open to be the prey of a sudden swift attack, and the moment has never
been more favorable."

"Let all these things be granted," the third man said. "Even then, are
we free to enter into this alliance with England? Our treaty with Russia
remains. We have no proof that she has broken faith with us. If this
secret treaty between Russia and Germany really exists, it is, of
course, another matter. But does it? We have nothing but the word of an
English boy. The rest is all assumption. The whole affair might be a
nightmare. We might sign this treaty with England, and find afterwards
that we had been the victim of a trick. We should be perjured before the
face of all Europe, and our great financial interest in Russia would at
once be placed in a perilous position."

A telephone upon the table rang softly. Monsieur Grisson held the
receiver to his ear and listened. Then he rose to his feet.

"Count von Munchen desires a word with me," he announced. "He pledges
himself not to keep me more than five minutes. I had better receive him.
Excuse me, gentlemen."

The two men were left alone. The elder and stouter of the two busied
himself with an inch rule and an atlas. He seemed to be making
calculations as to the distance between Cherbourg and a certain spot in
the North Sea.

"What is the chief's own mind?" his companion asked. "Does any one
know?"

The other shook his head.

"Who can say? Our ties of friendship with England are too recent to make
this a matter of sentiment. I believe that without proof he fears to
accept this statement. And yet above all things he fears Germany. There
was some talk of a missing page of the actual treaty between Russia and
Germany. If this could be found I believe that he would sign the draft
treaty."

"I myself," the other said, "do not believe that England would be so
easily overpowered."

"It is the suddenness and treachery of the attack which counts so
greatly in its favor," his companion said. "It might be all over in two
days before she could assemble a fifth part of her forces. If our
information is correct Germany has men enough mobilized to run huge
risks. Besides, you know how Lafarge's report ran, and what he said. The
German army is beginning to suffer from a sort of dry rot, as must all
institutions which fulfil a different purpose than that for which they
exist. The Emperor knows it. If war does not come Germany will have to
face severe military troubles."

"I myself am for the alliance!"

"And I," the other replied, "if proof of this Germano-Russian
understanding could be produced."

Monsieur Grisson returned. He carefully closed and locked the door
behind him.

"Gentlemen," he said, "the German Ambassador has just left me. His
mission in every way confirms our secret information. He has been
instructed to inquire as to our attitude in the event of any British
interference with the Baltic Fleet while in home waters."

The two men looked up expectantly. Monsieur Grisson continued:--

"I replied that it was a contingency which we scarcely thought it worth
while to consider. I expressed my firm belief that England would observe
all the conventions, written and understood, of international law."

"And he?"

"He was not satisfied, of course. He declared that he had certain
information that England was making definite plans with a view to ensure
the delay of the fleet. He went on to say that Germany was determined
not to tolerate any such thing, and he concludes that we, as Russia's
ally, would at any rate remain neutral should Germany think it her duty
to interfere."

"And your reply?"

"I answered that in the event of untoward happenings France would act as
her honor dictated--remaining always mindful of the obligations of her
alliance. He was quite satisfied."

"He had no suspicion of this?" the young man asked, touching the treaty
with his forefinger.

"None. It is believed in Germany that the young Englishman was really
found drowned in the Seine after a short career of dissipation. Our
friends served us well here. Now, gentlemen, the English Ambassador will
be here in twenty minutes. What am I to say to him? Do we sign this
draft agreement or do we not?"

There was a silence which lasted nearly a minute. Then the younger of
the two men spoke.

"Sir," he said respectfully, "without some proof of Russia's falsity I
cannot see how in honor we can depart from our treaty obligations with
her to the extent of signing an agreement with her putative enemy.
England must fight her own battle, and God help her!"

"And you?" Monsieur Grisson asked, turning to the third man.

"I agree," was the regretful answer. "If this treacherous scheme is
carried out I believe that France will be face to face with the greatest
crisis she has known in history. Even then I dare not suggest that we
court dishonor by breaking an alliance with a friend in distress."

"You are right, gentlemen," Monsieur Grisson said with a sigh. "We must
tell Lord Fothergill that our relations with his country must remain
unfettered. I----"

Again the telephone bell rang. Monsieur Grisson listened, and replied
with a sudden return to his old briskness of manner.

"It is young De Bergillac," he announced. "He has been in England in
search of that missing page of the treaty. I have told them to show him
in."

The Vicomte entered, paler than ever from recent travel, and deeply
humiliated from the fact that there was a smut upon his collar which he
had had no time to remove. He presented a paper to Monsieur Grisson and
bowed. The President spread it out upon the table, and the faces of the
three men as they read became a study. Monsieur Grisson rang the bell.

"Monsieur le Duc de Bergillac and a young English gentleman," he told
the attendant, "are in my private retiring-room. Desire their presence."

The servant withdrew. The three men looked at one another.

"If this is genuine!" the younger murmured.

"It is the Russian official paper," his _vis-a-vis_ declared, holding it
up to the light.

Then the Duc de Bergillac and Guy Poynton were ushered in. Monsieur
Grisson rose to his feet.

"Monsieur Poynton," he said, "we have all three heard your story as to
what you witnessed in the forest of Pozen. It is part of your allegation
that a page of writing from the private car which you were watching was
blown to your feet, and that you picked it up and brought it to Paris
with you. Look at this sheet of paper carefully. Tell me if it is the
one."

Guy glanced at it for a moment, and handed it back.

"It is certainly the one," he answered. "If you look at the back you
will see my initials there and the date."

Monsieur Grisson turned it over quickly. The two other men looked over
his shoulder, and one of them gave a little exclamation. The initials
and date were there.

Then Monsieur Grisson turned once more to Guy. He was not a tall man,
but he had dignity, and his presence was impressive. He spoke very
slowly.

"Monsieur Guy Poynton," he said, "it is not often that so great an
issue--that the very destinies of two great countries must rest upon the
simple and uncorroborated story of one man. Yet that is the position in
which we stand to-day. Do not think that you are being treated with
distrust. I speak to you not on behalf of myself, but for the millions
of human beings whose welfare is my care, and for those other millions
of your own countrymen, whose interests must be yours. I ask you
solemnly--is this story of yours word for word a true one?"

Guy looked him in the face resolutely, and answered without hesitation.

"On my honor as an Englishman," he declared, "it is true!"

Monsieur Grisson held out his hand.

"Thank you!" he said.

The three men were again alone. The man who controlled the destinies of
France dipped his pen in the ink.

"Gentlemen," he said, "do you agree with me that I shall sign this
draft?"

"We do!" they both answered.

The President signed his name. Then he turned the handle of the
telephone.

"You may show Lord Fothergill in!" he ordered.




CHAPTER XII

AN OLD FRIEND


It was perhaps as well for Andrew Pelham that he could not see Phyllis'
look as she entered the room. An English gentleman, she had been told,
was waiting to see her, and she had thought of no one but Duncombe. It
was true that she had sent him away, but only an hour ago the Marquise
had told her that her emancipation was close at hand. He too might have
had a hint! The little smile, however, died away from her lips as she
saw who was waiting for her with such manifest impatience.

"You, Andrew!" she exclaimed in amazement. "Why, however did you find me
out?"

He took both her hands in his. The look upon his face was transfiguring.

"At last! At last!" he exclaimed. "Never mind how I found you! Tell me,
what does it all mean? Are you here of your own free will?"

"Absolutely!" she answered.

"It was you at Runton?"

"Yes."

"Under a false name--with a man who committed robbery!"

She shrugged her shoulders a little wearily.

"My dear Andrew!" she said, "I will admit that I have been doing all
manner of incomprehensible things. I couldn't explain everything. It
would take too long. What I did, I did for Guy's sake, and of my own
free will. It will be all over in a day or two now, and we shall be
coming back to Raynesworth. Then I will tell you tales of our adventures
which will make your hair stand on end."

"It isn't true about Guy, then?" he exclaimed.

She hesitated for a moment.

"Andrew," she said, "I cannot tell you anything. It must sound rather
horrid of me, but I cannot help it. I want you to go away. In a day or
two I will write."

He looked at her in pained bewilderment.

"But, Phyllis," he protested, "I am one of your oldest friends! You ask
me to go away and leave you here with strangers, without a word of
explanation. Why, I have been weeks searching for you."

"Andrew," she said, "I know it. I don't want to be unkind. I don't want
you to think that I have forgotten that you are, as you say, one of my
oldest friends. But there are times when one's friends are a source of
danger rather than pleasure. Frankly, this is one of them."

His face darkened. He looked slowly around the magnificent room. He saw
little, but what he could distinguish was impressive.

"Your riddles," he said gravely, "are hard to read. You want me to go
away and leave you here."

"You must," she said firmly.

"Did you treat Duncombe like this?" he asked in a blind fit of jealousy.

"You have not the right to ask me such a question," she answered
coldly.

"Not the right! Not the right!" he repeated. "Who else has, then?
Haven't I watched you grow from a beautiful, capricious child into the
woman you are? Haven't I taught you, played with you, done your bidding
blindly ever since you came into your kingdom? Haven't I felt the pain
and the joy of you in my heart? Who else has a better right, then?
Duncombe, who came here, a stranger to you--or is it one of your new
friends?"

She came close to him, and laid her hand upon his shoulder.

"Don't be foolish, Andrew!" she said softly.

His whole expression changed. The bitterness left his tone.

"Ah, Phyllis!" he said. "That is more like yourself."

"And I want you," she said, "to be like your old self. You have always
been my best friend, Andrew. I hope you will always be that."

He tried to look into her face. It seemed to him that there was a little
unnecessary emphasis in her words.

"I am not a child now, you know," she continued. "I am quite old enough
to take care of myself. You must believe that, Andrew. You must go away,
and not worry about me. You will do this, please, because I ask you!"

"If I must," he said reluctantly. "I will go away, but not to worry
about you--that is impossible. You seem to be surrounded by all the
mediaeval terrors which confronted the emancipation of princesses in our
fairy books. Only a short time ago Duncombe implored me to follow his
example, and leave you and Paris alone. The detective whom I brought
with me has been shadowed ever since we left Paris. Last night he left
me for a few hours, and this morning comes a note from the hospital. He
is lying there with the back of his head beaten in--garotters, of
course, the police say, looking for plunder. How can you ask me to be
easy in my mind about you?"

She smiled reassuringly.

"No harm will come to me here, I can promise you," she said. "It is you
who run the most risk if you only knew it. Sir George Duncombe gave you
the best advice when he tried to get you to return to England."

"I cannot leave Lloyd now until he has recovered," Andrew answered.
"Tell me, Phyllis, has Duncombe found you out? Has he been here?"

"Yes," she answered. "I sent him away--as I am sending you."

"Has he ever told you," Andrew asked, "why he was willing in the first
instance to come to Paris in search of you?"

"No," she answered. "Wasn't it because he was your friend?"

He shook his head.

"It is his affair, not mine," he said with a sigh. "Ask him some day."

"You won't tell me, Andrew?"

"No! I will go now! You know where to send for me if you should need
help. I can find my way down, thank you. I have a guide from the hotel
outside."

The Marquise swept into the room as he passed out, an impression of
ermine and laces and perfume.

"Another of your English lovers, _ma belle_?" she asked.

"Scarcely that," Phyllis answered. "He is a very old friend, and he was
rather hard to get rid of."

"I think," the Marquise said, "you would get rid of all very willingly
for the sake of one, eh?"

The Marquise stared insolently into the girl's face. Phyllis only
laughed.

"One is usually considered the ideal number--in our country," she
remarked demurely.

"But the one?" the Marquise continued. "He would not be one of these
cold, heavy countrymen of yours, no? You have learnt better perhaps over
here?"

It was a cross-examination, but Phyllis could not imagine its drift.

"I have not had very much opportunity over here, have I, to amend my
ideals?" she asked. "I think the only two Frenchmen I have met are the
Marquis and that languid young man with the green tie, the Vicomte de
Bergillac, wasn't it?"

The Marquise watched her charge closely.

"Well," she said, "he is _comme il faut_, is he not? You find him more
elegant, more chic than your Englishmen, eh?"

Phyllis shook her head regretfully.

"To me," she admitted, "he seemed like an exceedingly precocious spoilt
child!"

"He is twenty-three," the Marquise declared.

Phyllis laughed softly.

"Well," she said, "I do not think that I shall amend my ideals for the
sake of the Vicomte de Bergillac!"

The Marquise looked at her doubtfully.

"Tell me, child," she said, "you mean, then, that of the two--your
English Sir George Duncombe and Henri--you would prefer Sir George?"

Phyllis looked at her with twinkling eyes.

"You would really like to know?" she asked.

"Yes!"

"Sir George Duncombe--infinitely!"

The Marquise seemed to have recovered her good spirits.

"Come, little one," she said, "you lose color in the house. I will take
you for a drive!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Andrew, conscious that he was being followed, sat down outside a cafe on
his way homewards, and bade his guide leave him for a little time.
Instantly there was the soft rustle of feminine skirts by his side, and
a woman seated herself on the next chair.

"Monsieur has not been up to the Cafe Montmartre lately!"

Pelham turned his head. It was the young lady from Vienna.

"No!" he answered. "I have not been there since I had the pleasure of
seeing Mademoiselle!"

"Monsieur has discovered all that he wanted to know?"

He nodded a little wearily.

"Yes, I think so!"

She drew her chair quite close to his. The sable of her turban hat
almost brushed his cheek, and the perfume of the violets at her bosom
was strong in his nostrils.

"Monsieur has seen the young lady?"

"I have seen her," he answered.

"Monsieur is indebted to me," she said softly, "for some information.
Let me ask him one question. Is it true, this story in the newspapers,
of the finding of this young man's body? Is Monsieur Guy Poynton really
dead?"

"I know no more than we all read in the newspapers," he answered.

"His sister spoke of him as dead?" she asked.

"I cannot discuss this matter with you, Mademoiselle," he answered.

"Monsieur is ungrateful," she declared with a little grimace. "It is
only that which I desire to know. He was such a _beau garcon_, that
young Englishman. You will tell me that?" she whispered.

He shook his head.

"Mademoiselle will excuse me," he said. "I am going to take a carriage
to my hotel!"

"It is on the way to leave me at my rooms, if you will be so kind," she
suggested, laying her hand upon his arm.

"Mademoiselle will excuse me," he answered, turning away. "Good
afternoon."

Mademoiselle also took a carriage, and drove to a large house at the top
of the Champs Elysees. She was at once admitted, and passed with the air
of one familiar with the place into a small room at the back of the
house, where a man was sitting at a table writing. He looked up as she
entered.

"Well?"

She threw herself into a chair.

"I have been following the Englishman, Pelham, all day," she said in
German. "He has seen Miss Poynton. I have talked with him since at a
cafe, but he would tell me nothing. He has evidently been warned."

The man grumbled as he resumed his writing.

"That fact alone should be enough for us," he remarked. "If there is
anything to conceal we can guess what it is. These amateurs who are in
league with the secret service are the devil! I would as soon resign.
What with them and the regular secret service, Paris is an impossible
city for us. Where we would watch we are watched ourselves. The streets
and cafes bristle with spies! I do not wonder that you find success so
difficult, Mademoiselle!"

"I haven't done so badly!" she protested.

"No, for you have not been set easy tasks. Can you tell me, though,
where that young Englishman disappeared to when he left the Cafe
Montmartre before your very eyes? Can you tell me whether the secret
service got hold of his story, how much the French Government believed
of it, whether they have communicated with the English Government, and
how much they know? Beyond these things, it is not your province to see,
or mine, Mademoiselle, and it is not for us to guess at or inquire into
the meaning of things. Tell me, is it worth while to have this man
Pelham put out of the way for a time?"

She shook her head.

"I do not think so," she answered. "He is quite stupid. The other, Sir
George Duncombe, he was different. If he had stayed in Paris he would
have been worth watching."

A bell rang. The man rose.

"The chief!" he said. "Be at the cafe to-night."

Mademoiselle went away thoughtfully.

"It is over this affair," she said to herself. "Carl knows everything!"




CHAPTER XIII

A NEWSPAPER SENSATION


Spencer, whose recovery during the last few days had been as rapid as
the first development of his indisposition, had just changed for dinner,
and was lighting a _cigarette d'appertit_ when, without waiting to be
announced, the Vicomte de Bergillac entered the room. Spencer, with
lightning-like intuition, knew that his time was come.

"Off with your coat, man, and get your code books out. I am going to
give you the most sensational story which has ever appeared in your
paper!" he exclaimed. "Only, remember this! It must appear to-morrow
morning. I am arranging for the French papers to have it. Yours shall be
the only English journal. Glance through these sheets. They contain the
story of _l'affaire Poynton_!"

Spencer was master of the gist of the thing in a very few moments. His
eyes were bright with excitement.

"Who guarantees this?" he asked quickly.

"My uncle has signed it," Henri de Bergillac answered, "and at the
bottom of the page there you will see a still more distinguished
signature. You understand _l'affaire Poynton_ now? It is very simple.
That English boy actually witnessed a meeting between the Czar and the
Emperor, and turns up in Paris with a loose sheet of a treaty between
the two, relative to an attack upon England. Our people got hold of him
at the Cafe Montmartre, and we have hidden him away ever since. Our
friends, the Germans, who seem to have had some suspicions about him,
have filled the city with spies, but from the first we have kept them
off the scent. We had a little difficulty in convincing our friends your
country-people, but we managed to borrow a few papers from the German
Ambassador whilst he was staying at a country-house in England, which
were sufficient."

Spencer was already writing. His coat lay on the floor where he had
thrown it.

"Don't go for a moment, De Bergillac," he said. "I want to ask you a few
things. I can talk and code at the same time. What about Miss Poynton?"

"Well, we had to take care of her too," De Bergillac said. "Of course
all her inquiries over here would have led to nothing, but they knew her
at the English Embassy, so we walked her off from the Cafe Montmartre
one night and took her to a friend of mine, the Marquise de St. Ethol.
We told her a little of the truth, and a little, I'm afraid, which was
an exaggeration. Anyhow, we kept her quiet, and we got her to go to
England for us with Toquet. They had a very narrow shave down at Runton,
by the by."

"After this," Spencer said with a smile, "the secret service people
proper will have to look to their laurels. It is a triumph for the
amateurs."

The Vicomte twirled his tiny black moustache.

"Yes," he said, "we have justified ourselves. It has cost us something,
though!"

"You mean?"

"Louis!"

Spencer stopped writing.

"It was an affair of a million francs," the Vicomte said. "I hope he has
got the money."

Spencer resumed his work.

"The Baron a traitor!" he exclaimed. "Where is he?"

"In England! We are not vindictive. If the Germans paid him a million
francs they got nothing for it. He has been watched from the first. We
knew of it the moment he came to terms with them. He only knows bare
facts. Nothing beyond. He is going to Brazil, I think. We shall not
interfere."

"Tell me why," Spencer said, "you were so down on all of us who joined
in the search for the Poyntons."

"We could not afford to run any risks of your discovering a clue," De
Bergillac answered, "because you in your turn were closely watched by
German spies, hoping to discover them through you. That is why we had to
strike hard at all of you who interfered. I was sorry for little
Flossie--but she knew the risk she ran. We had to stop you, induce
Duncombe to leave Paris, and knock on the head a fool of an English
detective for fear he might discover something. Monsieur Pelham was
getting into danger, but, of course, it is all over now. To-morrow we
are bringing Guy into Paris."

Spencer nodded.

"Where is Duncombe?" he asked.

"Back in Paris," De Bergillac answered. "Arrived here with me to-day. He
is much in love with the beautiful sister. Alas! It was to him that she
entrusted the missing page of that treaty which she found in her
brother's luggage. Some day I must tell you of my adventures in England
last night, when I went over to get it and found Louis a little ahead of
me."

"Some day," Spencer murmured, writing for dear life, with the
perspiration streaming down his forehead. "My dear Vicomte, do you mind
ringing the bell? I want my servant. I must telegraph my paper to warn
them of this. They must clear two columns of type for me."

The Vicomte did as he was asked. Then he turned towards the door.

"I will leave you," he said. "The dust of England is still in my throat.
Absinthe, a bath and dinner! _Au revoir, mon ami!_ Confess that I have
kept the promise which Louis made you. It is what you call a _coup_
this, eh?"

Out on the boulevards the papers were selling like wildfire. The Vicomte
bought one, and sitting down outside a cafe ordered absinthe. The great
headlines attracted him at once. He sipped his absinthe and smiled to
himself.

"The play commences!" he murmured. "I must return to Monsieur Spencer."

Spencer was still working like a madman.

"I must interrupt you for a moment," De Bergillac said. "I have brought
you an evening paper. The Baltic Fleet has sunk half a dozen English
fishing-boats and the whole country is in a frenzy. It is the
beginning."

Spencer nodded.

"Leave the paper, there's a good fellow," he said. "I will look it
through presently. If there is time--if there is only time this will be
the greatest night of my life. No other paper has a hint, you say?"

"Not one!"

"If I could put back the clock a single hour," Spencer muttered. "Never
mind! Williams, more sheets!"

De Bergillac took his leave. He had telephoned for his motor, which was
waiting outside. He gave the order to drive to his rooms. On the way he
passed the great pile of buildings in the Louvre. In a room at the
extreme end of the pile a light was burning. De Bergillac looked at it
curiously. A small brougham, which he recognized, stood outside.

"If one could see inside," he muttered. "It should be interesting!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In a sense it was interesting. Monsieur Grisson sat there in front of
his open table. His secretary's place by his side was vacant. Opposite
sat a tall man with gray hair and dark moustache. He was dressed for the
evening, and his breast glittered with stars and orders.

"It is exceedingly kind of you, Monsieur," he said, "to grant me this
interview at so short notice. I was most anxious to apprise you of news,
which as yet I believe has not found its way into your papers. You have
read accounts of a Russian attack upon an English fishing-fleet, but you
have not yet been informed of the presence--the undoubted presence--of
Japanese torpedo-boats concealed amongst them."

Monsieur Grisson raised his eyebrows.

"Indeed no!" he answered. "We have not even heard a rumor of anything of
the sort."

"Nevertheless, their presence was indubitable," the Prince declared. "In
those circumstances, Monsieur, you can doubtless understand that our
reply to any protests on the part of England will be of an unpacific
nature. We should not for a moment allow ourselves to be dictated to by
the allies of our enemy."

"Naturally!" Monsieur Grisson answered. "On the other hand, you surely
do not wish to embroil yourself in a quarrel with England at the present
moment?"

"We wish to quarrel with no one," the Prince answered haughtily. "At the
same time, we are not afraid of England. We recognize the fact that if
war should come it is an independent affair, and does not come under the
obligations of our alliance. We ask, therefore, for your neutrality
alone."

Monsieur Grisson bowed.

"But, Prince," he said gravely, "you speak lightly enough of the
possibilities of war, but surely you must know that the English fleet in
the Channel and at Gibraltar altogether outmatches the Baltic Fleet?"

"A Russian," the Prince answered grandly, "is not afraid of great odds!"

Monsieur Grisson bowed.

"For the sake of humanity," he said, "I trust most sincerely that the
affair may be peaceably arranged. If the contrary should turn out to be
the case, I can only say that in a quarrel which concerns Russia and
England alone, France would remain benevolently neutral. As you have
remarked, the obligations of our treaty do not apply to such a case."

The Prince played nervously with the star at his chest. Both men were
well aware that up to now they had been merely playing with words.

"There is another contingency," the Russian remarked, "which, now we are
upon the subject, it would perhaps be as well to allude to. The
relations between Germany and England, as you know, just now are very
sorely strained. If Germany should take advantage of the present
situation to make a demonstration against England, that, of course,
would not, from your point of view, affect the situation?"

Monsieur Grisson looked like a man who sees before him amazing things.

"My dear Prince," he said, "do not let us misunderstand one another. You
cannot by any possibility be suggesting that Germany might associate
herself with you in your resistance to possible English demands?"

The Russian leaned back in his chair.

"Germany is on the spot," he remarked, "and knows the fact of the case.
She has proofs of the presence of Japanese torpedo-boats amongst the
English fishing-fleet. Her natural love of fair play might possibly lead
her to espouse our cause in this particular instance. This, of course,
would make for peace. If Germany commands, England will obey. She could
not do otherwise."

"You have introduced, my dear Prince," Monsieur Grisson said, "an
altogether new phase of this question, and one which merits the most
grave consideration. Am I to understand that there is any arrangement
between Germany and yourself with respect to this question?"

"Scarcely anything so definite as an arrangement," the Prince answered.
"Merely an understanding!"

Monsieur Grisson had the air of a man who had just received grave
tidings of his dearest friend.

"Is this, Monsieur le Prince," he said, "entirely in accord with our own
treaty obligations?"

"We do not consider it to be in contravention to them," the Prince
answered.

The gravity of Monsieur Grisson's manner grew even more pronounced.

"My dear Prince," he said, "you are doubtless aware that during the last
few weeks there have been some very strange rumors about as to a meeting
between your master and the Emperor of Germany, and an agreement which
was forthwith signed between them. I need not remark that all such
rumors were entirely discredited here. Such a meeting kept secret from
us would of course be very seriously considered here."

The Prince smiled. He remained admirably self-possessed, though the very
veins in his forehead were swollen with anger.

"A canard of the sort has reached my ears," he remarked. "Some English
boy, I believe, imagined or dreamed that he saw some such meeting. We
scarcely need, I think, to discuss this seriously."

"Personally I agree with you," Monsieur Grisson said smoothly. "My
ministry, however, seem to have been a little impressed by the boy's
story. An autograph letter from the Czar, denying it, would perhaps make
our negotiations more easy."

"It shall be forthcoming," the Prince remarked, rising. "By the by, I
hear reports of great activity from Cherbourg. More manoeuvres, eh?"

Monsieur Grisson shrugged his shoulders.

"Our new naval chief," he remarked, "is a marvel of industry. You know
the English proverb about the new broom, eh?"

The Prince bowed.

"During the next few hours," he remarked, "many things may happen. You
will be always accessible?"

"I shall not leave my post, Prince!" Monsieur Grisson answered. "You
will find me here at any time!"




CHAPTER XIV

THE MAN WHO SAVED HIS COUNTRY


On the following morning the inhabitants of London, Paris, Berlin, and
St. Petersburg for a sum varying from a halfpenny to a penny were
treated to sensationalism as thrilling as any six-shilling shocker hot
from the press and assured of its half-million circulation. One English
and one French newspaper outdid their competitors by publishing side by
side with their account of the exploits of the Russian fleet a
marvellous but circumstantial story of a meeting and alliance between
the rulers of Germany and Russia. The eyes of the whole world were
turned towards Kiel, and more wonderful rumors still flashed backwards
and forwards along the wires throughout Europe. A great mobilization can
be kept secret up to a certain point, but when men and ships are
collected and ready the truth must out.

At an unusually early hour Monsieur Grisson, supported now by two
members of his ministry, received a visit from the Russian and German
Ambassadors, Prince Korndoff and Count von Munchen. The usual
compliments were quickly exchanged.

"I have asked my friend Count von Munchen to accompany me," Prince
Korndoff explained, "because we are here to speak with you on a matter
concerning which our interests are identical. You have read the demands
which England has dared to lay before my master with reference to the
encounter in the North Sea."

Monsieur Grisson bowed.

"I have studied them with great interest," he admitted.

"I do not need tell you then that they are scouted with indignation by
my master and his advisers," the Prince answered. "Neither shall we
permit for a single moment the detention of our fleet upon its mission."

"That means, then, war with England," Monsieur Grisson remarked quietly.

"Unless they instantly withdraw their insolent demands--undoubtedly,"
the Prince answered.

Monsieur Grisson turned to the German.

"And you, Count," he asked, "how does this concern you?"

"We also," the Count answered, "consider the demands of England
unwarrantable. We believe that there were undoubtedly Japanese torpedo
boats concealed amongst the English fishing fleet, and we consider that
the action of the Admiral in command of the Russian fleet was fully
justified."

"You are prepared, then, to give Russia your moral support?" the
President asked.

"We are prepared to do more," the Count answered boldly. "If England
persists in her demands we are prepared to demonstrate against her."

Monsieur Grisson assumed a very grave expression.

"I too," he said, "have lost no time in endeavoring to solve the mystery
of this North Sea incident. I have been in communication with the
English Ambassador, and I have collected all the evidence possible.
There is absolutely no proof obtainable of the presence of any Japanese
craft amongst the English fishing fleet. I submit, therefore, that this
is a case for arbitration. I consider that up to the present our friends
on the other side of the Channel have displayed commendable moderation
in a time of great excitement, and I am happy to say that I have the
authority of Lord Fothergill himself for saying that they will consent
to submitting the affair to a commission of arbitration."

The President's words were received with chilling silence. It was the
Prince, who, after a short silence, replied.

"Arbitration," he said coldly, "does not commend itself to us. We have
been insulted. Our country and our gallant fleet have been held up to
ridicule throughout the whole English Press. We are tired of being
dictated to and bullied by a weaker Power--the openly declared ally of
our enemy. England has long been seeking for a _casus belli_ with us. At
last she has found it."

Monsieur Grisson whispered for a moment to one of his colleagues. Then
he turned once more to the Prince.

"Let us understand one another, Monsieur le Prince!" he said, "and you,
Count von Munchen! You have come to announce to me your intention to
jointly make war upon England. St. Petersburg is to refuse her demands,
England will naturally strike at the Baltic Fleet, and Germany will send
her fleet to the rescue, and at the same time land troops somewhere in
the North of England. Russia, I presume, will withdraw her troops from
Manchuria and strike at India!"

"No, no!" Count von Munchen protested. "I can assure you, Monsieur, it
is not our intention to land a single German soldier in England. We are
interested only to see fair play to Russia. We require that the Baltic
Fleet shall be allowed to go on its way without molestation."

The President faced the last speaker. His gray bushy eyebrows met in a
frown.

"Then what, Count," he asked, "is the meaning of the mobilization of two
hundred thousand men at Kiel? What is the meaning of your State
railroads running west being closed last night to all public traffic?
Why have you cabled huge orders for Government supplies? Why were you
running trains all last night to the coast? Do you suppose that our
secret service slumbers--that we are a nation of babies?"

The Count made an effort to retain his composure.

"Monsieur le President," he said, "the reports which have reached you
have been much exaggerated. It is necessary for us to back up our
protests to England by a show of force!"

Monsieur Grisson smiled.

"Enough of this, gentlemen!" he said. "We will now talk to one another
as men who have weighty affairs to deal with simply and directly. The
story of the meeting between your two rulers which you, Prince Korndoff,
have alluded to as a fairy tale, was a perfectly true one. I have known
of that meeting some time, and I have certain proof of what transpired
at it. The North Sea incident was no chance affair. It was a
deliberately and skilfully arranged _casus belli_, although your
admiral, Prince Korndoff, had to go one hundred miles out of his way to
find the Dogger Bank fishing-fleet. You spoke to me last night of
Cherbourg, Prince. I think that after all your secret service is
scarcely so successful as mine, for I can assure you that you will find
there all that is to be found to-day at Kiel."

The Prince was amazed.

"But, Monsieur le President," he exclaimed, "you cannot mean--you, our
ally----"

The President extended a forefinger.

"It was no part of our alliance," he said sternly, "that you should make
a secret treaty with another Power and keep hidden from us no less a
scheme than the invasion of England. My Cabinet have dealt with this
matter on its own merits. I have the honor to tell you, gentlemen, that
I have concluded an alliance with England to come into effect in the
case of your carrying out your present intention. For every army corps
you succeed in landing in England I too shall land one, only, I think,
with less difficulty, and for every German ship which clears for action
in the North Sea two French ones will be prepared to meet her."

"I think, Monsieur le President," he said stiffly, "that this discussion
had better be postponed until after I have had an opportunity of
communicating with my Imperial master. I must confess, sir, that your
attitude is a complete surprise to me."

"As you will, sir," the President answered. "I am perhaps more a man of
affairs than a diplomatist, and I have spoken to you with less reserve
than is altogether customary. But I shall never believe that diplomacy
which chooses the dark and tortuous ways of intrigue and
misrepresentation is best calculated to uphold and strengthen the
destinies of a great nation. I wish you good morning, gentlemen!"

       *       *       *       *       *

For forty-eight hours the war fever raged, and the pendulum swung
backwards and forwards. The cables between Berlin and St. Petersburg
were never idle. There was a rumor, amongst those behind the scenes, of
an enormous bribe offered to France in return for her neutrality alone.
Its instantaneous and scornful refusal practically brought the crisis to
an end. The German hosts melted away, and the Baltic Fleet passed on.
St. Petersburg accepted the British demands, and a commission of
arbitration was appointed. Henri de Bergillac read out the news from the
morning paper, and yawned.

"_C'est fini--l'affaire Poynton!_" he remarked. "You can get ready as
soon as you like, Guy. I am going to take you into Paris to your
sister!"

Guy looked up eagerly.

"My pardon?" he asked.

The Vicomte made a wry face.

"Heavens!" he exclaimed, "I forgot that there were still explanations to
make. Fill your abominable pipe, _mon ami_, and think that to-morrow or
the next day you may be in your beloved England. Think how well we have
guarded you here when a dozen men were loose in Paris who would have
killed you on sight. Remember that in the underground history of England
you will be known always as the man who saved his country. I shouldn't
wonder in the least if you weren't decorated when you get home. Think of
all these things--hard!"

"All right!" Guy answered. "Go ahead!"

"You never killed any one. The duel was a fake. You were--not exactly
sober. That was entirely our fault, and we had to invent some plan to
induce you to come into hiding peacefully. _Voila tout!_ It is
forgiven?"

Guy laughed a great laugh of relief.

"Rather!" he exclaimed. "What an ass I must have seemed, asking that old
Johnny for a pardon."

The Vicomte smiled.

"The old Johnny, Guy, was the President of France. He wanted to know
afterwards what the devil you meant."

Guy rose to his feet.

"If you tell me anything else," he said, "I shall want to punch your
head."

The Vicomte laughed.

"Come," he said, "I will return you to your adorable sister!"




CHAPTER XV

A MERRY MEETING


Monsieur Albert was not often surprised, and still less often did he
show it. The party, however, who trooped cheerily into his little
restaurant at something after midnight on this particular morning,
succeeded in placing him at a disadvantage.

First there was the Vicomte de Bergillac, one of his most important and
influential patrons for many reasons, whose presence alone was more than
sufficient guarantee for whoever might follow. Then there was the
Marquise de St. Ethol, one of the _haute noblesse_, to welcome whom was
a surpassing honor.

And then Monsieur Guy Poynton, the young English gentleman, whose single
appearance here a few weeks back had started all the undercurrents of
political intrigue, and who for the justification of French journalism
should at that moment have been slowly dying at the Morgue.

And with him the beautiful young English lady who had come in search of
him, and who, as she had left the place in the small hours of the
morning with Monsieur Louis, should certainly not now have reappeared as
charming and as brilliant as ever, her eyes soft with happiness, and her
laugh making music more wonderful than the violins of his little
orchestra.

And following her the broad-shouldered young Englishman, Sir George
Duncombe, who had once entertained a very dangerous little party in his
private room upstairs, and against whom the dictum had gone forth.

And following him the Englishman with the heavy glasses, whom _l'affaire
Poynton_ had also brought before to his cafe, and with whom Mademoiselle
from Austria had talked long and earnestly.

And lastly Monsieur Spencer, the English journalist, also with a black
cross after his name, but seemingly altogether unconscious of it.

Monsieur Albert was not altogether at his best. Such a mixture of sheep
and goats confused him. It was the Vicomte who, together with the head
waiter, arranged a redistribution of tables so that the whole party
could sit together. It was the Vicomte who constituted himself host. He
summoned Monsieur Albert to him.

"Albert," he said, with a little wave of the hand, "these ladies and
gentlemen are my friends. To quote the words of my charming young
companion here, Monsieur Guy Poynton, whom you may possibly
remember"--Monsieur Albert bowed--"we are on the bust! I do not know the
precise significance of the phrase any more than I suppose you do, but
it means amongst other things a desire for the best you have to eat and
to drink. Bring Pomeroy '92, Albert, and send word to your chef that we
desire to eat without being hungry!"

Monsieur Albert hurried away, glad of the opportunity to escape. Guy
leaned back in his chair and looked around with interest.

"Same old place," he remarked, "and by Jove, there's the young lady from
Austria."

The young lady from Austria paid her bill and departed somewhat hastily.
The Vicomte smiled.

"I think we shall frighten a few of them away to-night!" he remarked.
"The wine! Good! We shall need magnums to drown our regrets, if indeed
our English friends desert us to-morrow. Monsieur Guy Poynton,
unconscious maker of history and savior of your country, I congratulate
you upon your whole skin, and I drink your health."

Guy drank, and, laughing, refilled his glass.

"And to you, the best of amateur conspirators and most charming of
hosts," he said. "Come soon to England and bring your automobile, and we
will conspire against you with a policeman and a stopwatch."

The Vicomte sighed and glanced towards Phyllis.

"In happier circumstances!" he murmured, and then catching the
Marquise's eye, he was silent.

The band played English music, and the chef sent them up a wonderful
omelette. Mademoiselle Ermine, from the Folies Bergeres, danced in the
small space between the tables, and the Vicomte, buying a cluster of
pink roses from the flower-girl, sent them across to her with a diamond
pin in the ribbon. The Marquise rebuked him half seriously, but he only
laughed.

"To-night," he said, "is the end of a great adventure. We amateurs have
justified our existence. To-night I give away all that I choose. Ah,
Angele!" he murmured, in her dainty little ear, "if I had but a heart to
give!"

She flashed a quick smile into his face, but her forehead was wrinkled.

"You have lost it to the young English miss. She is beautiful, but so
cold!"

"Do you think so?" he whispered. "Look!"

Phyllis was seated next Duncombe, and he too was whispering something in
her ear. The look with which she answered him, told all that there was
to know. The Marquise, who had intercepted it, shrugged her shoulders.

"It is not worth while, my friend, that you break your heart," she
murmured, "for that one can see is an affair arranged."

He nodded.

"After all," he said, "the true Frenchman loves only in his own
country."

"Or in any other where he may chance to be," she answered drily. "Never
mind, Henri! I shall not let you wander very far. Your supper-party has
been delightful--but you see the time!"

They trooped down the narrow stairs laughing and talking. Duncombe and
Phyllis came last, and their hands met for an instant behind the burly
commissionaire.

"Until to-morrow!"

"Until to-morrow," she echoed softly, as he handed her into the electric
_coupe_.

Andrew and he drove down the hill together. Duncombe was a little ill at
ease.

"There is one thing, Andrew," he said, "which I should like to say to
you. I want you to remember the night in your garden, when you asked me
to come to Paris for you."

"Yes?"

"I warned you, didn't I? I knew that it would come, and it has!"

Andrew smiled in gentle scorn.

"My dear Duncombe," he said, "why do you think it necessary to tell me a
thing so glaringly apparent? I have nothing to blame you for. It was a
foolish dream of mine, which I shall easily outlive. For, George, this
has been a great day for me. I believe that my time for dreams has gone
by."

Duncombe turned towards him with interest.

"What do you mean, Andrew?"

"I have been to see Foudroye, the great oculist. He has examined my eyes
carefully, and he assures me positively that my eyesight is completely
sound. In two months' time I shall see as well as any one!"

Duncombe's voice shook with emotion. He grasped his friend's hand.

"That is good--magnificent, Andrew!" he declared.

Their carriage rattled over the cobbled stones as they crossed the
Square. The white mysterious dawn was breaking over Paris. Andrew threw
his head back with a laugh.

"Back into the world, George, where dreams are only the cobwebs of time,
and a man's work grows beneath his hands like a living statue to the
immortals. I feel my hands upon it, and the great winds blowing. Thank
God!"


THE END


       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's note

The following typographical error was corrected in the text:

   Phillis Poynton changed to Phyllis Poynton



       *       *       *       *       *



POPULAR COPYRIGHT NOVELS

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A. L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

       *       *       *       *       *

ABNER DANIEL. By Will N. Harben.

ADVENTURES OF GERARD. By A. Conan Doyle.

ADVENTURES OF A MODEST MAN. By Robert W. Chambers.

ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. By A. Conan Doyle.

ADVENTURES OF JIMMIE DALE, THE. By Frank L. Packard.

AFTER HOUSE, THE. By Mary Roberts Rinehart.

ALISA PAIGE. By Robert W. Chambers.

ALTON OF SOMASCO. By Harold Bindloss.

A MAN'S MAN. By Ian Hay.

AMATEUR GENTLEMAN, THE. By Jeffery Farnol.

ANDREW THE GLAD. By Maria Thompson Daviess.

ANN BOYD. By Will N. Harben.

ANNA THE ADVENTURESS. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

ANOTHER MAN'S SHOES. By Victor Bridges.

ARIADNE OF ALLAN WATER. By Sidney McCall.

ARMCHAIR AT THE INN, THE. By F. Hopkinson Smith.

AROUND OLD CHESTER. By Margaret Deland.

ATHALIE. By Robert W. Chambers.

AT THE MERCY OF TIBERIUS. By Augusta Evans Wilson.

AUCTION BLOCK, THE. By Rex Beach.

AUNT JANE. By Jeanette Lee.

AUNT JANE OF KENTUCKY. By Eliza C. Hall.

AWAKENING OF HELENA RICHIE. By Margaret Deland.


BAMBI. By Marjorie Benton Cooke.

BANDBOX, THE. By Louis Joseph Vance.

BARBARA OF THE SNOWS. By Harry Irving Green.

BAR 20. By Clarence E. Mulford.

BAR 20 DAYS. By Clarence E. Mulford.

BARRIER, THE. By Rex Beach.

BEASTS OF TARZAN, THE. By Edgar Rice Burroughs.

BEECHY. By Bettina Von Hutten.

BELLA DONNA. By Robert Hichens.

BELOVED VAGABOND, THE. By Wm. J. Locke.

BELTANE THE SMITH. By Jeffery Farnol.

BEN BLAIR. By Will Lillibridge.

BETRAYAL, THE. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

BETTER MAN, THE. By Cyrus Townsend Brady.

BEULAH. (Ill. Ed.) By Augusta J. Evans.

BEYOND THE FRONTIER. By Randall Parrish.

BLACK IS WHITE. By George Barr McCutcheon.

BLIND MAN'S EYES, THE. By Wm. MacHarg & Edwin Balmer.

BOB HAMPTON OF PLACER. By Randall Parrish.

BOB, SON OF BATTLE. By Alfred Ollivant.

BRITTON OF THE SEVENTH. By Cyrus Townsend Brady.

BROAD HIGHWAY, THE. By Jeffery Farnol.

BRONZE BELL, THE. By Louis Joseph Vance.

BRONZE EAGLE, THE. By Baroness Orczy.

BUCK PETERS, RANCHMAN. By Clarence E. Mulford.

BUSINESS OF LIFE, THE. By Robert W. Chambers.

BY RIGHT OF PURCHASE. By Harold Bindloss.


CABBAGES AND KINGS. By O. Henry.

CALLING OF DAN MATTHEWS, THE. By Harold Bell Wright.

CAPE COD STORIES. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

CAP'N DAN'S DAUGHTER. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

CAP'N ERI. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

CAP'N WARREN'S WARDS. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

CARDIGAN. By Robert W. Chambers.

CARPET FROM BAGDAD, THE. By Harold MacGrath.

CEASE FIRING. By Mary Johnson.

CHAIN OF EVIDENCE, A. By Carolyn Wells.

CHIEF LEGATEE, THE. By Anna Katharine Green.

CLEEK OF SCOTLAND YARD. By T. W. Hanshew.

CLIPPED WINGS. By Rupert Hughes.

COAST OF ADVENTURE, THE. By Harold Bindloss.

COLONIAL FREE LANCE, A. By Chauncey C. Hotchkiss.

COMING OF CASSIDY, THE. By Clarence E. Mulford.

COMING OF THE LAW, THE. By Chas. A. Seltzer.

CONQUEST OF CANAAN, THE. By Booth Tarkington.

CONSPIRATORS, THE. By Robt. W. Chambers.

COUNSEL FOR THE DEFENSE. By Leroy Scott.

COURT OF INQUIRY, A. By Grace S. Richmond.

CRIME DOCTOR, THE. By E. W. Hornung

CRIMSON GARDENIA, THE, AND OTHER TALES OF ADVENTURE. By Rex Beach.

CROSS CURRENTS. By Eleanor H. Porter.

CRY IN THE WILDERNESS, A. By Mary E. Waller.

CYNTHIA OF THE MINUTE. By Louis Jos. Vance.


DARK HOLLOW, THE. By Anna Katharine Green.

DAVE'S DAUGHTER. By Patience Bevier Cole.

DAY OF DAYS, THE. By Louis Joseph Vance.

DAY OF THE DOG, THE. By George Barr McCutcheon.

DEPOT MASTER, THE. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

DESIRED WOMAN, THE. By Will N. Harben.

DESTROYING ANGEL, THE. By Louis Joseph Vance.

DIXIE HART. By Will N. Harben.

DOUBLE TRAITOR, THE. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

DRUSILLA WITH A MILLION. By Elizabeth Cooper.


EAGLE OF THE EMPIRE, THE. By Cyrus Townsend Brady.

EL DORADO. By Baroness Orczy.

ELUSIVE ISABEL. By Jacques Futrelle.

EMPTY POCKETS. By Rupert Hughes.

ENCHANTED HAT, THE. By Harold MacGrath.

EYE OF DREAD, THE. By Payne Erskine.

EYES OF THE WORLD, THE. By Harold Bell Wright.


FELIX O'DAY. By F. Hopkinson Smith.

50-40 OR FIGHT. By Emerson Hough.

FIGHTING CHANCE, THE. By Robert W. Chambers

FINANCIER, THE. By Theodore Dreiser.

FLAMSTED QUARRIES. By Mary E. Waller.

FLYING MERCURY, THE. By Eleanor M. Ingram.

FOR A MAIDEN BRAVE. By Chauncey C. Hotchkiss.

FOUR MILLION, THE. By O. Henry.

FOUR POOL'S MYSTERY, THE. By Jean Webster.

FRUITFUL VINE, THE. By Robert Hichens.


GET-RICH-QUICK WALLINGFORD. By George Randolph Chester.

GILBERT NEAL. By Will N. Harben.

GIRL FROM HIS TOWN, THE. By Marie Van Vorst.

GIRL OF THE BLUE RIDGE, A. By Payne Erskine.

GIRL WHO LIVED IN THE WOODS, THE. By Marjorie Benton Cooke.

GIRL WHO WON, THE. By Beth Ellis.

GLORY OF CLEMENTINA, THE. By Wm. J. Locke.

GLORY OF THE CONQUERED, THE. By Susan Glaspell.

GOD'S COUNTRY AND THE WOMAN. By James Oliver Curwood.

GOD'S GOOD MAN. By Marie Corelli.

GOING SOME. By Rex Beach.

GOLD BAG, THE. By Carolyn Wells.

GOLDEN SLIPPER, THE. By Anna Katharine Green.

GOLDEN WEB, THE. By Anthony Partridge.

GORDON CRAIG. By Randall Parrish.

GREATER LOVE HATH NO MAN. By Frank L. Packard.

GREYFRIARS BOBBY. By Eleanor Atkinson.

GUESTS OF HERCULES, THE. By C. N. & A. M. Williamson.


HALCYONE. By Elinor Glyn.

HAPPY ISLAND (SEQUEL TO UNCLE WILLIAM). By Jeannette Lee.

HAVOC. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

HEART OF PHILURA, THE. By Florence Kingsley.

HEART OF THE DESERT, THE. By Honore Willsie.

HEART OF THE HILLS, THE. By John Fox, Jr.

HEART OF THE SUNSET. By Rex Beach.

HEART OF THUNDER MOUNTAIN, THE. By Elfrid A. Bingham.

HEATHER-MOON, THE. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

HER WEIGHT IN GOLD. By Geo. B. McCutcheon.

HIDDEN CHILDREN, THE. By Robert W. Chambers.

HOOSIER VOLUNTEER, THE. By Kate and Virgil D. Boyles.

HOPALONG CASSIDY. By Clarence E. Mulford.

HOW LESLIE LOVED. By Anne Warner.

HUGH WYNNE, FREE QUAKER. By S. Weir Mitchell, M.D.

HUSBANDS OF EDITH, THE. By George Barr McCutcheon.


I CONQUERED. By Harold Titus.

ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, THE. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

IDOLS. By William J. Locke.

INDIFFERENCE OF JULIET, THE. By Grace S. Richmond.

INEZ. (Ill. Ed.) By Augusta J. Evans.

INFELICE. By Augusta Evans Wilson.

IN HER OWN RIGHT. By John Reed Scott.

INITIALS ONLY. By Anna Katharine Green.

IN ANOTHER GIRL'S SHOES. By Berta Ruck.

INNER LAW, THE. By Will N. Harben.

INNOCENT. By Marie Corelli.

INSIDIOUS DR. FU-MANCHU, THE. By Sax Rohmer.

IN THE BROODING WILD. By Ridgwell Cullum.

INTRIGUES, THE. By Harold Bindloss.

IRON TRAIL, THE. By Rex Beach.

IRON WOMAN, THE. By Margaret Deland.

ISHMAEL. (Ill.) By Mrs. Southworth.

ISLAND OF REGENERATION, THE. By Cyrus Townsend Brady.

ISLAND OF SURPRISE, THE. By Cyrus Townsend Brady.


JAPONETTE. By Robert W. Chambers.

JEAN OF THE LAZY A. By B. M. Bower.

JEANNE OF THE MARSHES. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

JENNIE GERHARDT. By Theodore Dreiser.

JOYFUL HEATHERBY. By Payne Erskine.

JUDE THE OBSCURE. By Thomas Hardy.

JUDGMENT HOUSE, THE. By Gilbert Parker.


KEEPER OF THE DOOR, THE. By Ethel M. Dell.

KEITH OF THE BORDER. By Randall Parrish.

KENT KNOWLES: QUAHAUG. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

KING SPRUCE. By Holman Day.

KINGDOM OF EARTH, THE. By Anthony Partridge.

KNAVE OF DIAMONDS, THE. By Ethel M. Dell.


LADY AND THE PIRATE, THE. By Emerson Hough.

LADY MERTON, COLONIST. By Mrs. Humphrey Ward.

LANDLOPER, THE. By Holman Day.

LAND OF LONG AGO, THE. By Eliza Calvert Hall.

LAST TRY, THE. By John Reed Scott.

LAST SHOT, THE. By Frederick N. Palmer.

LAST TRAIL, THE. By Zane Grey.

LAUGHING CAVALIER, THE. By Baroness Orczy.

LAW BREAKERS, THE. By Ridgwell Cullum.

LIGHTED WAY, THE. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

LIGHTING CONDUCTOR DISCOVERS AMERICA, THE. By C. N. & A. M. Williamson.

LIN MCLEAN. By Owen Wister.

LITTLE BROWN JUG AT KILDARE, THE. By Meredith Nicholson.

LONE WOLF, THE. By Louis Joseph Vance.

LONG ROLL, THE. By Mary Johnson.

LONESOME LAND. By B. M. Bower.

LORD LOVELAND DISCOVERS AMERICA. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

LOST AMBASSADOR. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

LOST PRINCE, THE. By Frances Hodgson Burnett.

LOST ROAD, THE. By Richard Harding Davis.

LOVE UNDER FIRE. By Randall Parrish.

MACARIA. (Ill. Ed.) By Augusta J. Evans.

MAIDS OF PARADISE, THE. By Robert W. Chambers.

MAID OF THE FOREST, THE. By Randall Parrish.

MAID OF THE WHISPERING HILLS, THE. By Vingie E. Roe.

MAKING OF BOBBY BURNIT, THE. By Randolph Chester.

MAKING MONEY. By Owen Johnson.

MAM' LINDA. By Will N. Harben.

MAN OUTSIDE, THE. By Wyndham Martyn.

MAN TRAIL, THE. By Henry Oyen.

MARRIAGE. By H. G. Wells.

MARRIAGE OF THEODORA, THE. By Mollie Elliott Seawell.

MARY MORELAND. By Marie Van Vorst.

MASTER MUMMER, THE. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

MAX. By Katherine Cecil Thurston.

MAXWELL MYSTERY, THE. By Carolyn Wells.

MEDIATOR, THE. By Roy Norton.

MEMOIRS OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. By A. Conan Doyle.

MISCHIEF MAKER, THE. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

MISS GIBBIE GAULT. By Kate Langley Bosher.

MISS PHILURA'S WEDDING GOWN. By Florence Morse Kingsley.

MOLLY MCDONALD. By Randall Parrish.

MONEY MASTER, THE. By Gilbert Parker.

MONEY MOON. THE. By Jeffery Farnol.

MOTOR MAID, THE. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

MOTH, THE. By William Dana Orcutt.

MOUNTAIN GIRL, THE. By Payne Erskine.

MR. BINGLE. By George Barr McCutcheon.

MR. GREX OF MONTE CARLO. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

MR. PRATT. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

MR. PRATT'S PATIENTS. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

MRS. BALFAME. By Gertrude Atherton.

MRS. RED PEPPER. By Grace S. Richmond.

MY DEMON MOTOR BOAT. By George Fitch.

MY FRIEND THE CHAUFFEUR. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

MY LADY CAPRICE. By Jeffery Farnol.

MY LADY OF DOUBT. By Randall Parrish.

MY LADY OF THE NORTH. By Randall Parrish.

MY LADY OF THE SOUTH. By Randall Parrish.


NE'ER-DO-WELL, THE. By Rex Beach.

NET, THE. By Rex Beach.

NEW CLARION. By Will N. Harben.

NIGHT RIDERS, THE. By Ridgwell Cullum.

NIGHT WATCHES. By W. W. Jacobs.

NOBODY. By Louis Joseph Vance.


ONCE UPON A TIME. By Richard Harding Davis.

ONE BRAVER THING. By Richard Dehan.

ONE WAY TRAIL, THE. By Ridgwell Cullum.

OTHERWISE PHYLLIS. By Meredith Nicholson.


PARDNERS. By Rex Beach.

PARROTT & CO. By Harold MacGrath.

PARTNERS OF THE TIDE. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

PASSIONATE FRIENDS, THE. By H. G. Wells.

PATROL OF THE SUN DANCE TRAIL, THE. By Ralph Connor.

PAUL ANTHONY, CHRISTIAN. By Hiram W. Hayes.

PERCH OF THE DEVIL. By Gertrude Atherton.

PETER RUFF. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

PEOPLE'S MAN, A. By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

PHILLIP STEELE. By James Oliver Curwood.

PIDGIN ISLAND. By Harold MacGrath.

PLACE OF HONEYMOON, THE. By Harold MacGrath.

PLUNDERER, THE. By Roy Norton.

POLE BAKER. By Will N. Harben.

POOL OF FLAME, THE. By Louis Joseph Vance.

PORT OF ADVENTURE, THE. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

POSTMASTER, THE. By Joseph C. Lincoln.

POWER AND THE GLORY, THE. By Grace McGowan Cooke.

PRAIRIE WIFE, THE. By Arthur Stringer.

PRICE OF LOVE, THE. By Arnold Bennett.

PRICE OF THE PRAIRIE, THE. By Margaret Hill McCarter.

PRINCE OF SINNERS. By A. E. Phillips Oppenheim.

PRINCES PASSES, THE. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

PRINCESS VIRGINIA, THE. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

PROMISE, THE. By J. B. Hendryx.

PURPLE PARASOL, THE. By Geo. B. McCutcheon.


RANCH AT THE WOLVERINE, THE. By B. M. Bower.

RANCHING FOR SYLVIA. By Harold Bindloss.

REAL MAN, THE. By Francis Lynde.

REASON WHY, THE. By Elinor Glyn.

RED CROSS GIRL, THE. By Richard Harding Davis.

RED MIST, THE. By Randall Parrish.

REDEMPTION OF KENNETH GALT, THE. By Will N. Harben.

RED LANE, THE. By Holman Day.

RED MOUSE, THE. By Wm. Hamilton Osborne.

RED PEPPER BURNS. By Grace S. Richmond.

REJUVENATION OF AUNT MARY, THE. By Anne Warner.

RETURN OF TARZAN, THE. By Edgar Rice Burroughs.

RIDDLE OF NIGHT, THE. By Thomas W. Hanshew.

RIM OF THE DESERT, THE. By Ada Woodruff Anderson.

RISE OF ROSCOE PAINE, THE. By J. C. Lincoln.

ROAD TO PROVIDENCE, THE. By Maria Thompson Daviess.

ROBINETTA. By Kate Douglas Wiggin.

ROCKS OF VALPRE, THE. By Ethel M. Dell.

ROGUE BY COMPULSION, A. By Victor Bridges.

ROSE IN THE RING, THE. By George Barr McCutcheon.

ROSE OF THE WORLD. By Agnes and Egerton Castle.

ROSE OF OLD HARPETH, THE. By Maria Thompson Daviess.

ROUND THE CORNER IN GAY STREET. By Grace S. Richmond.

ROUTLEDGE RIDES ALONE. By Will L. Comfort.


ST. ELMO. (Ill. Ed.) By Augusta J. Evans.

SALAMANDER, THE. By Owen Johnson.

SCIENTIFIC SPRAGUE. By Francis Lynde.

SECOND VIOLIN, THE. By Grace S. Richmond.

SECRET OF THE REEF, THE. By Harold Bindloss.

SECRET HISTORY. By C. N. & A. M. Williamson.

SELF-RAISED. (Ill.) By Mrs. Southworth.

SEPTIMUS. By William J. Locke.

SET IN SILVER. By C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

SEVEN DARLINGS, THE. By Gouverneur Morris.

SHEA OF THE IRISH BRIGADE. By Randall Parrish.

SHEPHERD OF THE HILLS, THE. By Harold Bell Wright.

SHERIFF OF DYKE HOLE, THE. By Ridgwell Cullum.

SIGN AT SIX, THE. By Stewart Edw. White.

SILVER HORDE, THE. By Rex Beach.

SIMON THE JESTER. By William J. Locke.

SIREN OF THE SNOWS, A. By Stanley Shaw.

SIR RICHARD CALMADY. By Lucas Malet.

SIXTY-FIRST SECOND, THE. By Owen Johnson.

SLIM PRINCESS, THE. By George Ade.



       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's notes

The following typographical errors were corrected in the text above:

   1. A. N. Williamson changed to A. M. Williamson
   2. Caroline Wells changed to Carolyn Wells
   3. Marjorie Benton Cook changed to Marjorie Benton Cooke

The list of books presented at the bottom of this text ended
at "The Slim Princess" in the original scans that were used,
probably due to missing pages. Other copies that were obtained
did not include this list of books at all.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MAKER OF HISTORY***


******* This file should be named 19341.txt or 19341.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/3/4/19341



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg