ovttish
    Church to which he belonged; and few will feel disposed to doubt
    that the general impression which the lives of such men made on
    the minds of people disgusted with Paganism, together with the
    internal truth of the Christian doctrines, has ever, and in a
    greater degree, contributed to their first conversion, than even
    the most convincing and solid arguments. How else could the
    so-often, vainly attempted conversion of the Northumbrians have
    been effected by Aidan, who, sprung from a hostile race, sent
    from a hostile school, strove to propagate the doctrines of the
    defeated Scots and Picts, the former oppressors of the Britons,
    in a tongue for which Oswald himself was compelled to act as the
    interpreter?

    “Of Aidan’s fitness for the pious work committed to him, a
    judgment may be formed from the following anecdote related by
    Beda. At the solicitation of Oswald, a priest had been sent by
    the Scots to preach the word to the Pagans of Northumbria, who,
    proving unqualified for the task, and unwelcome to the people,
    through the austerity of his character, returned to his country,
    where, in an assembly of his brethren, he declared his inability
    to effect any good among a people so ungovernable and barbarous.
    On hearing this declaration, Aidan, who was present at the
    meeting, said to him, ‘Brother, it seems to me that you have
    been harsher than was fitting towards such uninstructed hearers,
    and have not, in conformity with apostolic usage, first offered
    the milk of milder instruction, until, gradually nourished by
    the divine word, they might become capable both of receiving the
    more perfect, and of executing the higher precepts of God.’ A
    discussion, to which these words gave rise, terminated in the
    unanimous declaration, that Aidan was worthy of the Episcopal
    dignity, and that he ought to be sent back to the ignorant
    unbelievers.

    “In such, and in every other manner possible, Oswald promoted
    the religion of the Cross, planted by him, not in his own
    kingdom only, but in the states encircling the British empire.
    In this he followed the impressions of his youth, and the
    conviction which had steeled his arm to victory. He might also
    have cherished the hope that in a British Christian church, the
    surest spiritual support would be found to consist in the union
    of all the tongues of Britain.”

For some time the Catholic and Columban clergy lived and laboured
together in the common cause of true religion, with mutual charity and
increasing usefulness. But the desire for external unity, so attractive
in theory, so unattainable in practice, disturbed this pleasing repose;
and, in the struggle that ensued, the victory was on the side of the
Romish system, aided perhaps by superior learning and experience, and
perhaps by the great advantage which dictatorial intolerance often
possesses, in religious matters, over an enlarged liberality. On weak or
ill-instructed minds, the bold assertion of an exclusive access to
salvation, so dogmatically claimed by bigots of all churches, will
generally prevail over opposing doctrines, which invest the choice of a
sect with a less hazardous responsibility. The scene at the Synod of
Whitby reveals a part of the truth, but perhaps a part only; and views
of deeper policy may have been concealed under the somewhat slender
pretext which led to this momentous change.

    “An important measure, both for the benefit of the church and
    the closer union of the Anglo-Saxons, was reserved for King
    Oswiu. The Anglo-Saxons, according as they had been converted by
    Augustine and his followers, or by those of Columba, were
    attached to the Roman Catholic, or to the British Church. The
    majority of the ecclesiastics, at least of the more
    distinguished, belonged to the latter; hence arose a difference
    in religious views and worship, not only in the several
    kingdoms, but in the several provinces, which threatened to
    become extremely dangerous to the new faith. We see this
    religious discussion introduced through marriages even among the
    royal families, and that Oswiu himself celebrated the Easter
    festival, according to the Scottish practice, on a different day
    from that observed by his queen, Eanflœd, a daughter of the King
    of Kent. Ealhfrith also, the son, and co-regent with Oswiu, was,
    through the persuasion of his friend Cenwealh, favourable to the
    Roman church. Differences of this kind, though affecting
    externals only, greatly endangered the Christian faith among a
    people scarcely weaned from the worship of their forefathers,
    and acquainted with Christianity only in the closest connexion
    with the new external observances. Colman, a Scot, the third
    bishop of Lindisfarne, after the death of Finan, zealously
    strove to establish the principles of his sect. A synod was
    called at Streoneshealh, (Whitby) in which, under the presidency
    of Oswiu, the most distinguished ecclesiastics of each church
    defended their respective doctrines. Among the partisans of Rome
    were Agilbert, bishop of Wessex, and Wilfrith, (Wilferth) the
    future celebrated bishop of York. The disputation was maintained
    on both sides with learning and acuteness, and the Scottish
    clergy might have succeeded in settling for ever a strong
    barrier against the Catholic pretensions of the Roman church, if
    the king, wavering under the weight of so many conflicting
    arguments, had not remarked, that the Scots appealed to St.
    Columba, but the Catholics to the Apostle Peter; for Wilfrith
    had not forgotten to adduce, in support of the Roman tenets,
    that Peter was the rock on which the Lord had founded his
    Church, and that to him were committed the keys of Heaven. ‘Has
    Columba also received such power?’ demanded the king. Colman
    could not answer in the affirmative. ‘Do you both agree, that to
    Peter the Lord has given the keys of Heaven?’ Both affirmed it.
    ‘Then,’ said the king, ‘I will not oppose the Heavenly porter,
    but to my utmost ability will follow all his commands and
    precepts, lest, when I come to the gates of Heaven, there be no
    one to open to me, should he, who is shown to have the key in
    his custody, turn his back upon me.’ Those sitting in the
    council, as well as those standing around, noble and vulgar,
    alike anxious for their eternal salvation, approved of this
    determination, and were thus, in the usual spirit of large
    assemblies, and without further investigation of the arguments
    adduced, impelled to a decision by the excited feelings of the
    moment. The Scots either returned to their friends, or yielded
    to the opinion of the majority, and thus, by the learning of
    their school, became useful to the Anglo-Saxons; but, together
    with these apparently trivial externals, the great latent
    influence was sacrificed, which their church would probably have
    acquired in opposition to the then less firmly established one
    of Rome.”

The arrival of Theodore, an able and accomplished Asiatic, appointed to
the primacy by the Pope, and the co-operation of Wilfrith, just
mentioned, an Anglo-Saxon of transcendant talents and unconquerable
zeal, confirmed throughout England the ascendency of Romish influence,
which had thus been established in Northumbria, and which, from the
first, had been recognised in Kent.

We may speculate, with Lappenberg, on the results to be expected if
this controversy had terminated differently. A victory of opinion,
gained in England by the followers of Columba, might have laid the
foundation of a United Church, comprehending all the races that
inhabited the island, and sufficiently powerful to contest with Italy
the guidance of Christian principles over the rest of Europe, and to
confine the Roman Bishoprick within narrower and safer bounds.

    “The British Church, established probably on the oldest direct
    traditions from Judea, in closest connexion with conversions of
    the highest importance in the history of mankind, appeared, no
    less by its geographical position than by its exalted spiritual
    endowments, fitted to become the foundation of a northern
    patriarchate, which, by its counterpoise to Rome and the rest of
    the south, its guardianship over a Celtic and Germanic
    population, sanctified by the doctrine of Christ, might have
    been the instrument to impart to those within its pale, that
    which both meditative and ambitious men in the middle-age
    sometimes ventured to think on, but which, in comparatively
    modern times, Martin Luther first strove to extort for Romanized
    Europe.”

The picture is pleasing if we contemplate these possibilities merely on
“the side that’s next the sun.” We fancy a church system extending over
Northern Europe, pure in its doctrines and peaceable in its policy, free
from foreign influence and intrigue, and in harmony with the frank and
earnest character of the nations it embraces within its bosom. We
imagine, too, that Rome herself, uninjured by the intoxication of a
wealth and power too great for any clerical rulers to bear meekly and
innocently, would have retained something more of apostolical truth and
simplicity; and that the two rivals might have run a friendly race of
Christian zeal and diligence. But there are also opposite contingencies
which may reconcile us to the course, in which events have been directed
by a wisdom greater than our own. We might have seen perhaps in our own
region the establishment of a church at variance with that of Rome, in
some essential articles of faith in which we now agree with her. We
might have been born under a great Arian or Pelagian heresiarchy,
enervating or polluting all our best elements of action; or, if _we_ had
remained pure, the unaided energy of the Roman See might have sunk under
the formidable errors with which she was at one time threatened, and the
limits of orthodox Christendom might have been fearfully abridged. As it
is, by the unity that for a time was attained even at a serious
sacrifice, the preservation and extension of the apostolic faith may
have been secured until the fulness of time arrived, when the
Reformation set men free from a bondage that had ceased to be necessary,
and had begun to be pernicious.

The ascendency of the Romish church brought with it another
compensation, in the influx of southern art and classical learning. It
cannot be doubted that our religious connexion with Christian Rome, was
mainly instrumental in rendering us familiar with Roman and even with
Grecian antiquity: and who shall say what might have been our mental
condition if we had wanted all the ennobling and ameliorating influences
which have thence been derived? A Saxon or a Celtic tendency
predominating in our literature, and in our habits of thought and
action, and excluding perhaps benigner elements of sentiment and
reflection, might have made us a rude and rugged people, brave and
impetuous, ardent and impassioned, but without either the refinement of
taste, the soundness of judgment, or the depth of philosophy, which have
been the fruits of that ingrafted instruction which has softened and
subdued our native character. On the whole, then, let us be grateful for
what we are: not repining at having learned our religion from Rome, and
not regretting that we are now emancipated from our schoolmistress, and
at liberty to judge and to act for ourselves.

With other arts and knowledge, as Lappenberg observes,

    “Architecture also came in the suite of the Roman Church. The
    Scottish clergy, from the preference, perhaps, of the northern
    nations for that material, had built their churches of wood,
    thatching them with reeds, an example of which existed in the
    new Cathedral at Lindisfarne. It was at a later period only that
    reeds were exchanged for sheets of lead, with which the walls
    also were sometimes covered. Wilfrith sent for masons from
    Kent, and the abbot Benedict for workmen from Gaul. The stone
    basilica, erected by Paulinus, at York, which had fallen into a
    disgraceful state of dilapidation, was restored by Wilfrith, the
    roof covered with lead, the windows filled with glass, till then
    unknown among his countrymen. At Ripon, he caused a new basilica
    of polished stone to be erected, supported by pillars with a
    portico. The consecration--at which the Kings Ecgfrith and
    Ælfwine were present--was concluded by a feasting reminding us
    of Pagan times, which lasted during three days and nights. The
    four gospels, written with golden letters on purple vellum,
    adorned with paintings, in a case of pure gold set with precious
    stones, enables us to judge both of the wealth and munificence
    of the patrons of Wilfrith.

    An edifice still more remarkable was erected by the bishop at
    Hexham, which, it is said, had not its like on this side of the
    Alps. Benedict’s structure, too, at Wearmouth was the work of
    masters from Gaul, after the Roman model. Thus, we perceive, in
    the instance of the most memorable buildings of which mention is
    found in the history of the Anglo-Saxons, how their architecture
    sprang from that of ancient Rome, however it may have been
    modified in England, to suit a difference of circumstances and
    climate.”

The details we possess of the exertions of Benedict, mentioned in the
preceding extract, and generally distinguished by the name of Benedict
Biscop, are especially interesting, and present a remarkable view of the
actual importation and progress of those arts of civilization, to which
the Saxons but a century before were utter strangers. He was the
builder, and first abbot of St. Peter’s monastery at Weremouth:--“A
man,” as Bede tells us in his Lives of the Abbots of that locality, “of
a venerable life, (we use Dr. Giles’ translation,) blessed (benedictus)
both in grace and in name; having the mind of an adult even from his
childhood, surpassing his age by his manners, and with a soul addicted
to no false pleasures. He was descended from a noble lineage of the
Angles, and by corresponding dignity of mind, worthy to be exalted into
the company of the angels. Lastly, he was the minister of King Oswy, and
by his gift enjoyed an estate suitable to his rank; but at the age of
twenty-five years he despised a transitory wealth, that he might obtain
that which is eternal.” He visited Rome five times, and never returned
with empty hands. After being settled at Weremouth in the year 674,
Benedict visited Gaul, and brought with him masons and glass artificers,
to build his church in the Roman style. He then made his fourth voyage
to Rome, (we quote again from Bede,)

    “And returned loaded with more abundant spiritual merchandise
    than before. In the first place, he brought back a large
    quantity of books of all kinds; secondly, a great number of
    relics of Christ’s Apostles and Martyrs, all likely to bring a
    blessing on many an English church; thirdly, he introduced the
    Roman mode of chanting, singing, and ministering in the church,
    by obtaining permission from Pope Agatho to take back with him
    John, the arch chanter of the church of St. Peter, and Abbot of
    the Monastery of St. Martin, to teach the English.”--Further,
    “he brought with him pictures of sacred representations to adorn
    the church of St. Peter, which he had built; namely, a likeness
    of the Virgin Mary, and of the twelve Apostles, with which he
    intended to adorn the central nave, on boarding placed from one
    wall to the other; also some figures from ecclesiastical history
    for the south wall, and others from the Revelation of St. John
    for the north wall; so that every one who entered the church,
    even if they could not read, whereever they turned their eyes,
    might have before them the amiable countenance of Christ and his
    Saints, though it were but in a picture, and with watchful minds
    might revolve on the benefits of our Lord’s incarnation, and
    having before their eyes the perils of the last judgment, might
    examine their hearts the more strictly on that account.”

Some years afterwards, he made his fifth voyage

    “From Britain to Rome, and returned (as usual) with an immense
    number of proper ecclesiastical relics. There were many sacred
    books and pictures of the saints, as numerous as before. He also
    brought with him pictures out of our Lord’s history, which he
    hung round the Chapel of Our Lady in the larger monastery; and
    others to adorn St. Paul’s church and monastery, ably describing
    the connexion of the Old and New Testament; as, for instance,
    Isaac bearing the wood for his own sacrifice, and Christ
    carrying the cross on which he was about to suffer, were placed
    side by side. Again, the serpent raised up by Moses in the
    desert, was illustrated by the Son of Man exalted on the cross.
    Among other things, he brought two cloaks, all of silk, and of
    incomparable workmanship, for which he received an estate of
    three hides, on the south bank of the river Were, near its
    mouth, from King Alfred.”

A glimpse of the pictures thus imported into England, in the seventh
century, and of the gazing multitudes who would crowd around them, would
carry us back almost to the childhood of modern art, and to the infancy
of English taste.

The establishment, however, of Roman influence in England was partial
after all, and ecclesiastical authority was not independent of the
State. The Anglo-Saxon clergy, as Lappenberg observes, were not so free
as their brethren on the continent, and many are the complaints that
their subjection to secular power seems to have called forth,
particularly as to their liability to the _trinoda necessitas_ of
fortress and bridge money, and contributions for military levies. The
weaker hold maintained by the Papal power helped to promote the use of
the vernacular tongue in their church service, and the diffusion of
vernacular versions of Scripture, as well as other benefits of which we
are still reaping the good fruits.

The permanent importance of the struggles then maintained for
ecclesiastical ascendency, and the profession and pursuits of the only
men by whom history could be written, have necessarily given an undue
prominence to those actors on the scene who belonged to the church, and
have left the laymen and even the royal personages of the period in
comparative obscurity. As illustrating the workings of Roman influence
on the minds of men, we may select two examples of distinguished
churchmen of Northumbria, the one representing the secular, and the
other the monastic portion of the clergy, and in whom the different
elements entering into the spirit of the times were very variously
exhibited.

    “Wilfrith, though not of noble birth, was endowed with all those
    natural advantages, the influence of which over rugged,
    uncivilized people appears almost fabulous. In his thirteenth
    year, the period at which an Anglo-Saxon youth was considered of
    age, he resolved to leave his parents and renounce the world.
    Equipped suitably to his station, he was sent to the court of
    Oswiu, and, through the influence of the Queen Eanflœd, was
    received into the monastery of Lindisfarne by the chamberlain
    Cudda, who had exchanged earthly joys and sorrows for the
    retirement and observances of a cloister. There he was as
    remarkable for humility as for mental endowments. Besides other
    books, he had read the entire Psalter, according to the
    emendation of St. Jerome, as in use among the Scots. His anxious
    desire to behold and pray in the church of the apostle Peter
    must have been the more grateful to the queen and her Roman
    Catholic friends, from the novelty and singularity of such a
    wish among his countrymen. In furtherance of his object, she
    sent him to her brother Earconberht, King of Kent, where he made
    himself familiar with the doctrines of the Roman Church,
    including the Psalms according to the fifth edition. He was
    attached as travelling companion to Benedict, surnamed Biscop, a
    distinguished man, who, at a later period, exerted himself so
    beneficially in the cause of the Church, and in the civilization
    and instruction of the Northumbrians. Benedict died abbot of the
    monastery founded by him at Wearmouth, an establishment not less
    famed for arts and scientific treasures, than ennobled through
    its celebrated priest, the venerable Beda. On Wilfrith’s arrival
    at Lyons, Dalfinus, the Archbishop, was so struck by his
    judicious discourse, comely countenance, and mature
    understanding, that he retained him long with him, offered to
    adopt him for his son, to give him the hand of his brother’s
    daughter, and to procure for him the government of a part of
    Gaul.

    “But Wilfrith hastened to Rome, acquired there a thorough
    knowledge of the four Gospels, also the Roman computation of
    Easter, which, as we have already seen, he afterwards so
    triumphantly employed, and at the same time made himself
    familiar with many rules of ecclesiastical discipline, and
    whatever else was proper for a minister of the Roman Church. On
    his return, he passed three years at Lyons, with his friend
    Dalfinus, and extended his knowledge by attending the most
    learned teachers. He now declared himself wholly devoted to the
    Church of Rome, and received from Dalfinus the tonsure of St.
    Peter, consisting of a circle of hair in imitation of the crown
    of thorns, while the Scots shaved the entire front, leaving the
    hair only on the hinder part of the head. Here he nearly shared
    the fate of his unfortunate friend, the archbishop, in the
    persecution raised against him by the Queen Baldhild, the widow
    of Clovis the Second, and the mayor of the palace, Ebruin; but
    the comely young stranger, through the extraordinary compassion
    of his persecutors, was saved from the death of a martyr. He now
    hastened back to his country, where he was honourably received
    by King Ealhfrith, consecrated abbot of the monastery of Ripon,
    and regarded as a prophet by high and low. After the disputation
    with Bishop Colman at Whitby, Oswiu and his son, with their
    witan, chose the abbot Wilfrith for Bishop of York, who passed
    over to Paris to be consecrated by Agilbreht. On his return to
    Northumbria, he was driven by a storm on the coast among the
    Pagan south Saxons, who proceeded vigorously to exercise the
    right of wreck on the strangers. The chief priest of the
    idolaters stood on an eminence for the purpose of depriving them
    of power by his maledictions and magic, when one of their
    number, with David’s courage and success, hurled a stone at him,
    from a sling, which struck him to the brain. At the fall of
    their priest, the fury of the people was excited against the
    little band, who succeeded however, after a conflict, four times
    renewed, in re-embarking with the return of the tide, and
    reached Sandwich in safety.”

Wilfrith in his absence had been deprived of the See of York, and on his
return retired with real or affected submission to his cloister at
Ripon; but the see was restored to him by the influence of Theodore.
Various events hastened an outbreak of dissensions among the higher
clergy, and of the jealousy of the secular towards the ecclesiastical
power.

In order partly to curtail the dimensions of Wilfrith’s power, the See
of York was divided into two dioceses; and the influence and
remonstrances of the bishop were unavailing to avert the blow. He set
out, therefore, on a journey to Rome, to appeal to the Papal authority;
but he had enemies abroad as well as at home, and was only saved from
their hostility by a storm, which drove his vessel to the coast of
Friesland, and secured for him the honour of being the first of the
numerous English missionaries who bore the tidings of the Gospel to the
continental Pagans of the North.

Resuming his journey, after a year, he laid his complaints before the
Roman See, and was here also the first in a less honourable path,--no
previous appeal to the Papal protection having ever been attempted by
Anglo-Saxon churchmen. The thunders of the Vatican sounded, as yet, but
faintly in British ears; and Wilfrith, on his return, was consigned to a
prison, instead of obtaining that restoration of his honours which Pope
Agatho had ventured to decree.

Driven from Northumbria a homeless exile, Wilfrith fled to the shores of
Sussex, the scene of his former peril and preservation, and, renewing
his efforts against the remains of Pagan barbarism still lingering in
that quarter, he taught the natives the lore of a better life, both in
worldly and in spiritual things, and established a bishopric, to the
charge of which he was himself elevated.

Again reconciled to Theodore, he was appointed to the See of Litchfield,
the fourth that had fallen to him, and he afterwards had the glory of
declining an offer of the archiepiscopate of Canterbury. After
recovering the bishopric of York, he once more lost it by becoming
involved in new disputes and contests for the superiority of the Romish
discipline, and, in his seventieth year, carried another appeal to the
Papal Chair, which, on this occasion, had the satisfaction of finding
that both Wilfrith and his enemies pleaded to its jurisdiction. Wilfrith
was exculpated by the Pope, but could only obtain from the Anglo-Saxon
Prince of Northumbria the See of Hexham and the monastery of Ripon.
“After a few years passed in almsgiving and the improvement of church
discipline, Wilfrith died in his seventy-sixth year, a man whose
fortunes and activity in the European relations of England were long
without a parallel.” He completed what Augustine began, and united the
English Church to that of Rome in matters of discipline. Even his
influence, however, could not destroy the independence of his
countrymen, who, as Lappenberg observes, “even after they were no longer
Anti-Catholic, continued always Anti-Papistical.”

The two achievements which occur as episodes in this singular biography,
the commencement of a Christian mission in Germany, and the conversion
of the last remnants of Paganism in England, would have been enough to
immortalise their author, independently of his influence on the outward
discipline of the Church.

To the chequered and restless career of Wilfrith, thus divided between
clerical ambition, and Christian usefulness, a striking contrast is
presented in the peaceful life of one who is the honour of Saxon
England, and the brightest, or the only bright name in European
literature during the centuries that intervened between Theodoric and
Charlemagne.

    “But no one imparts to the age of the ‘Wisest King’ greater
    brilliancy than the man just named, whom the epithet of ‘The
    Venerable’ adorns, whose knowledge was profound and almost
    universal. Born in the neighbourhood of Wearmouth, he enjoyed in
    that abbey the instructions of Benedict, its first abbot, of
    whom we have already had occasion to make honourable mention, as
    well as those of his successor, Ceolfrith, equally distinguished
    for his zeal in the promotion of learning. In the neighbouring
    cloister of Jarrow, Beda passed his life in exercises of piety
    and in varied study; and gave life and form to almost all the
    knowledge which the age could offer him. If, on a consideration
    of his works, it must appear manifest that that age possessed
    more means of knowledge, both in manuscripts and learned
    ecclesiastics, than we are wont to ascribe to it; and even if we
    must recognise in Beda the high culture of the Roman church,
    rather than Anglo-Saxon nationality, yet the acknowledgment
    which his merits found in Rome during his life, and shortly
    after his death, whereever learning could penetrate, proves that
    in him we justly venerate a wonder of the time. His numerous
    theological writings, his illustrations of the books of the Old
    and New Testaments, have throughout many ages, until the total
    revolution in that branch of learning, found readers and
    transcribers in every cloister of Europe. His knowledge of
    Greek, of medicine, of astronomy, of prosody, he made
    subservient to the instruction of his contemporaries; his work
    “De sex hujus seculi ætatibus,” though less used than it
    deserves to be, is the basis of most of the universal chronicles
    of the middle age. But his greatest merit, which will preserve
    his name through all future generations, consists in his
    historic works, as far as they concern his own native land. If a
    second man like himself had arisen in his days, who with the
    same clear, circumspect glance, the same honest and pious
    purpose, had recorded the secular transactions of his
    forefathers, as Beda has transmitted to us those chiefly of the
    church, then would the history of England have been to posterity
    almost like revelation for Germanic antiquity.”

It seems like a miracle to witness within a century of their country’s
conversion, two native names so remarkable as these. Under the influence
thus exerted, which in the one man was purely good, and in the other had
more good in it than evil, an active spirit of religion was necessarily
introduced, and the national character underwent a mighty change. The
condition of public feeling at this period is strongly illustrated in
the concluding chapter of Bede’s History.

    “Such being the peaceable and calm disposition of the times,
    many of the Northumbrians, as well of the nobility as private
    persons, laying aside their weapons, rather incline to dedicate
    both themselves and their children to the tonsure and monastic
    vows, than to study martial discipline. What will be the end
    hereof, the next age will show. This is, for the present, the
    state of all Britain; in the year, since the coming of the
    English into Britain about 285, but in the 731st year of the
    incarnation of our Lord, in whose reign may the earth ever
    rejoice; may Britain exult in the profession of his faith; and
    may many islands be glad, and sing praises in honour of his
    holiness!”

_What will be the end hereof the next age will show!_ These are ominous
words, of which we are soon to find the fulfilment in many grievous
revolutions and disasters. And yet amid all these it is impossible to
depreciate the value and operation of the peaceful interval that
preceded them, or to deny that, though other things might fall or fade
away for a time, the great work of the diffusion of Christian
civilisation was destined ever to make more rapid progress, even by the
help of those very events which seemed to threaten its extinction.




SCOTTISH MELODIES BY DELTA.


ERIC’S DIRGE.

    Shon’st thou but to pass away,
    Chieftain, in thy bright noon-day?
      (All who knew thee, love thee!)
    Who to Eric would not yield?
    Red hand in the battle field,
    Kinsman’s idol, Beauty’s shield,
      Flowers we strew above thee!

    Eagle-like, in Glory’s sky,
    Soar’d thy dauntless spirit high;
      (All who knew thee, love thee!)
    Scion of a matchless race,
    Strong in form, and fair of face,
    First in field, and first in chase,
      Flowers we strew above thee!

    Three to one Argyle came on,
    Yet thy glance defiance shone;
      (All who knew thee, love thee!)
    Fear thine Islesmen never knew;
    We were firm, tho’ we were few;
    And in front thy banner flew:--
      Flowers we strew above thee!

    What mere men could do was done;
    Two at least we slew for one;
      (All who knew thee, love, thee!)
    But, ah fatal was our gain!
    For, amid the foremost slain,
    Lay’st thou, whom we mourn in vain:
      Flowers we strew above thee!

    Mourn!--nor own one tearless eye,
    Barra, Harris, Uist, and Skye!
      (All who knew thee, love thee!)
    Eric! low thou liest the while,
    Shadowed by Iona’s pile;
    May no step thy stone defile:--
      Flowers we strew above thee!


THE STORMY SEA!

    Ere the twilight bat was flitting,
    In the sunset, at her knitting,
    Sang a lonely maiden, sitting
      Underneath her threshold tree;
    And, as daylight died before us,
    And the vesper star shone o’er us,
    Fitful rose her tender chorus--
      “Jamie’s on the stormy sea!”

    Warmly shone that sunset glowing;
    Sweetly breathed the young flowers blowing;
    Earth, with beauty overflowing,
      Seem’d the home of love to be,
    As those angel tones ascending,
    With the scene and season blending,
    Ever had the same low ending--
      “Jamie’s on the stormy sea!”

    Curfew bells remotely ringing,
    Mingled with that sweet voice singing;
    And the last red rays seem’d clinging
      Lingeringly to tower and tree:
    Nearer as I came, and nearer,
    Finer rose the notes, and clearer;
    Oh! ’twas heaven itself to hear her--
      “Jamie’s on the stormy sea!”

    “Blow, ye west winds! blandly hover
    O’er the bark that bears my lover;
    Gently blow, and bear him over
      To his own dear home and me;
    For, when night winds bend the willow,
    Sleep forsakes my lonely pillow,
    Thinking of the foaming billow--
      “Jamie’s on the stormy sea!”

    How could I but list, but linger,
    To the song, and near the singer,
    Sweetly wooing heaven to bring her
      Jamie from the stormy sea:
    And, while yet her lips did name me,
    Forth I sprang--my heart o’ercame me--
    “Grieve no more, sweet, I am Jamie,
      Home returned, to love and thee!”


GENERAL MACK--A CHRISTMAS CAROL.

_To the Tune of “No one else could have done it.”_

    At the taking of Ulm, some forty years back,
    “No one could have done it” but General Mack:
    Like “The League,” the besiegers were certainly strong,
    But to Mack, without doubt, did the triumph belong:
    “In vain,” people cried, “must have been the attack,
    But for one single man--gallant General Mack!”

    Yet “the Hero of Ulm,” doesn’t stand quite alone,--
    For we have a General Mack of our own;
    And when any strong Fortress in which he commands,
    Any morning is found in The Enemy’s hands,
    We cry till our voices are ready to crack,
    “Pray, who could have done it but General Mack?”

    In the time of _old_ Mack, although only a lad,
    What delight in the name must the stripling have had!
    How the opening buds of political truth
    Must have swell’d in the heart of the generous youth,
    As he nobly resolved to pursue the same track,
    And become, in due season, a General Mack!

    “If perchance,” he would say, “the time ever should be,
    When some fortress as strong is entrusted to _me_--
    If its chosen defenders I ever should lead,
    Here at once is a system that’s sure to succeed!
    How soon may the boldest and bravest attack
    Be brought to an end, by a General Mack!”

    In days when they tell us that prophets are rare,
    This was, for a young one, you’ll own, pretty fair;
    For in due course of time, (not to dwell upon dates,)
    Full many a fortress had open’d its gates;
    And I could not admit, though I were on the rack,
    Any one could have done it but General Mack.

    On each new exploit, the same wonderment ran--
    “You’ll allow that this Mack _is_ a wonderful man.
    All the optics of friends and of foes he defies--
    He is always preparing some pleasant surprise--
    What a squint you must have, if you see on what tack,
    He next is to go--honest General Mack!”

    Oh, gallant commander! I hear people say,
    These triumphs of yours have at length had their day.
    I will not determine how far that may be,
    But I’m sure they have not been _forgotten_ by me;
    And a Carol for CHRISTMAS you never shall lack,
    As long as your name shall be GENERAL MACK!




REFLECTIONS SUGGESTED BY THE CAREER OF THE LATE PREMIER.


We have heard a great deal said of late against what are termed
“personalities”--a term which, I suppose, implies remarks or reflections
on the personal conduct of an individual. If a statesman is hard pressed
on some unpleasant point, he escapes by saying, that it is only a
“personality,” and that to “bandy personalities” is a thing from which
he is precluded by his dignity. If a discussion in Parliament turn much
upon these personalities, they are treated by those who may find them
distasteful, as a totally irrelevant matter, interrupting the true
business of the House; and if they are noticed, it is done as if it was
a pure πάρεργον, a gratuitous piece of condescension on the
part of the person replying to the attack. It seems to be laid down as a
sort of axiom by many, that political questions should be discussed
solely on their own merits, abstaining from all remarks on personal
character, more especially in Parliament, where all such reflections are
condemned as pure waste of the time of the House.

That political questions should be discussed on their own merits, and
that those merits are in no way affected by the character of any
individual whatever, is perfectly true; but if it be meant to be
inferred that the personal character of public men is therefore a matter
of no importance, a subject which is to be veiled in a sacred silence,
and never to be examined or discussed, such a sentiment is eminently
flimsy and false, one which could only find general acceptance in a
poor-minded age, to which material interests were of greater value than
the far higher ones of national character. For that the national
character is greatly affected by the personal character of its leading
public men, is a truth that will scarcely be called in question. The
venality and corruption which more especially disgraced the ministry of
Walpole, and infected, in a greater or less degree, that of his
successors, may reasonably be expected to have exercised a widely
debasing influence on the nation at large, an expectation amply
confirmed (to say nothing of native testimonies) by the estimates which
foreign writers of that time draw of the national character of England.
The intriguing and profligate character of many of the public men under
Charles II. had, no doubt, a similarly evil influence on the popular
mind; and generally, all insincerity in high places must be looked on as
a bane to the country. Most widely should we err, if, in estimating the
career of these statesmen, we looked only to the outward character of
their measures, in a commercial, economical, or political point of view.
However beneficial many of their measures may have been in these
respects, if their own character was not sincere and honest, if these
measures were brought about not by fair and open means, but by artful
and underhand intrigues, by false professions, by duplicity, and
insincerity, by venality, whether of the open bribe, or the insidious
government influence, we pass a verdict of censure on their career, we
reject them from the rank of the true patriots, the sacred band, who
have earned renown as the pure benefactors of their country,--“Quique
sui memores alios fecere merendo.”

If we looked only at the commercial or practical consequences of his
measures, the career of Walpole might be esteemed glorious--for I
believe it is generally considered that his measures were sagacious and
successful. But the venal character of his administration is a blot that
no one may remove, and this stain on his personal character neutralises
(as far as he is concerned) all the effect of his measures. Posterity,
accordingly, has done him justice, and has assigned him his fitting
rank--he takes his place among the skilful statesmen, not among the
great patriots. Who will be able to alter this decision? Who shall have
influence to induce the world to raise him to the higher rank,--to make
us couple the name of Walpole with those of Aristides, Phocion, and
Demosthenes?

Since, then, this personal character exercises so wide an influence for
good or for bad upon the character, and therefore on the destinies, of a
nation, are we to be told, that it is not a subject of discussion, that
it is shrined in an inviolable asylum, removed from the free exercise of
thought; that we must confine our views to the character of measures,
and not dare to direct them to the character of men? Who is it, in
writing the history of Charles I. who has not pointed out the lamentable
defect in the character of that unfortunate prince, that his friends
could not rely on his professions? And if there be a statesman of the
present day, whose friends cannot rely upon his professions, are we
totally to abstain from making any reflection, either mentally or
verbally, on so lamentable a defect? By whom are we taught this new and
precious doctrine? Certain members of the late Government take upon them
to be our chief instructors in it; more especially, perhaps, Mr. Sidney
Herbert. Sharp expressions had been raining pretty thick from his foes,
amid which he and his colleagues (proh nefas!) had been termed
“Janissaries!”

    Talibus exarsit dictis violentia Sidnei;
    Dat gemitum;

and he delivers an able lecture to his opponents on their strong and
ungentlemanly language. After this, let us take care what we are about:
let us say nothing ungentlemanly respecting the conduct of Walpole:
whatever we may think of the personal character of Cromwell, let us, in
our language at least, observe the established courtesies and urbanities
of discussion.

“Not so,” perhaps says Mr. Herbert. “I make a distinction: I do not mean
to debar you from free discussion on the characters of the dead; but
what I desire is, that you abstain from meddling with the conduct of the
living.” Where is it, then, that he has found this doctrine? Were those
who blamed, and strongly too, the conduct of Shaftesbury, and
Bolingbroke, and Walpole, when alive, culpable? Was it only permitted to
do so after their death? Is Aristophanes thought peculiarly guilty for
having blamed Cleon while alive and in power? Is Socrates stigmatised
for having wounded the feelings of any demagogue of the day, or of the
thirty tyrants? Is Cicero reproached for his ungentlemanly tone towards
Catiline, his disregard of the feelings of Verres, his total want of
courtesy and urbanity even to so eminent and distinguished a man as
Antony? Or in our own days, is Lord Lyndhurst blamed for having again
happily applied the language of Cicero to denounce the conduct, or
rather misconduct, of O’Connell? No; if their censure was deserved, they
are honoured for having decidedly expressed it. And when, indeed, is it
of greater importance that a true estimate should be formed of the
character of public men, than while they are yet alive,--while that
character is still exercising its widely-acting influence, and while
mistakes in respect to it may lead to the most pernicious consequences?
It is during their lifetime that we should discuss the characters of
such men as O’Connell and Peel. A true estimate of their character after
death is, doubtless, better than nothing; but a true estimate of it
during life is better still. The proverb tells us, that “late is better
than never;” but it does not deny that early is better than late.

“Well, then,” perhaps Mr. Herbert may reply, “you may, if you please,
judge their character while they are yet alive, but this must be in
proper time and place; I must request you to abstain from doing so in
Parliament. Strong language in Parliament on personal character is a
thing which I can never approve; here I must insist on the use of mild
language, on a gentlemanly and courteous tone of discussion.”

And what, we would ask, is the object of Parliament, if not to discuss
impartially, but firmly and decidedly, all important subjects that
deeply concern the public weal? And what subject more important than the
conduct of the men who hold the helm? Since how long is it that
Parliament has been considered as having no right to form or to express
any opinion on this subject? Since how long has the new doctrine been
held or been acted on, that they are only to regard measures, and not
the conduct of men? This is calling on them to abdicate one of the
highest and most important of their functions; for the public character
of statesmen is at least as important a consideration as that of the
measures they propose; frequently of much greater importance. And in
what place can such opinions be more fitly expressed, or with greater
weight and propriety, than within the walls of Parliament; of that
assembly, whose duty it is to deliberate on all matters concerning the
national welfare?

“Well, then,” perhaps says our Parliamentary master of the ceremonies,
“let us grant even this point; still I must insist on their expressing
such opinions in courteous and gentlemanly language.”

We should be much obliged to our preceptor, if he would inform us of the
precise mode in which this is to be done. We suppose he will grant that
if such opinions are to be expressed at all, the thing chiefly desirable
is, that the expression of the opinions be _true_; that the language
employed convey an accurate and well-defined idea of the real sentiments
entertained by the speaker.

Now, if the deliberate opinion which the speaker wishes to convey to the
assembly be, that a public man is insincere, underhand, and artful, one
whose convictions have no genuine strength, one whose professions cannot
be trusted, we would fain be informed how these ideas can be accurately,
truthfully, and unmistakeably conveyed, in gentlemanly, courteous, and
pleasing language. Our tutor must give us a list of expressions by which
this can be effected, before he blame us for not making use of them. But
even suppose that his ingenious intellect should enable him to
accomplish this, we would still desire to be informed what would be the
use of it, and why, if we wish to express our opinion of a person’s
insincerity, the discourteous word of “insincere,” which is now in use,
should not be as good as the most gentlemanly and elegant detour that
could be invented even by Mr. Herbert’s ingenuity.

Or take the very word of “_Janissary_,” which forms the bone of
contention. The Janissaries were a body who acted under orders of their
chief, without perhaps troubling themselves much about the abstract
merits of the case. If bidden by their General to do a thing, they did
it; if bidden to abstain, they abstained. Such conduct is not altogether
unknown among the politicians of England. If, then, the word Janissary
convey an accurate idea, well applicable to certain individuals, why
should its use be so atrocious? Really, we are at a loss to comprehend
the storm of indignation excited in the late Government by the simple
word Janissary. We have heard of a fish-woman who patiently endured all
the opprobrious epithets heaped on her by one of her fellows, till this
latter happened to apply to her the term of “individual.” What the term
of “individual” was to the fish-woman, the term of “Janissary” seems to
have been to certain members of the late Peel cabinet. We will, however,
grant that its application was somewhat unjust, though quite in a
different way from what those parties suppose. Leaving it to them to
defend themselves, we must take up the part of the Janissaries, whose
feelings seem to have been totally disregarded in the whole matter. Let
us remember that they no longer exist; victims of a melancholy end, they
are incapable of speaking for themselves; be it then allowed to us to
see that fair play is done them. Is it just, we ask, that their name
should be so scornfully rejected as the _ne plus ultra_ of reproaches by
English statesmen? What great guilt are they charged with, that it
should be thus opprobrious? Not, surely, that they were paid: I have
some doubts even whether such was the case; but, granted that they were,
so are our soldiers, so are our officials. Whatever were their errors,
they were bold and brave, true and consistent to their Mussulman
principles. They were not basely subservient to government influence;
their fault lay rather the other way. It was not that they truckled to
the Prime Vizier, but that they did not sufficiently respect their
Sultan. Their misconduct has been expiated by their death. Peace be with
their ashes! Let us not add insult to injury. It is not for Peel and his
followers to spurn at and dishonour their name. Considering the recent
conduct of so many of our public men, may we not reasonably think that
it is a greater insult to the Janissaries to apply their name to some of
our statesmen, than it is to those statesmen that the name of Janissary
should be applied to them. Would not the shade of an old Janissary be
fully as indignant if he heard himself termed a paid English official,
as the English official in his full-blown virtue could be at being
called a paid Janissary?

The contrast of all these indignant professions of our statesmen with
their actual practice, has not the best effect. The present is not the
time best fitted for these displays; the brilliancy of public virtue has
not of late been so lustrous as to justify this tone of triumph over the
poor Ottomans. If these epithets are so distasteful to our public men,
there is a far better mode of repelling them than these angry
protestations. Let them act with that openness, sincerity, and candour
which England looks for in her statesmen, and they need not fear far
harder terms than this much dreaded name of Janissary.

But enough of this digression, which is purely incidental. We have
merely wished to state a principle, let others accommodate it to the
rules of Parliamentary warfare. Enough has been said for our object, to
vindicate the utility of a review of the public character of leading
statesmen, and the right of expressing a judgment upon it in firm and
decided language.

That the practice of defaming the character of a public man without
cause, simply because he is a political opponent--a practice too much
employed in the party political warfare of the day--is one deserving the
severest reprobation: this is a truth that no one ought to deny. But the
evil of this practice consists, not in the decided tone of the language,
nor in the severity of the opinion expressed, but in the absence of all
just cause to warrant the strength of the censure.

But to argue, that because many people are blamed unjustly, no one is to
be blamed justly--that the abuse of censure precludes the use of it,--is
a mode of reasoning which cannot for a moment be admitted. We all know,
that if we are forbidden from using everything that may be abused,
nothing of any worth or importance would be left; and it is an old
remark, that the very best and most useful things, are precisely those
that are liable to the easiest and greatest abuses.

If I thought that the views which I entertain on the conduct of the late
Premier were in the least degree the result of political prejudices, I
should carefully abstain from giving them publicity. But I am not
conscious of being swayed by any such motives. With regard to the
greater part of the actual measures brought forward by Sir R. Peel, as
far as I know them, I feel no reason to disapprove of them. With regard
to many of his measures, which are wanting in any specific or decided
character, it is natural that no very decided opinion should be felt.
They are good, for all I know to the contrary, as far as they go. With
respect to the more prominent measure of Catholic Emancipation, it is
one that has my hearty approval. With respect to the bulk of his
financial measures, I believe them, from general report, to be sagacious
and skilful. But, it will be said, you have a strong opinion in favour
of Protection, and here your political prejudices warp your judgment.
Such, I can safely say, is by no means the case. I by no means entertain
any fixed and definite opinion, either for or against the actual measure
of the repeal of the Corn Laws. I have not obtained sufficient knowledge
of the facts of the case, to enable me to come to such a decisive
opinion; and so little am I suited at present for a staunch
Protectionist, that I feel in perfect readiness, if greater knowledge,
or the practical result of the working of the measure should convince me
of its utility, to recognise its value and importance; nay, I will even
say, that in the state of excitement into which the public mind had been
worked on the subject, I rejoice at the experiment being made, for if it
work well, so much the better, and if it work ill, our laws are not as
those of the Medes and Persians. Its evils can be stopped in time, and
if so, will be far less than those arising from permanent disaffection
among the people. Certainly, many of the principles urged in its
support, I consider fallacious, and some of those fallacies I have
endeavoured to expose; but I know perfectly well, that people may form a
correct practical judgment, though unable to explain, philosophically,
the true principles on which that judgment is really based. No earnest
free-trader, who advocates his cause from a sense of its truth, could
wish such fallacies to remain without exposure. If their view is true,
it cannot but gain instead of lose, by being removed from the
treacherous support of unsound principles.

But I feel quite sure that I entertain no prejudice against any man,
merely on account of his being a free-trader. I dislike all whose
suspicious conversion prevents full confidence in the sincerity of their
motives. I feel no sympathy with those who, with the ignoble violence of
petty minds, preach up a war against the aristocracy, impugn all motives
but their own, and seem to anticipate with triumph the downfal of those
above them, and their own seizure on rank and power in their turn.[7]
But then, it is not here the free trade that I dislike, but, in the one
case, the insincerity; in the other, the bigotry and narrow-mindedness.
But with a reasonable and liberal-minded free-trader, such as many of
the Whig party doubtless are, who is willing to do justice to other
motives than his own, and is actuated by a sincere and earnest belief in
the truth of his principles, I feel perfectly sure that no animosity
vitiates my feelings towards him, and that I could be as good friends
with him as with any person whatever. I believe, indeed, that there are
few people in England less under the influence of party or political
prejudice than myself, nor less unfitted, so far as their absence is
concerned, for forming an impartial estimate of a public man’s
character. I feel, therefore, no apprehension, in the present case, of
being influenced, even unconsciously, by unworthy motives, but simply by
the desire of expressing my opinion on conduct which appears to me to
call for grave and decided censure. My judgment is not based on any
isolated or doubtful expression, nor on minute and recondite
circumstances: it is the simple reading of those plain and unmistakeable
characters which more conspicuously mark Sir Robert Peel’s career, which
are known and admitted by all, and which lie within the comprehension of
all.

For my own part, I knew next to nothing of his former political conduct,
till the discussion caused by recent circumstances; a vague knowledge of
some change in his opinion on the Catholic Question, was nearly the
whole information I possessed of the career of a man respecting whom,
feeling no great admiration of his character, I never took any lively
interest. Nor can I say, that at present I have any thing but the most
elementary knowledge of the circumstances of his political life. I know
no more than those leading events which form the salient points in his
career, which, however, it seems to me, are quite sufficient for a just
conclusion,--a conclusion which, perhaps, is the less likely to err, as
founded on simpler premises, and freer from all subtle minutiæ.

I take then the facts which, as far as I can learn, are admitted by
all,--himself among the rest. If there be any error in my statement of
them, it certainly does not arise from design.

After having been for some time in the government with Canning, he
refused to hold office under him, and went into opposition, from a
strong and decided feeling (as was professed by himself) against the
Catholic claims which that statesman advocated.

Amid the ranks of this opposition, were some partisans, more zealous
than scrupulous, who carried on their party warfare in an unduly violent
way, which produced an effect much deeper than political attacks usually
do, on the generous and sensitive mind of Canning. This misconduct,
though confined to few, and little thought of at the time by their
associates, has, by its result, cast somewhat of a shade over the whole
of this opposition.

Owing at length to the efforts of his party, Sir R. Peel is brought in,
as the Protestant champion, to resist the Catholic claims, which the
great bulk of that party look upon as fraught with danger both to the
spiritual and temporal welfare of the State.

This party, which places him in power, never for a moment doubts that
his opinion coincides with their own, nor does he ever express a
sentiment which could lead them to suppose that they were mistaken in
their conviction. His actions and his speeches are perfectly in harmony
with that opinion, and all tend to confirm them in unlimited confidence.

When, however, he is seated in office, and while they are still enjoying
their opinion in perfect security, lie astonishes them by proposing and
passing the very measure which they imagined it was his principal object
to resist.

On the sudden and unexpected triumph of the principles of reform, which
raised the Whigs to power, Peel is again reduced to the ranks of
Opposition, and we here find him strenuously attacking all their
principles, which he denounces as dangerous to the institutions of
Church and State. He thus rallies round himself a party termed
Conservative, whose object is to resist these encroachments, which they
look on as irreligious, destructive, and anarchical.

This party gradually gains ground, while the Whigs decline in
proportion. At length, when the Whigs begin to devote their attention to
the development of free-trade principles, the storm, under Peel’s
auspices, is roused to the highest pitch, and the Whigs fall prostrate
under their triumphant adversaries.

Peel then comes into power, (for the second time,) supported by a large
majority. He stands forth in the character of “Defender of the Faith,”
and of the institutions of Church and State, and, generally, as the firm
antagonist of all Whiggish principles.

But more especially does he stand forth as the great Champion of
Protection--to resist the menacing encroachments of Free Trade--to check
all advances in the direction of that dimly seen and dreaded
catastrophe--the Repeal of the Corn Laws. Here, again, his party
entertain the strongest conviction that his opinions on this subject
coincide with their own; and on the strength of this conviction they
take their measures in full security on the most important matters.

Sir R. Peel, as before, never for a moment leads them to infer, by any
word or action, that this conviction is erroneous; on the contrary, for
a considerable period of time, he gives repeated assurances, in the
strongest language, of his support of the principle of Protection.

Nevertheless his measures, as it is soon observed, are all imbued with
the precise policy which he had formerly so denounced in his
opponents--a discovery which excites considerable dissatisfaction among
his followers, though they reconcile themselves to it, as they best may,
on the plea of the necessity of the times. Not for a moment, however,
are they induced to doubt of his firm determination to uphold the Corn
Laws.

No sooner, however, has the repeal of these laws (by the declaration of
the opposite party and the strength of public opinion) become feasible,
than, without giving any previous intimation of his real opinion, while
his party are still in complete security, and relying on his support, he
proposes and carries the very measure which they believed him to be
heartily endeavouring to oppose, and for the sake of resisting which
they had placed him in power, and supported him.

Before quitting power, he makes a speech explanatory of his views and
principles, in which he expresses his adoption of all those principles
of policy which, when the Whigs were in power, he had so resolutely
denounced, and his perfect readiness to assist in developing their
doctrines much further than they themselves had done.

Such is a simple outline of the facts,--facts of no dubious or recondite
nature, but notorious, and not, I apprehend, capable of denial.

It is from these facts that my opinion is formed, that Sir R. Peel’s
career is deserving of the gravest censure: it is from these that I draw
the conclusion, by some so much deprecated, and venture to pronounce,
without feeling much risk of error, that Sir R. Peel, in his public
conduct, is insincere, a man unworthy of all trust and confidence. A
most unwarrantable attack, exclaim his partisans; an imputation that can
only be the result of the venomous malignancy of a political opponent!
Who else would dare to brand such a man with the odious crime of
insincerity, to assert that he is not worthy of being trusted--to impute
to a statesman of such pure and exalted virtue the detestable guilt of
political hypocrisy!

How far the simple ideas of right and wrong may be altered by a tenure
of office, or by long acquaintance with political affairs, we are
fortunately ignorant; but unless they undergo some improvement, or at
least some modification, we are at a loss to account for all the
indignation manifested at these charges by the principal members of the
late ministry, and by other leading political luminaries, and are
tempted to inquire whence arise such great angers in these celestial
minds? To our unsophisticated intellect it seems, that to say that Sir
R. Peel is insincere, is only saying, in a concise and general way, what
is conveyed in the simple statement of the above facts, with somewhat
more of detail. What better exposition of the word _insincerity_ could
we give to a person desirous of receiving it than the plain recital of
Sir R. Peel’s conduct, as given above? That conduct is little else than
the very definition of the word. Is not a man said to be insincere when,
either by words or deeds, or by their omission, he wilfully leads people
to believe that he holds opinions which he really does not, and to act
in important matters upon that supposition;--when, knowing that they
believe him to support their cause, and that they are placing their
trust in him accordingly, he does not undeceive them, as one word of his
might do, but suffers them complacently to remain in their error?

Is not a man said to be unworthy of trust, or faithless, who, while he
knows that a trust of the greatest importance is reposed in him, and who
has tacitly acknowledged the acceptance of that trust, is seeking all
the time the ruin of that cause, the defence of which has been intrusted
in full confidence to him?

Is not a man said to be a hypocrite who acts outwardly a part which is
at variance with his inward convictions? Is not a man a hypocrite, who
outwardly so behaves himself, that he is looked upon as the Protestant
champion, while inwardly he is casting about how to carry the Catholic
claims? Is not he a hypocrite whose demeanour is such that he is clapped
on the political stage as the hero of Protection, whilst inwardly he is
thinking of the time when he shall be cheered as the Repealer of the
Corn Laws?

Now, that Sir R. Peel was ignorant that his party reposed trust in him,
and believed his views to coincide with their own, is, I imagine, what
nobody, not even himself, could for a moment pretend. It may be looked
on as a fact that cannot be disputed, that he knew that a large body of
men believed him to hold a certain class of opinions, while he himself
knew that he was holding the contrary,[8] and that nevertheless he
suffered them to repose trust in him, without ever undeceiving them of
their error, which a word of his would have sufficed to do, and allowed
them to act in security on matters of importance upon that erroneous
belief.

He is placed, then, in this dilemma;--that if he acknowledges the fact
he acknowledges the insincerity; if he denies the fact, nobody will
believe the denial; and so far from escaping from the odium of
insincerity, he will only prove it the more, by adding one piece of it
to another. Any way, then, he cannot escape this charge of insincerity,
which is complained of as so peculiarly distasteful. To what purpose,
then, are all these high-sounding speeches, this tone of injured
innocence, this indignation at the slightest hint of the names of deceit
or hypocrisy? It falls powerless on his accusers; it is not they who
laboriously strain to prove the charges, it is the facts which speak for
themselves. But what is the use, alas! of all this declamation against
the unhappy facts, which are in no degree moved or affected by it? Here,
again, if the reputation of sincerity be so much valued, would it not
have been a far better method of securing it, instead of making all
these laboured professions of esteem, to have simply observed its rules
in practice? How is it that so mature and able a statesman overlooked so
simple and obvious a course? Let politics explain the mystery.

The fact that he himself professes to see nothing in the least degree
blamable in his conduct, nothing that can in any way be qualified as
insincere, and that some of his partisans are indignant at such terms
being applied to it, is a useful example, to show how political
prejudices can blind the mind to the simplest moral truths.

The only line of defence that he could reasonably take, would be to
grant the insincerity, but to maintain that it was rendered necessary
and justifiable by circumstances. Thus, (taking the second case, of the
repeal of the Corn Laws,) his partisans might argue, that the measure
was one most highly beneficial to the country; that it was of vital
importance as well for its commercial interests, as also to allay the
strong and growing discontent which had taken hold of the nation; that
the concealment and dissimulation of which such complaint is made, were
necessary to obtain these benefits. Had Sir R. Peel avowed at an early
stage his real views, the prejudices of the Protectionists would
immediately have displaced him from power. It was necessary not to
awaken these prejudices, and this end was obtained by concealing his
true sentiments; by suffering them to repose their trust in one who was
really their enemy, which, it is admitted, was certainly a piece of
hypocrisy. “But then,” would they say, “mark the advantages of this
hypocrisy. Peel is thus enabled quietly to watch his opportunity. The
Whigs, finding the current of opinion strongly setting for free trade,
declare their adherence to it. Now, then, they are fairly compromised,
and Peel has the game all to himself. If he goes out, and the Whigs come
in, they will not be able to carry it, for when Peel is out of office,
not a dozen of his party will vote in favour of Free Trade. They will
not be able then to make any head, and if they come in they will be
immediately displaced again. Peel all the time, with that hypocrisy
which you so much blame, has kept his own plans snugly locked up in his
impenetrable breast, and is still looked upon by the unconscious
Protectionists as their hero and champion, so much so, that they refuse
to believe any rumours which may be floating about to the contrary.
Thanks then to this hypocrisy, he smoothly comes in again as before, but
the case, now that he is once more in office, is widely altered. If the
Whigs had proposed the measure, perhaps not a dozen of his party would
have supported it. But now that he is in office, the ‘_government
influence_’ is in his hands;” (that “_government influence_,” a phrase
after Mr. Sidney Herbert’s own heart which means, I believe, being
interpreted, that mixture of motives which combines, with the purest
public duty, certain visions of peerages, salaries, offices of various
kinds, and all the undefinable tribe of loaves and fishes.) “Will Peel
find only a dozen free-traders among his ranks now? Rest assured that a
wonderful liberality will be diffused among them; for the government
influence has the property of making many a man a free-trader, who
otherwise would have lived and died a staunch Protectionist. A round
hundred will be converted in addition to the former dozen, by the magic
of this government influence. This, in addition to the Whigs, who would
any way vote for free-trade, will be sufficient to carry the measure
with a good majority.

“Do not then let us blame so loudly this hypocrisy, before we have
examined how far it has been advantageous. In the present case, it has
hastened on a most beneficial measure, and we may well overlook in
regard to that a little falsehood and deceit. If the Protectionists have
been taken in, it is no very great matter; they are not people to be
pitied; they should have looked sharper about what they were doing. Peel
had shown them before what they might expect in the Catholic business;
and it is their own fault if such old birds let themselves be caught,
twice running, with chaff.”

This, altering somewhat the expressions to suit the dignity of his
language, is the line of defence that Sir R. Peel ought to adopt.
Admitting the insincerity, which it is useless to attempt to deny, he
should rest his case on the necessities of the State, on the important
benefits of his measure. In this view it will be a case of a conflict of
duties,--of the duty of truthfulness and sincerity, which in ordinary
cases is binding--and the duty to his country; and he may say, that
considering his duty to his country as greater than his duty of
sincerity to the Protectionists, he considered himself justified in
deceiving them, with a view of benefiting the nation. In this case,
however, we must remark, that he ought to acknowledge the deceit, and
feel compunction for it; for the breach of a duty, even when sacrificed
to a superior one, should not (as the moralists and as reason tell us)
take place in a virtuous mind without pain.[9] This pain, however, Sir
R. Peel is particularly unwilling to acknowledge; he strenuously insists
on feeling no humiliation or compunction of any kind for any part of his
conduct, by which assertion he gives us no favourable impression of the
nature of his mind; while by taking up so foolish and exaggerated a
posture, he materially injures the strength of his defence.

That the duty of truth, though paramount in ordinary circumstances, is
not so in all, and requires in certain cases to be sacrificed to
superior duties, is what all must on reflection admit.[10] The wife who
saved her husband by a falsehood, is immortalized as the “splendide
mendax” of Horace, and many other cases might be quoted in point. There
is no reason why a statesman also might not, in some circumstances, be
“splendide mendax,” but it is a dangerous aim, and he must take especial
care, that the natural meanness of the “mendacia” do not more than
counteract the splendour of his measures.

In estimating such conduct, two points come into consideration, the
splendour of the benefit obtained, and the character of those upon whom
the deceit is practised. Thus, in the above case of Hypermnestra, the
benefit obtained was the preservation of her husband’s life, a benefit
of the greatest importance to him, and one which her duty to her husband
made it imperative upon her to seek. Moreover, the conduct of those whom
she deceived was such, that the duty of sincerity towards them was
scarcely binding; for they themselves were endeavouring to compass an
act of the greatest guilt, one which involved not only deceit, but
murder. In every way her conduct was perfectly right, and justly is she
celebrated as “splendide mendax.”

Let us then examine, on both these points, the conduct of the late
Premier; let us weigh Peel against Hypermnestra. Let us scrutinise the
character of his “mendacia,” and see whether it should be ranked in the
category of “splendida” or “ingloria.”

First, then, as to the benefits which his recent conduct has conferred
upon his country.

Admitting (what, however, we cannot hold as any way proved at present)
that the measure itself of free-trade in corn, is one of the highest
benefit to the country,--granting that the promises held out by its most
sanguine advocates, shall be copiously fulfilled,--it still remains to
inquire, how far the country’s possession of those benefits will be
attributable to the conduct of Sir R. Peel, who, up to the eleventh
hour, was their strenuous and consistent opponent.

It is a generally admitted truth, that under the constitution we now
possess, as soon as public opinion is decidedly formed in favour of any
principle, that principle must triumph over all opposing influences. If,
then, public opinion were strongly pronounced in favour of free-trade in
corn, if the majority of the electors, who, under our constitution,
represent by the members they send to Parliament the deliberate opinion
of the nation, were strongly and decidedly in favour of the measure, why
should they be unable to give effect to those opinions?--what need would
they have of all the circuitous and underhand process employed by the
late Premier? No damage could have been done in this case to their cause
by Sir R. Peel’s avowal of his real opinions, instead of the close
secrecy in which, for purposes best known to himself, he thought fit to
veil them for so long a period. Granted, that by so doing he would have
been displaced from office; the country would not have felt at all
embarrassed by such an event--it would have had no difficulty on that
account in finding men who could execute its deliberate opinion. However
desirable it may be to Sir Robert, that he should have been the minister
to pass the measure, that his name might be associated with it, and that
it should cast a halo on his career, all that is a matter of pure
indifference to the nation, and cannot be looked on in the light of a
benefit. If the opinions of the actual Parliament were the only
obstacle, a dissolution was nigh at hand, or might have been resorted to
at any moment, when the country could have had no possible difficulty in
expressing its real opinions, and carrying them into effect, either
through him or others. However much, then, it might be advantageous to
himself, we cannot see what benefit, in such a case, free-trade can have
derived from the sinister support of all this disingenuous conduct.

But, if the merit attributed to him be, that by means of his skilful
artifices, and by the government influence at his disposal, he succeeded
in carrying the measure before it was the deliberate opinion of the
House, or of the majority of the electors of the country, then it is
plain that his conduct has been unconstitutional, and deserving far more
blame than praise. In this case the majority would have been obtained by
improper influences, not by the deliberate convictions of sincere and
earnest men, and would have been forced, by a species of trick, by the
minority of the electors on the majority. We all know to some extent
what “government influence” means--though the idea of it is so
mysterious and vague, that it is impossible to give a very precise
definition. Without asserting that it is an influence of any very
dishonourable kind, (as times go,) we may safely assert that it is not
of the most honourable. Motives resulting from sincerity and truth, are
certainly more estimable than those which result from government
influence. We should have thought that a minister, however useful he
might find it in practice, would carefully abstain from making much
direct reference to it in public. That a statesman should boast of the
success with which, by his eloquence and earnestness, he had advocated a
principle--of the impression which his arguments had made on the minds
of his hearers,--of how he had consistently supported it from the time
while it was yet weak and doubtful, till its triumphant success had
crowned his arduous exertions, this we could readily understand,--this
would be a just subject of self-gratulation. But if he has no proofs of
having persuaded the minds of men by reason; if, on the contrary, his
arguments have all tended to plunge them deeper into error and delusion,
we cannot understand how he should think it a matter of boast, that he
had persuaded their minds by “government influence.” Such a boast
appears to us not to be of the most honourable kind to himself, and
certainly not very complimentary to those who had supported him. If we
ourselves had voted for a minister, and had heard him afterwards
declare, that he believed us to have done so from “government
influence,” we should certainly look upon it as a species of insult.
Sir R. Peel, however, in giving his own account of his share of merit in
promoting the measure, makes no scruple of attributing it all to his
well-timed use of “government influence.” After particularly insisting,
that Lord John Russell cannot claim much merit in the affair, he
explains to us what amount properly falls to himself. “The real state of
the case,” says he, “was, that parties were nearly equally balanced, and
THAT THE GOVERNMENT INFLUENCE WAS THROWN INTO THE SCALE.” With his
wonted egotism, he does not seem to think it possible, that the
gentlemen of his party may have given their vote without reference to
him, solely as the result of their genuine convictions. Such is the
reward which his unhappy followers receive from the master whom they so
faithfully supported. We do not say that they may not have deserved it,
but we think they had a right to look for it from other hands.

By his own account, then, the matter stands thus: the merit of the
affair is to be shared between Cobden and Peel. In this division of
labour, Cobden has all the clean work, and Peel all the dirty. Cobden
converts all those whose minds are amenable to persuasion, and Peel all
those whose minds are amenable to “government influence.”

Sir Robert Peel, however, seems most perfectly satisfied with his
exploit, and never for a moment to doubt that it entitles him to the
greatest applause. St. Augustine could not speak with more exultation of
converting millions of Pagans to Christianity by the fervour of his
eloquence, than Sir R. Peel does of his illustrious feat of converting
some hundred ignoble minds to free-trade by his paltry government
influence. This is the glorious, the devoted deed, upon which he rests
his claims to immortality; this it is which is to enshrine his name amid
the gratitude of an admiring posterity. On account of this he trusts
that “his name will be gratefully remembered in those places which are
the abode of the man whose lot it is to labour, and to gain his bread
with the sweat of his brow, when he recruits his strength with abundant
and untaxed food, the sweeter because no longer leavened with a sense of
injustice.” What this abundance of food will actually turn out to be,
and when it is to begin, (for I apprehend that as yet, although the law
is in operation, no labourers have been incommoded with plethora,) we
will not here endeavour to determine. But even if it should turn out to
be an abundance altogether unlooked for and unprecedented, we would not
have Sir Robert Peel imagine that much of the labourer’s gratitude will
go to him. The labourer is generally a shrewd man, with a good share of
honest common sense; and he neither likes his bread nor his minister to
be leavened with the taint of injustice. He is perfectly capable of
discriminating between those who consistently advocate a cause, and
those who, having profitably opposed it in the hour of its weakness,
when they might have aided it, embrace it at the eleventh hour, in the
time of its triumph, when it is capable of aiding them. It is not on
time-serving patriots, such as these, that posterity confers her
gratitude. Posterity gives her gratitude to the upright and sincere, not
to the crafty, servile, and deceitful. Posterity admires those who
convert their fellows to truth by persuasion, she scorns those who can
only convert them to dishonour by government influence.

If, then, the majority of electors were in favour of free-trade, Peel’s
artifices were null and superfluous; if they were not yet in favour of
it, they were unconstitutional. He either did no good whatever to the
cause, or he passed it sooner than constitutional principles warranted.
In the latter case he might claim some merit for anticipating, by a
brief period, the time when it would have been duly carried by a
majority of the electors. A short additional interval of the enjoyment
of free-trade is then, it appears, the utmost extent of his services.
Against this are to be placed all the evils arising from his peculiar
mode of passing the measure,--the shock given to confidence in public
men by such sudden inconsistency,--the general lowering of political
character by his craftiness and duplicity,--the disgust excited at the
avowed and conspicuous part which government influence has played on the
occasion. The country feels justly offended with the minister, who, in a
free nation, where the conscientious voice of the majority should alone
decide, attempts to anticipate that decision by the voice of those who
are biassed by lower and unrecognised motives, and who scruples not to
boast of the success of such a method, and lay claim to merit on its
account. It feels justly offended also at the discovery, that no less
than a hundred of its representatives, who are looked on as the elite of
the land, are capable of voting on a measure of first-rate importance,
on other grounds than their own heartfelt convictions; that they are
ready to vote against it if proposed by A, and for it if proposed by B.
Even the cause of free-trade receives its share of damage by becoming
associated with the odium of such mischievous proceedings. This, indeed,
is felt and acknowledged by many of the free-traders themselves. I may
quote, as an illustration, some expressions in a published letter of Mr.
Vernon Smith, that has fallen under my eye. He states as a motive for
declining office, that “he should be very sorry in his person, however
humble, to sanction the belief that official emolument is a motive of
action among public men. Sufficient shock” he says, “has already been
given to public virtue;” and he subsequently adds, speaking of the Corn
Bill, “We have to await many mischiefs from its mode of settlement.”

For our part, had we been free-traders, most earnestly should we have
implored that our cause might not be encumbered with the sinister aid of
Sir Robert Peel.

Weighing, then, well all the circumstances of the case; considering the
relative value of moral and economical advantages; nay, even looking
principally merely to the latter, it appears to me, as the result of Sir
R. Peel’s recent proceedings, that no residuum of benefit to the country
is left, but a very considerable amount of injury. Such a result is not
one of sufficient lustre and brightness to enable us to grant him the
title in question of “splendide mendax.”

Let us, however, inquire into the other point, as to the character of
those who were the dupes of his insincerity, and how far the duty of
sincerity between him and them was binding.

The duty of sincerity between a leading statesman and that body of men
who were termed his party, does not result from any verbal promise given
by one to the other, but is a tacit compact, arising from the nature of
things, mutually understood, though not defined; and, precisely on
account of its tacit nature, and of so much being left to good faith, is
perhaps the more incumbent on an honourable mind. Not, indeed, that the
party who have placed a public man in power, have therefore the smallest
right to claim an influence over his opinions;--not that because they
think they have done a service to him, they are to claim his support of
their views as a recompense for that service. He is perfectly free to
hold what opinions he pleases, but he is under an obligation honestly to
profess those opinions. He is free to change them when he likes, but he
is bound to give an intimation of those changes. This is not a case of
services bandied to and fro between one party and another, but it is a
mutual duty which all public men owe to each other for the furtherance
of the welfare of the State. Unless public men of all parties and
positions are sincere in the avowal of their opinions, public business
sustains severe injury. For in this, as in other things, isolated
individuals can accomplish little; men must combine their efforts, and
organise themselves, that they may act effectually; and in order to do
this, they must know the general tenor of each other’s opinions, and
count on their support or their hostility accordingly. If they once took
to deceiving one another on these points; if a body of Whigs came over
to the Tory benches, (or _vice versâ_,) and acted and spoke like Tories,
merely with the view of deceiving them, leading them into erroneous
calculations, and then profiting by the error they had caused, such
conduct would justly be stigmatised as baneful and dishonourable. For
public men act and concert measures in matters of the greatest
importance upon the belief which they thus entertain of the general
views of others, and unless they can act in security on this belief,
there is an end of all public confidence. But this general sincerity of
profession and behaviour, though binding on all, even the humblest
member of the House, is more especially so on the leading and more
distinguished statesmen, inasmuch as its breach in their case is
productive of greater evils. A knowledge of their real views is of the
greatest importance to all parties, whose measures vitally depend on the
opinion they entertain of the general views of these statesmen. Upon
this belief they securely act in matters of the greatest importance;
upon this they support or oppose a ministry; and if they are deceived in
this belief, they are thus induced to act in a way which they would, if
they knew the truth, think contrary to the public welfare. If a man
should knowingly induce in another, though without any actual falsehood,
an erroneous belief, and suffer him to act in consequence in a way
prejudicial to his private fortune, (of which we have seen many
instances in the late railroad transactions,) such conduct is justly
denounced as highly censurable. But much more censurable is the conduct
of him who induces an erroneous belief in another, so as to lead him to
act in a way prejudicial (under his views) to the public welfare. By how
much the public welfare is dearer to the high-minded man than his own
individual fortune, by so much is the misconduct of the hypocrite in
Parliament greater than that of the hypocrite upon ’Change. When,
therefore, a Prime Minister knowingly suffers an erroneous belief to
exist in the minds of men, owing to which they give him their support,
which support, if they knew his real views, they would think injurious
to the public welfare, he is committing a breach of a solemn trust; he
is suffering, or rather he is inducing, men to act contrary to the
dictates of their conscience, to do that which he knows they will
afterwards repent of, as contrary to what they deem the interests of
their country; and his conduct is in every way deserving of the
strongest and severest censure.

That Sir Robert Peel knew that men looked upon him as a Protectionist,
while he knew that he was not one; that he knew that, in consequence of
this belief, they supported him; that he knew that if they were aware of
his real views, they would instantly withdraw their support, and that as
soon as they discovered them they would grievously repent of that which
they had given him, as having been contrary to the real interests of
their country;--that he knew all this, and that, nevertheless, he
concealed his real views from these men, and allowed them to retain
their erroneous belief, and to act consequently in a way diametrically
opposite to their conscientious convictions, though a single sentence of
his would have sufficed to dispel their error, and enable them to
further their country’s interests conformably with their own
views--this, I say, is matter of fact, which he would in vain attempt to
deny.

This case, then, exactly corresponds with the preceding; he has broken a
solemn though tacit trust; he has given a severe blow to public
confidence; he has culpably suffered honourable men to deceive
themselves in matters deeply concerning the public welfare; and his
conduct, therefore, exposes him to a severer censure than I have any
wish to seek for language to express.

And when honest men, who have been for a long time conscientiously
supporting him, find that he has been tacitly deceiving them, and
concealing from them his real views,--that he has been sporting with
their convictions, and using them for nothing more than tools for his
own secret purposes,--shall we wonder that they feel just indignation at
such conduct, and that they express their feelings in stronger terms
than suit the delicate ears of Mr. Sidney Herbert?

Sir R. Peel has indeed attempted, in a broken kind of way, to excuse his
conduct, by saying,--“I never told you so and so; if you supported me
without knowing my real opinions, it was your own fault. I did not _say_
any thing that you can charge me with as a falsehood.” Without
mentioning that, in this case, great suspicion is cast on many even of
his verbal professions, which come down to no distant period, surely a
sexagenarian Premier can scarcely need to be told, that there is a
deceit in actions not less than in professions. Does he think it an
excuse that he did not deceive others, but only allowed them to deceive
themselves? A pleasant kind of sincerity! Why, this is no more than the
excuse of a school-boy, who thinks it a sufficient salve to his
conscience that he has skilfully managed to deceive without uttering any
thing directly false with his lips. And this is the excuse put forth by
an English Minister! Miserable excuse, that fitly crowns the
deceit--paltriness of mind, almost inconceivable!

Still worse is it, when he attempts to justify his conduct by taunting
his friends with a previous inconsistency of their own, which they had
been reluctantly induced to commit through him, in order to support him
in power.[11] We cannot understand why he should thus delight in
exposing the not very pleasing recesses of his ignoble nature.
Certainly, “Quem Jupiter vult perdere, prius dementat.” Otherwise he
must see that such palliations as these are far more injurious to his
character than the severest attacks of his foes.

The only case in which this duty of sincerity towards public men could
at all cease to be binding, and admit of a valid excuse, would be, when
those upon whom the deceit was practised were not men conscientiously
seeking the public good, but were acting from unworthy views, for
private or for class interests. In this case, we will admit that the
duty of sincerity would not be of any very strict obligation. This is
doubtless the view that is taken by many people of the conduct of the
Protectionists; by all that numerous class represented by Messrs.
Bright, Villiers, &c.--men who, however sincere themselves, are not
probably endowed by nature with very comprehensive or liberal minds.
From these gentlemen we hear nothing but attacks on the character of the
whole body of the landlords; they look on them as a selfish oligarchy,
sacrificing the public good to their own class interests. Such views
having been industriously propagated by the League, are entertained with
more or less of bitterness by a considerable body of the people. It is
on this account that Sir R. Peel’s conduct has met with so much applause
among them; this it was which animated the cheers that consoled him on
his resignation of power; his treachery to the Protectionists, so far
from appearing censurable in the eyes of these admirers, has rather
enhanced the merit of his success. But such views, however they may suit
the minds of those whose passions are aroused in the party warfare of
the day, can meet with no acceptance from the impartial judge. It is
impossible to admit for a moment that a very large portion of the whole
population of the country, including not only landlords but people of
all classes, merchants, tradesmen, and operatives, were so lamentably
destitute of all regard for their country, and that public spirit was
entirely monopolised by the party advocating free-trade. Neither can we
admit that the large body of Protectionist members in the House, forming
upwards of a third of the whole, were all playing so unworthy a part.
For, adding them to the converts of “Government influence,” we should
thus have more than half the House of Commons acting upon questionable
motives--a prospect certainly not cheering, nor honourable to the
country.

Sir R. Peel, indeed, with his usual magnanimity, does not scruple to
adopt, in a great measure, the above view; and, seeing how little he
spares the feelings of his own devoted supporters, we cannot expect him
to show much tenderness to those who have become his foes. Accordingly,
we find him making frequent hints at these unworthy motives; indeed, but
for some such belief, we cannot understand how he could have justified
to himself his deceitful conduct. In his last words, on laying down his
power, he does not conceal his sentiments:--“I shall leave a name,” says
he, “execrated by every monopolist, who, from less honourable motives,
clings to Protection for his own individual benefit,”--a sentiment
warmly, applauded by Messrs. Bright, Villiers, & Co.

The generosity of nature displayed in this parting blow is indeed worthy
of admiration! We should scarcely think that it was pronounced by a man,
who, up to the age of fifty-six, had done every thing in his power to
uphold this very monopoly and oppose the Repeal of the Corn Laws, and
who had strongly denounced all imputations of the above kind, in the
language of its early and consistent supporters. How noble must be the
man, who, having for all his life courted and flattered the aristocracy,
and thus obtained power as their champion, now gives them a parting
kick, and delivers them over to popular odium as monopolists, after
having obtained for himself popularity and influence at their expense!

Really, let us remark, when Sir Robert scruples not to express such
views, he has no reason to be indignant if the stones of his opponents
break some of the panes of his own glass house, even though they damage
a few of the artificial flowers, which he has been striving to rear
there with so much care.

But, as we observed before, the impartial judge cannot accept this
opinion of Sir Robert’s. He will proportion his praise and blame pretty
nearly equally between both parties. He will hope that in both, the main
body of men are acting on sincere and worthy motives; in both he must
acknowledge it to be probable that there are a few whose motives are of
a less estimable kind. But he will not put all the virtue on one side,
nor all the selfishness on the other. We have yet to learn that Sir
Robert is in any way qualified to pass his censure on the body of
English gentlemen. The less he says upon these points the better. In the
impartial estimate of the three parties, it is he and his that will come
by far the worst off.

We cannot then admit that the character of the parties deceived, in any
way justified the insincerity; no sufficient excuse is found upon this
head, and the breach of the duty remains exposed to grave and severe
censure. England does not recognise such conduct in her Ministers. She
has long been accustomed to pride herself on a general openness and
sincerity of dealing; and that honesty which she looks for in the
humbler walks of life, she claims in a yet more imperative degree from
her leading and conspicuous statesmen. She reprobates among these all
deceitful and underhand conduct, all espionage and mystery; she loves
not the secret opener of letters, even though the plea of utility be at
hand to excuse his conduct; nor is the government influence, Sir
Robert’s darling, at all palatable to her taste. Such proceedings she
thinks more fitted to the court of the despot, to the sinuous policy of
the Oriental Divan; in a free country she demands that public men should
be honest and straightforward, and should not, from whatever motives,
suppress and mask the genuine convictions of their mind. She looks not
on language as a method of concealing the thoughts, but as a method of
declaring them. The recent conduct of Peel has been in every way alien
to her principles. It was a skilful _coup d’état_, well suited to a
Turkish Vizier, but totally inappropriate to an English Minister.

Having, then, examined the insincerity on both the points proposed, we
find that in neither does it wear an aspect of splendour or of
brilliancy, but much of the reverse. We refuse it then the title of a
splendid insincerity, but we qualify it as poor, culpable, and
inglorious.

Sir R. Peel, however, gives us quite a different account of the matter:
he puts in his claim to a generosity of the purest and most exalted
kind. “What possible motives could I have had,” he asks, “except the
most devoted and patriotic? See what an enormous sacrifice I have made!
To afford my country the blessings of Free Trade, I have given up my
power and the confidence of a large party, every thing, in a word, which
is chiefly valuable to a public man. I have come forward and boldly
avowed the truth, in spite of all the taunts of inconsistency and
apostasy to which I inevitably exposed myself. But these I esteem as
nothing in comparison with the good of my country. For my part, I
declare that the proudest moment of my life was when I avowed my
opinions to my colleagues, and proposed measures for opening the
ports.”

It is curious to observe how completely blind Sir Robert Peel seems to
be, to the point on which his conduct is really blamable. He insists
much on his perfect integrity in proposing the measure, seeing that he
thought it highly beneficial to his country. Surely so self-evident a
truism can scarcely need so much parade: surely it is an acknowledged
fact that a statesman is not to blame for proposing measures which he
deems to be highly beneficial. Sir Robert was doubtless most perfectly
right in proposing his measure; nobody, I apprehend, at all blames him
on that head. He was doing his simple duty, considering what his views
were upon the subject. But that for which he is justly blamable, is for
not having done so before. He was culpable for suppressing so long his
real opinions, for professing to deem free trade injurious, while really
he thought it beneficial. He is culpable for the general mask which he
has so long thrown over all his real character and opinions, leading
astray the minds of men, and ruining public confidence. This is the
point to which blame attaches, and on this he is perfectly silent. We
should be glad to know whether it was from motives of a very high and
exalted virtue, that he so long suffered his colleagues, and the public
generally, to deceive themselves? Was it from any very stoical sense of
duty that he so long passed himself off for a protectionist, when really
a free trader? Was it from any very intense and devoted patriotism that
for so long he bitterly denounced Whig principles, when, as it now turns
out, he thoroughly approves of them in his heart? Was it any great
stretch of self-sacrifice, any very generous magnanimity, to obtain
power, and so long to retain it, upon false pretences? This is the point
which it would be desirable for him to clear up. Instead of this, we
have much declamation, quite beside the purpose, on his virtue in coming
forward and avowing his real opinion. What! is it then any such
excessive stretch of virtue, that a man should actually tell the truth?
Is it any thing so marvellous in a statesman, that he should advocate a
measure which he thinks vitally necessary for his country? Sir R. Peel
seems to think that when it entails, as in his own case, the sacrifice
of power, such conduct is eminently praise-worthy and meritorious. Why,
it is his bare duty and nothing more; it is what he ought to have done
years ago, holding the views he does; or, rather, he should never have
entered on that power at all. Surely power and place are not so dear to
statesmen that they should think it very arduous and patriotic to
sacrifice them for their duty to their country. Not to do so would be
highly blamable, to do so is simply right, but in no way a subject for
praise or self-glorification. And yet Sir R. Peel naively tells us, that
the proudest moment of his life was when he declared his real sentiments
to his colleagues, and avowed his advocacy of free trade. A strange
subject of pride, to fulfil (much too late) a duty of common honesty!
Wondrous triumph of virtue, to put a tardy close to a culpable and
pernicious dissimulation, which had already been productive of great
harm! And this is the glorious feat, which, as Sir R. Peel informs us,
afforded him the proudest moment of his life! Curious, unenviable
career, of which such is the proudest moment?

It seems then to be “the enormous sacrifice” which he has made, upon
which he rests his claim to devoted virtue. “I have sacrificed,” says
he, every thing that “is dear to a public man.” Certainly, we do not
deny that he has made many sacrifices. He has sacrificed his former
supporters, handing them over to discomfiture and to the public odium as
monopolists. By his course of dissimulation and deceit he has also
sacrificed his character, and with it all claims to public confidence.
But these sacrifices are not of any very sublime and devoted nature. It
is not by a sacrifice of character that a claim to exalted virtue can
best be established. The method is ingenious, but somewhat Irish,[12]
and likely to meet with no solid success. There remains, then, the
sacrifice of power, to which we will grant its share of merit, (provided
it is not made a matter of boast.) We learn, however, from some of his
new admirers, that it has not been laid down for nought. It appears to
have been exchanged for a good equivalent of popularity and influence,
upon which it is hinted that a firmer power is to arise ere long, much
grander and more durable than the last. Mr. Wakley, for instance,
informs us that “at this moment Sir R. Peel is the most popular man in
the kingdom; that he is beloved, nay adored, by the masses, who believe
that no man has ever before made such sacrifices on their behalf.” And
that most probably “he (Sir R. Peel) will shortly return to power upon
the shoulders of the people, and will remain there just as long as he
pleases.”

If this be so, what shall we say of the sacrifice? Had Sir Robert
advocated this measure while it was weak, and while such advocacy
entailed a real sacrifice, then might he justly put in his claim to
heroism and devotion. But he gained his power by opposing it while weak,
he did not adopt it till it was strong, and capable of supporting that
power. He rejected it when its adoption would have weakened him, he
embraced it when his adherence procured for him an extensive (though
ill-deserved) popularity and influence. By associating his name with it,
he has obtained renown, frequently the dearest reward of ambition. In no
way are the circumstances of his conduct such as to support his claims
to intense and exalted patriotism. It is not for men of time-serving
convictions like these, to aspire to the rank of Aristides or
Washington.

If, indeed, we go back to the characters of antiquity, we find others
much better suited to our man, than these exalted natures; but there is
one especially whose resemblance is such that we cannot help suspecting
that there must be more than chance in it. He is described by
Aristophanes, and with such lively and accurate traits, that no one can
fail to recognise the type of our present hero. It has not, indeed, been
reserved for the nineteenth century to discover that a measure promising
cheap food is well suited to procure popularity and power, and that the
favour of the people can most readily be obtained by courting that
highly important organ, its stomach. (Nor can we altogether blame this
judgment of the “popular bellua.”) The late contest between our
political leaders is most amusingly similar to that described in the
“Knights,” between the two candidates for the good graces of the
Athenian Demos.

    R. ὁρᾷς· ἐγώ σοι πρότερος ἐκφέρω δίφρον.

    P. ἀλλ’ οὐ τράπεζαν· ἀλλ’ ἐγὼ προτεραίτερος.

    R. ἰδοὺ φέρω σοι σάχχαρον Κύβης ἐγὼ,
       ἤρτυνε δ’ αὐτὸν δοῦλος Ἀφρικανικός.

    P. ἐγὼ δὲ μᾶζαν Ἰνδικὴν μεμαγμένην.

    R. λαβέ νῦν πλακοῦντος πίονος παρ’ ἐμοῦ τόμον.

But it is when we come to the crowning trick that we more especially
recognise our patriot, that famous “coup” of the hare, which has shed
immortal lustre on the ἀλλαντοπώλης. How exactly was Cleon like
the Whigs, boasting

    Κ. ἀλλ’ οὐ λαγῷ’ ἕξεις ὁπόθεν δῷς· ἀλλ’ ἐγώ·

    ΑΛΛΑΝ. οἴμοι. πόθεν λαγῷά μοι γενήσεται;
          ὦ θυμὲ νυνὶ, βωμολόχον ἔξευρέ τι.

And how beautiful is the heaven-sent flash of genius which irradiates
the mind of the Athenian Peel, when, distracting his adversary’s
attention, by directing it to “envoys _with bags of money_,” he snatches
away the choice tit-bit, and proffers it with his own hands to the
chuckling Demos;--

    ΑΛΛΑΝ. ὦ Δημίδιον, ὁρᾷς τὰ λαγῷ’ ἅ σοι φέρω;

It is a stroke that may have been often imitated, but never surpassed,
and must excite envy even in the breast of his present successful
follower. And is not our modern trickster’s recognition of the services
of Cobden, and his own claim of merit for his skilful “government
influence,” almost prophetically expressed in the slightly varied line--

    P. τὸ μὲν νόημα Κοβδένος, τὸ δὲ κλέμμ’ ἐμόν.

and the contest for their respective claims to favour between himself
and Lord John?

    R. ἐγὼ δ’ ἐκινδύνευσ’. P. ἐγὼ δ’ ὤπτησά γε.

with the pithy judgement of the Demos,

    ἄπιθ’· οὐ γὰρ ἀλλὰ τοῦ παραθέντος ἡ χάρις.[13]

Yes, when we read this it is impossible to hesitate; an Attic colony
must have settled in England, and the sausage-seller’s progeny must
still be thriving among us. The blood of the ἀλλαντοπώλης must
yet be circulating in the veins of the κοτωνοπώλης of the day.

Yet when we read of our sausage-seller’s subsequent career, we feel that
we have done him injustice; most widely different is his policy as
Agoracritus, from any thing in the career of Peel.

In fact, our κοτωνοπώλης is the ἀλλαντοπώλης inverted.
The Athenian starts as a demagogue, and ends as a patriot. Peel starts
in the character of a patriot, and ends in that of a demagogue. The
Athenian starts with the trick of the hare, and ends in an honest and
noble policy. Peel starts with the appearance of an honest policy, and
ends with the trick of the hare.

The Athenian directs his efforts to a high and noble aim, to purify and
regenerate the Δῆμος, to purge him from the love of gain, from
fickle caprice, and overweening vanity, and lead him to higher and
nobler influences; to attune his mind to old national feelings, and
revive in him a love of his country’s institutions, before fast falling
into contempt. Under the auspices of the bard of the shining brow, we
are conducted to a glorious vision, where amid the sound of the opening
Propylæa, the regenerate Δῆμος is sitting on his throne, clad
in his long-lost ornaments, τεττιγοφόρας ἀρχαίῳ σχήματι
λαμπρός. οἷός περ Ἀριστείδῃ πρότερον καὶ Μιλτιάδῃ ξυνεσίτει·

But what is the vision to which Peel’s principles have conducted us? How
will the Δῆμος that delights his economical mind bear
comparison with that of the Athenian? The Athenian’s is sitting upon a
throne, Peel’s is standing bowing behind a counter. The Athenian’s is
animated by the love of the beautiful, Peel’s by the love of the
gainful. The Athenian’s is alive to poetry and art, Peel’s is engrossed
by industry and commerce. The Athenian’s strives to give real value to
mind, Peel’s to give exchangeable value to matter. The Athenian’s
delights in philosophical, Peel’s in commercial speculations. The
Athenian’s is a nation of heroes, Peel’s is a nation of shopkeepers.
There is the workman toiling twelve hours a-day, while Parliament
discusses the probability of a discussion on his condition. There is the
pauper, revelling in the workhouse on his diet of “abundant and untaxed
food.” There, too, is the liberal cotton lord, proud of his
intelligence, his piety, and his purse. “I thank my stars that I am not
as other men are, monopolists, aristocrats, or even as this
Protectionist. I eat slave-grown sugar. I pay half per cent income-tax
on all that I possess. I work my men twelve hours a-day, and leave them
no time for vice and idleness. I buy in the cheapest, and I sell in the
dearest market.”

There is the liberality that prefers free trade to free man, and the
principles of economy to those of humanity. There is the piety that
justifies its avarice by texts, and patronises slavery on the ground of
Christian duty. There is the philanthropy that loves itself and its tea
better than the happiness of its fellows; that dooms thousands of its
race to the lowest depths of wo, in order to save a penny on the pound
of sugar. Go, ye liberal and enlightened Christians, learn Christianity
from Voltaire. He did not bow before the idol of trade, at which you are
now prostrating yourselves; he raised his voice in the cause of humanity
against those vile principles of commercial cupidity which you have
chosen for your creed. He, pointing to the degraded negro, could
indignantly exclaim--

    “Voyez, à quel prix vous mangez du sucre en Europe!”

He did not think that market cheap, where such a price was paid for it.
Yes! while you are dealing out damnation in your bigoted sects, he was
more, far more a Christian than you are.[14]

We by no means wish to lay to Sir Robert’s charge all the evils of the
above picture; nevertheless, we think that the economical principles so
dear to his heart, have had no little share in contributing to them.
Certainly we look in vain for any efforts on his part to elevate the
national character. His last support of the sugar bill is admirably
characteristic; he is decidedly opposed to its principle, (he
sympathises indeed most warmly with the negroes,) but, nevertheless, he
is compelled as usual to support it--at a great sacrifice of course to
his feelings--owing to the peculiar position of political affairs.
Certainly, his career cuts a lamentable figure by the side of that of
Agoracritus.

Nevertheless, though we cannot think his career meritorious, it is
without doubt remarkable. This phenomenon of a man, who through life had
been regarded as a leader in the aristocratic or Tory school, casting
his skin nearly at the mature age of sixty, and soaring forth in the
sunshine of popular favour in the gaudy and pleasing colours of the
Radical, is certainly one of a curious and interesting kind. A variety
of questions are suggested by it to the inquiring spirit. For how long
has this suppression of his real opinions existed? For how long has he
been pleased, according to his phrase, to allow people to deceive
themselves? Is he still allowing them this amusing privilege? Do we even
now see him in his real colours, or is some further metamorphosis in
store? Have his changes been the sudden conversions of a facile and
unstable inconsistency, or are they the long prepared denouement of a
secret and mysterious plot? Has a tyro in politics been unlearning his
prejudices and mistakes at the expense of his country, or has a Radical
in disguise been prowling in the Tory fold, luring on the aristocracy to
their own discomfiture?

Between the two alternatives of inconsistency and insincerity, it might
be thought that his apologists would all take the first, and his
accusers the second; that while the latter attacked him for premeditate
treachery, the former might defend him on the ground of a natural
facility of disposition, which rendered him prone to sudden conversions
beneath the pressure of the times.

Such, however, by no means seems to be the case: on the contrary, the
darker and more mysterious view of his conduct is the one taken by his
most ardent admirers; (for, strange to say, such beings still exist.)
Happening to be in conversation with one of these, (a zealous Radical,)
I chanced to indulge in some animadversions on Sir Robert’s weakness, as
shown in his numerous and repeated conversions, expressing an opinion
that a statesman so exceedingly fallible must be totally unfitted to
guide the destinies of a great nation. But such, I found, was by no
means the view of my radical friend; who, somewhat to my surprise,
maintained that he was a most able and skilful man, by far the best
fitted of all our existing statesmen for the post of Prime Minister. Of
any thing like weakness he would not hear. Does Peel’s general
character, said he, savour of weakness? does he look like an innocent
child, who does not know what he is about? Depend upon it there is a
method in his inconsistency; depend upon it he has perfectly well known,
all along, the game he has been playing.

What! then, said I, do you mean to say, that all his former professions
were insincere? that when he opposed Canning on the Catholic question,
he all along looked forward to his carrying it? that when he opposed the
Whigs, he intended when in, power to adopt their principles? that when
he made such strenuous professions in favour of Protection, he all
along had an eye to the repeal of the Corn Laws?

Certainly, replied my friend, I may say not only that I think it, but
that I know it. Do you suppose that so skilful a man would make his
moves without having an eye to the game he was playing?

And is not such insincerity, said I, most detestable?

Insincerity! replied my Liberal, with a shrug of the shoulders,--it is a
fine word, a very pretty word for declamation; but, young man, when you
are as old as I am, you will know what it passes for in the political
world. Depend upon it, only those cry out about it who are hurt by it;
those who benefit by it give it quite a different name. The man who is
an apostate and a renegade to the party whom he betrays, is a virtuous
and patriotic convert to that which receives him.

Surely, cried I, if Peel has really been playing the game you attribute
to him, no one could hesitate to pronounce him insincere.

Not at all so, said his admirer, his sincerity can easily be defended. I
look upon him myself as a most sincere patriot, notwithstanding the view
that I take of his policy. His principle has been a most consistent and
patriotic one;--always to carry the popular measure, as soon as the
public mind was ripe for it.

But was not, then, his conduct to Canning most reprehensible, when he
professed such repugnance to the Catholic claims?

Not by any means; he really opposed them at the time, because the public
mind was not yet ripe for them; and he sincerely proposed them
afterwards, because it had ripened in the interim. The measure which
would have been hazardous in the former case, had become safe and
beneficial in the second. The same may be said of his apparent changes
with respect to the principles of the Whigs and the Free Traders. He
abstained from these doctrines as long as their popularity was doubtful,
and embraced them as soon as the maturity of public opinion had rendered
them wise and beneficial.

Why then, I inquired, did he profess to oppose them on principle?--why
did he not declare that he was only waiting for the public mind to
ripen? I cannot say that I got a very satisfactory answer on this head,
but it was something to the effect that the public good, statesman-like
discretion, peculiarities of political affairs, might justify some
suppression on this point.

In fact, continued my friend, his whole opposition to the Whigs and the
Reform Bill, was nothing but a piece of acting, into which he was led by
the force of circumstances. Nobody thought that the public mind was so
nearly ripe for it as it proved to be, and Peel therefore was not
prepared to take advantage of it. It was an unforeseen event which took
him by surprise, and he thus, against his will, was forced out of the
movement. But his opposition was entirely fictitious,--he was never a
Tory at heart: he might use their prejudices as tools to serve his
purposes, but he was always too wary to adopt them in reality. His heart
was always with the popular doctrines, more so than was the case with
the Whigs themselves, as his recent behaviour evinces. He is ready now
to take up and carry out their principles at a point where they
themselves hesitate to do so. This is what he has all along been aiming
at,--the post he aspires to is that of the man of the people, the leader
of the movement. He is far better fitted for this than the Whigs; he has
no sickly visions of finality. He will not scruple to carry out the
dominant wishes of the people, whithersoever they may lead. Then he has
this peculiar advantage, that while most other ministers are fettered by
their pledges and professions, these are no impediments to Peel. This is
why I look upon him as our fittest minister, because he will most fully
carry out the people’s will. As soon as that will is decidedly
expressed, his only care will be to execute it.

We ventured to raise some doubts as to the fitness of such a character
for the post of Minister. Surely, said we, _he_ can scarcely be fit for
a ruler, who is thus servile to the dominant opinion of the day. Surely
a Minister should be somewhat in advance of the mass, and rather capable
of directing their opinion than compelled to follow it.

If we look to mere outward brilliancy, replied he, that may be true, but
if we look to solid utility, the case is different. In a despotic
country, such a minister as you require might be needful; in Austria,
for instance, a Metternich may be of use to direct and anticipate public
opinion. But in a free country like ours, where public opinion is so
active, we shall never want demagogues to form it; of these there will
always be a plentiful stock; the difficulty is to find a minister who
will interpret and execute the popular will, after it has been fashioned
by these more original spirits. And this, if I mistake not, is eminently
found in Peel, as time, I suspect, will demonstrate. Think not that his
career is over; think not, as his short-sighted adversaries may imagine,
that he is extinguished as a public man. That darling wish of his heart,
to be borne triumphantly into power by the masses, as leader of the
popular movement, lies at length almost within his grasp. His recent
desertion of the aristocracy was admirably timed; though he may have
lost their support, he has gained in exchange the favour of the people.
He has craftily quitted the falling house, to take ampler lodgings in
the new and rising fabric. However powerless he may seem to the
ignorant, he has still admirable cards in his hand. His adversaries may
be formidable in number, but they are weak in intrinsic strength. No one
knows better than he how to play them off one against the other, and to
profit by their dissensions. Meanwhile he is patiently biding his time,
which, be assured, is not far distant. Politics have lately displayed
much greater wonders than the triumphant return to power of Sir Robert
Peel.

And if once he return, think not that he will easily be dispossessed of
it. He will well know how to play the part of the popular favourite.
There stands not in the House a more thorough Radical than the inner man
of Sir Robert Peel. It is from him that we shall obtain Extended
Suffrage, finally to become Universal. It is from him that we shall
obtain the diminution, and at last the abolition of Church
Establishments. It is from him, or from such as he, that we may hope
finally to obtain a Republic. You may smile, and think such a prospect
absurd. Would you have thought it more absurd, if I had told you three
years ago that from him we should have obtained Repeal of the Corn Laws?
Depend upon it, we shall yet see the day when Sir Robert shall be the
triumphant popular minister.

Heaven forbid! thought I; yet I was forced to confess that it did not
seem unlikely. I could, however, by no means join in the admiration
which my friend expressed for such a character. While granting that some
respect might be felt for the skilful δημαγωγός, who leads and
sways the popular mind, I could feel nothing but contempt for the
servile δημοπηδός, who merely watches and follows it. I rallied
him somewhat upon the magnanimous liberality, which could ally itself
with so poor and ungenerous a character, so debased, if his account were
true, by meanness, duplicity, and hypocrisy. My Radical waxed somewhat
warm, and at length he parted, in all the dignity of his liberality,
thinking me a young fool; while I returned, laughing at his generous
patriotism, and thinking him a servile-minded old humbug.[15]

The more, however, I pondered on the subject, the more did I see the
justice of his views on Peel’s character, and at length I almost
entirely coincided with him,--in every thing but his admiration.

What then shall we say of these principles, looking at them under their
moral aspect? Taking his admirer’s view, I know not how they could
escape the severest censure. But though these admirers of his make no
scruple in adopting this view, and even in warmly defending it, we
cannot but hesitate to follow their example. An insincerity so
deliberate, so calculated, is more than we can readily admit. No doubt,
his actual conduct has been such as my friend above described, as facts
sufficiently show. No doubt, he has professed one set of principles
when seeking power, and another when in possession of it. No doubt, he
has used the aristocratical element as his stepping-stone to greatness,
and has afterwards kicked it over for the popular one as its support.
But we think that these principles have acted in a great measure
spontaneously, without any very fixed and deliberate plan in his own
mind. We take his conduct to have been not so much the result of
calculation, as of the peculiar organisation of his nature. We believe
him to have been in a great measure unconscious of the inherent
servility and flexibility of his convictions. When he opposed a measure,
he probably imagined that he did so chiefly on its own merits, and was
not aware that his conversion would inevitably take place, as soon as
public opinion was ripe for that measure.

Let us, however, listen to himself, and see what light we can derive
from his own lips as to the nature of his principles. By his own
account, in the case of the Corn Laws, the suppression of his real
opinions lasted for somewhere about three years. “About three years
ago,” says he, “a great change took place in my opinions on the
subject;” but it seems that for the public good, he thought it best to
allow people to deceive themselves, and therefore carefully suppressed
all intimation of this change. So far, then, his own account tallies
with that of his admirer, and we have his own word that his insincerity,
for a considerable period of time, was deliberate and calculated. But
the actual duration of this hypocrisy it must evidently be impossible to
determine with accuracy; for if a person can, by his own avowal,
practise it knowingly and deliberately for three years, it is probable
that in a vague and unconscious way, not thoroughly known even to
himself, he has been indulging in it for a much longer period.

Again, with respect to his Whig principles, it is impossible to
determine accurately how long they have been suppressed, and he has not
favoured us on this point with much specific information; but it would
appear that they latently existed at the time that he so strenuously
opposed that government, and that the germ of Whiggery was developing
itself in his bosom, while outwardly he was shining as a high Tory.

With respect to the Catholic Question he is more communicative, and he
takes care to inform us, in a speech revised by his own hand, and
published for the benefit of posterity in Hansard, that here, too, his
duplicity had been of long standing, and very much of a deliberate and
premeditated nature. When proposing, as Minister, the measure of
Catholic Emancipation, which outwardly he had so long opposed, he
reports himself to have said, “So far as my own course in this question
is concerned, it is the same with that which suggested itself to my mind
in the year 1825, when I was his Majesty’s Principal Minister for the
Home Department, and found myself in a minority in this House on this
[the Catholic] Question.”[16] Now, the course which he was then pursuing
was that of openly advocating and supporting the Catholic claims. And
the same course, he tells us, (that, therefore, we must conclude, of his
advocating these claims,) suggested itself to his mind in 1825. His
duplicity then was of long standing; for he did not, as is well known,
suffer the public to be in the least aware of any such suggestion, from
the time when it presented itself to his mind in 1825, till 1829, when
he first avowed that favourable leaning to those claims, which had so
long lain dormant in the interior of his breast. His conduct certainly
was well calculated to prevent any suspicion of the existence of such a
tendency in his mind; for in 1827, two years after the suggestion had
offered itself, he declared himself compelled, by a painful but rigorous
sense of duty, to quit Canning’s ministry, and join the opposition
against that statesman, on account of his own deep repugnance to those
claims, and his conviction of their ruinous tendency. Nay, more, he
suffered himself to be borne into power for the ostensible purpose of
resisting those claims, and made the round of the country amid the
acclamations of his supporters, as Protestant champion, without giving
the slightest hint of the suggestion which the minority in 1825 had
awakened in his mind, and which was so shortly to develop itself in full
force, as soon as he was seated in power.

If, then, we are to believe his own account, his hypocrisy in this
matter must have been of considerable duration, of much skill, and
consummate perfidy. Though a feat of his earlier prime, it must have
been quite worthy to compare with the recent great exploit of his
maturity.

The speech from which we have extracted the above passage, is the same
which gave rise to the discussion in Parliament, in which Sir Robert’s
conduct in this business was attacked. He then endeavoured to rebut the
charges founded on it, by denying the authenticity of the expressions
attributed to him, some of which rested only on the isolated reports of
particular newspapers.[17] But the sentence above quoted stands at full
length in his own corrected report in Hansard, revised, as its title
tells us, by Mr. Secretary Peel, the authenticity of which has never
been questioned. And certainly its natural sense would lead us to
conclude, that he was ready, in the interior of his mind, in 1825, to
embrace the cause of Catholic Emancipation. If, as he would fain
demonstrate, it has a contrary meaning, it can be only, we presume, when
taken in some _non-natural sense_;--the fixing of which we leave to
those more conversant than ourselves with that very ingenious mode of
interpretation.

And if it be true that he did feel so disposed, that he was “almost
persuaded,” at that early period, of the wisdom of granting the Catholic
claims, then his subsequent behaviour in putting himself at the head of
the party who unflinchingly and undoubtingly opposed those claims, as
injurious to the country, his professing to coincide fully in their
views, and his obtaining power on the strength of those professions,
cannot but be looked on as a political manœuvre of the most disingenuous
and culpable kind.

What could have been the motive of his making so strange a confession,
is a somewhat curious subject of inquiry. We think we recognise in it an
attempt to establish a kind of vague compromise between insincerity and
inconsistency. If his conduct were attributed to mere inconsistency, he
must plead guilty to a long previous mistake, and must forfeit all
pretensions to political prudence and foresight. If, however, it were
thought that he had for a long time had a secret leaning in favour of
the Catholic claims, and had only been waiting for the ripeness of
public opinion to declare his real sentiments, then he would escape the
charge of weakness and imprudence, and would only incur the blame of a
beneficial insincerity. He would thus gain the good graces of all those
whose strong attachment to the measure would make them overlook, in
behalf of its importance, what they would consider a pardonable deceit.

This view, indeed, he could not explicitly state in so many words, as it
would have laid him too open to the accusations of his opponents; but it
can be hinted at, as in the above passage. For what intelligible meaning
can be attached to that sentence, if it do not convey the idea that his
inconsistency, after all, was not so flagrant as had been represented;
that his mind for some time previously had been leaning that way, and
that, to use his peculiar phrase, his course was “the same with that
which suggested itself to his mind in the year 1825.” We believe this
expression to be the most accurate that he could have used. The design
of supporting the Catholic claims had not then fully ripened in his
mind, he had not formed any accurate and deliberate plan of conduct; but
the possibility of doing so at some future day secretly “suggested
itself to his mind.” A scarcely audible voice whispered in his mind,
“Perhaps, Peel, some time or other, in certain contingencies, State
necessities, public duty, &c., may require that you should lend a
favourable ear to the Catholic claims.” What these peculiar
contingencies were would also be suggested by the same little voice, but
in so low a tone and in such vague terms that he himself would not be
able to render a definite account of them.

Whatever, however, be the real construction of the above passage, or of
any other similar ones that may be met with among his speeches, we
ourselves should not be disposed to attach too prominent an importance
to them. Such confessions might be admirably fitted as a taunt to him,
as an “argumentum ad hominem,” as a case of “habemus confitentem reum:”
but it is not on his own verbal expressions that the judgment on his
conduct is to be formed. Strange indeed would it be if a skilful orator
should so blunder in his speech as openly to avow an act of duplicity
and deceit; it is only matter of marvel how such expressions as that
above quoted could ever have been used. But, in a case like this, if he
wished fully to express all that he knew of his own intentions, if he
desired to unburden his mind by the fullest possible confession, he
would not be able accurately to do so, and his own estimate of his own
character would be little worth. It is an unfailing consequence with
those who practise hypocrisy in the view of deceiving others, that they
also at the same time deceive themselves. One deliberate and systematic
piece of deceit produces an incalculable amount of this subtler and
unconscious hypocrisy. It is a kind of general veil or mantle in which
the person walks, which conceals his soul even from his own view, and
deceives him as to the motives of his own actions. Under its soothing
influence no sense of insecurity is felt; and the man whose conduct is
all the time biassed by some egotistical motive, walks in the proud
conviction to himself that he is a model of patriotism and virtue. Such
an hypocrisy, to take a prominent instance, is well exemplified in the
case of Cromwell; but illustrations must be familiar to every one in the
humbler walks of life, and if he have a difficulty in discerning it in
others, he will have none if he knows how to examine himself. It is a
tendency which exists in all, and requires strong efforts for its
subjugation. All strong passions or desires carry it along with them,
unless their deceptive influence be firmly counteracted by the stronger
desire for truth and right.

In Sir Robert’s case we believe it to have arisen from the action of a
strong egotistical desire of power and fame, unchecked by any heartfelt
and earnest convictions with regard to the truth of his public
principles. His whole career is a continuous proof of this defect of all
genuine and lively seizure of the truth; for never does he advocate an
opinion while it is weak, and never does he oppose it when it is strong.
Owing to this, his principles, though he himself may have no distinct
consciousness of it, have insensibly bent themselves to the stronger
motives of ambition. He remains all the time in ignorance of the secret
bias, and is by no means aware of how far from true patriotism he is.

Accustomed to rely on the opinions of others, from the absence of all
earnest conviction in himself, he must be forced to trust to their voice
even in matters relating to his own conduct; and, when he hears the
cheers of the populace that salute him at the door of the House of
Commons, he lays the flattering unction to his soul that he is a martyr
and a patriot. How should it be otherwise? When he hears himself
applauded as an eminently virtuous and injured man, what means is there
of undeceiving him, if his own conscience be silent or confirm the
delusion? I find it well remarked to my purpose by Mencius, the Chinese
sage, speaking of some statesmen of his day, whom he declares to have
had only a false appearance of virtue,--“Having had for a long time this
false appearance, and not having made any return to sincerity and
integrity, how could they know,” he asks, “that they did not possess
it?”[18]

And when we speak of the weakness or servility of conviction, we would
by no means be understood to mean a mere liability to change. The man of
sincere and earnest mind frequently changes his opinions oftenest. The
difference lies in the motives of the change. In the case of the earnest
man these arise from his own mind, in the case of the servile-minded man
from external circumstances. Such, for instance, are political
advantages, or the number, or clamour, or strength of the advocates of
an opinion. Circumstances generally enable us to discriminate pretty
accurately. If a man always rejects an opinion when shared by few, and
always adopts it when popular and dominant; if he has nothing to say to
it when it is of no service to him, but embraces it when it is strong,
and can give him renown and popularity, we shall not probably err in
deeming that man to be of a servile mind, wanting in sincere and earnest
convictions. The truthful-minded man at once avows his change, the
servile-minded one cunningly conceals it till it suits his purpose. If,
besides this, a man be cold, pompous, and an egotist, if his character
be marked by duplicity, if his language be plausible, but unsatisfactory
if he be found to pay more deference to his foes through fear than to
his friends from affection, all these are corroborating tests of the
servile character in question. Though it may be difficult to assign its
precise tokens in words, there is less difficulty in discriminating it
in practice.

It is this total want of all earnest and heartfelt conviction of the
truth, which forms the key to the interpretation of the whole of Sir R.
Peel’s career. Deciphered by this, all the tortuous inconsistencies of
his course arrange themselves in systematic order, all the varied
hieroglyphics of his mysterious conduct yield a clear and intelligible
meaning. The man who is thoroughly convinced of the truth of his
principles, labours unceasingly to impart them to others, to urge upon
them the importance of his views, to point out the beneficial results
which must flow from his course of policy. Such an earnest conviction
animated Pitt in his resistance to the French Revolution, Canning in his
advocacy of the Catholic claims, Wilberforce in his endeavours for Negro
Emancipation; and lately, (if we may be pardoned somewhat of a bathos,)
Cobden in his war against the Corn Laws. Without meaning to assimilate
the merits, of these various efforts, they all serve as examples of the
way in which men act when animated by a genuine and sincere conviction.
But there is no principle, great or small, which has owed its advance in
public opinion to one sentence of Peel’s. Say rather, there is none
which while yet in its infancy, and in need of support, has not been
opposed by him to the best of his power. While it is weak, he raises his
tongue against it; while it is doubtful, he halts between two opinions,
and watches the struggle in cautious silence; as soon as it has become
dominant and can dispense with his support, he proffers his aid with
copious professions of zeal, and seeks to fix on his inglorious brow the
laurels that rightly belong to another.

Had he lived in the Roman world at an earlier age, when Christianity was
yet striving against the secular powers, while it was weak and
despised, who would have opposed it more loudly than the Robert Peel of
the day? who would have more warmly urged its impracticability, its
unfitness for the concerns of life? who would more eloquently have
exhorted the Roman world to hold to the wisdom of their forefathers? As,
however, the tide gradually and steadily rolled on, and day by day one
conversion followed another, these eloquent protestations would begin
somewhat to flag, and at length that plausible tongue would lie in
silence. But when at last it began to make its way among the higher
powers of the land, amid the eminent and wealthy; when finally it even
penetrated into the Court of the Emperor, and rumours began to be
whispered that he himself looked on it with no unfavourable eye, a few
days before Constantine’s conversion Pellius would announce his formal
adhesion to its principles, with an intimation that he had for some
years been leaning that way, and that “a similar course had suggested
itself to his mind,” even at the time when he took some part in the
Dioclesian persecution.[19] A skilful management of “government
influence,” pouring grace and unction on many benighted minds, would
secure him a good claim to merit, and he would doubtless be rewarded for
his seasonable change by a high post amid the officers of the regenerate
Emperor.

This time-serving conduct, skilfully managed, will frequently succeed
admirably with the world; for these children of this world are in their
generation wiser than the children of light. The sincere advocates of
principles through good and through bad report, are looked upon as
unpractical and fanciful theorists; while those who carefully watch
their opportunity, and conform themselves with good grace to the
dominant tide of opinion, are hailed as able and practical men, and even
obtain from the mass the praise of more than common honesty, inasmuch as
they are not ashamed to avow a change in their opinions. It is of such
as these that the wise Confucius pointedly says, “The most honest men of
their time are the pest of virtue.”

“What!” asks the surprised disciple Wen-tchang, “whom do you call the
most honest men of their time?”

“Those,” replies the Sage, “who direct their principal efforts to speak
and act like all the world, are the adulators of their age: these are
the most honest men of their generation.”

“And why,” says the disciple, “do you call them the pest of virtue?”

“If you wish to find a defect in them, you will not know where to lay
hold of them; if you wish to attack them in any place, you will not be
able to compass it. They participate in the poverty of the manners of
their age. That which dwells in their heart resembles integrity and
sincerity, and their actions resemble the practice of temperance and
virtue. As all the people of their country boast of them incessantly,
they believe themselves to be models of perfection. This is why I regard
them as the pest of virtue.”

“I detest,” continues Confucius, “that which has only the appearance of
reality: I detest the tares, in the fear that they will ruin the crop. I
DETEST THE SKILFUL STATESMAN, IN THE FEAR THAT HE WILL CONFOUND
EQUITY.”[20]

Might not the simple lessons of Confucius be read with advantage even in
our enlightened age, which certainly is not without its “adulators?”
Might not they do some good to Sir R. Peel, and awaken that “skilful
statesman” to a juster estimate of his real virtue?

The idea contained in the above passage is most accurately and
profoundly true, and shows, like most of his remarks, that Confucius had
a penetrating knowledge of human nature. There are, in fact, two great
classes into which mankind may be divided; those whose model of conduct
is the general conduct of the society in which they live, and those
whose model is an ideal in their own minds, unattainable indeed, and
never to be realised in practice, but the mere aiming at which elevates
their character. The first of these are the men described above by
Confucius, “whose principal effort is to think and to act just like all
the world,” whom he ironically terms “the most honest men of their
district.” And even in our day this class furnishes us with a vast
number of “most highly respectable men.” Destitute of all splendid
visions, they are never led astray into any extravagance that might
shock the decorous laws of society, and they are looked upon accordingly
as models of temperance and virtue. These are the “children of this
world” most wise in their generation: the “men of the world,” from whom
arise the sharp practical man, the skilful statesman, the time-serving
diplomatist,[21] and all the host of Vicars of Bray, whether in religion
or politics.

The others are those who derive their principles not from the
fashionable dicta of the world, nor the ruling doctrines of the age, but
from the idea of truth within their own minds; who, “though the sun were
on their right hand and the moon were on their left,” would not be
diverted from the genuine convictions of their conscience. They look not
to the flickering glare of public opinion, but to the immutable light of
truth; these are “the children of light,” the souls of pure and
high-minded virtue. From these have sprung all that humanity has of
great and noble, all those who have sacrificed on the altar of truth; in
religion the Martyrs, in philosophy the Sages, in politics the sincere
and devoted Patriots. They do not despise opinions because the world
despises them, nor do they honour them because the world does them
honour; they are “justi ac tenaces propositi viri,” who do not ebb and
flow with the tide of public opinion.

In which of these two classes Sir Robert Peel is to be placed, is what
his own conduct will decide, better than our judgment. Nevertheless, we
will hazard the opinion, that Sir Robert Peel is no child of light. We
suspect that there are _very_ few principles, for which he would suffer
himself to be burnt,--even in effigy. With no high ideal by which to
guide his conduct, with no generous or exalted views, he has ventured on
a career beyond his powers. Fitted by Nature to make an excellent
Chancellor of the Exchequer, he has not known how to content himself
with his proper post. A narrow egotist, he has attempted to guide the
destinies of a great nation. His career, as might have been expected,
has been a notable failure. If it be not exposed to very heavy blame, we
decidedly must withhold all praise from it; if it have little of the
execrable, it certainly has nothing of the admirable. Unstable as water,
how could he excel? and excellence has been wanting accordingly. His
career has been one continuous mistake; the greatest mistake of all
being that he ever began it. His only discoveries have been, that he had
previously been in error. His only victories have been over his friends,
whom thrice he has dragged through the mire of dishonour.[22] He has
portioned out triumph to his foes, defeat and bitterness to his
supporters. He quits power amid the disgust and indignation of his old
friends, and the contemptuous patronage of his new. Such has been the
career of the _safe_ man, the practical and able statesman! The generous
Canning, a man of real and noble ideas, was looked upon as dangerous,
and the wary and cautious Peel was raised to power in his stead. Could
they have foreseen--those who were toiling for their safe man, and so
alarmed at the dangerous ideas of Canning--that it was to the safe man
they were to be indebted for Catholic, Emancipation, and Repeal of the
Corn Laws? Reflect upon this, ye lovers of _safe_ men, and be wise:
choose those who are really safe, and see first that they are men at
all, and next only that they be safe ones; men--of high and bold ideas,
not crafty and narrow-minded egotists.

The above described modification of character is, no doubt, extensively
prevalent, and by its frequency in their ranks casts somewhat of a
shade over the whole body of politicians and statesmen; so much so, that
it was an axiom of one of the most distinguished of their number, that
they were all to be considered dishonest, till their conduct proved the
contrary. But, though far too many examples of it are afforded by
political history, we may safely say that seldom has a better
opportunity of studying such a character existed, than at the present
day, when it is exemplified in a far more open and unblushing way than
usual, by the two most noted actors on the political stage, the one of
England, the other of Ireland. It is impossible not to recognise the
intrinsic similarity in the characters of Peel and O’Connell, though
outwardly very differently modified by the circumstances and the tempers
of the nations with which they have had to deal. But in both, one great
characteristic is the same, that their professions have been at variance
with their convictions; that the ends to which they have secretly been
working, have been totally different from those which they put forward
to the public as their aim. Both have made use of principles and
feelings as tools to their ambition, in which they themselves did not in
the least degree sympathise; nay, which, in Peel’s case, were the secret
object of his hostility and aversion. Peel made use of the principles of
Toryism, the banner of Church and State; O’Connell of the principle of
Nationality, so dear to the Irish, the cry of Repeal, and the Parliament
in College Green. That O’Connell cares little enough about Repeal, is
now sufficiently evident; and that Peel cared absolutely nothing about
Toryism, is but a faint expression of the truth, inasmuch as his object
has evidently been to overthrow it, as soon as it had raised him to
power. O’Connell, while professedly upholding the cause of the National
and fiery Anti-Saxon party, has secretly made friends with the much less
romantic and more practical interests of the Catholic priesthood and the
Whigs; Peel, while professedly maintaining the declining cause of the
Church and State, the old institutions, the national feelings, &c., of
the country, has secretly made friends with the much less ideal and more
substantial interests of the commercial classes, and the Manchester
cotton lords. Both have ended in a complete rupture with the party of
which they were the former champion. Peel is at open war with the
Tories, O’Connell with the Nationals. The love of their former friends,
is in both cases turned into bitter disgust and contempt; and as we have
already heard violent denunciations of Peel from his old supporters, we
shall probably ere long hear equally violent against O’Connell. Both, in
fact, share the merited fate of long-continued falsity of principle;
they stand forth in their old age with their nakedness uncovered, the
contempt of all those who can penetrate the hollowness of their career.
For both the same excuse is set up, that they deceived for the good of
their country. For both the excuse is alike untenable, for nothing can
justify such deliberate tampering with the truth; and in both, their
final exposure may serve as a warning to show how delusive is such a
notion.

On the whole, however, we must greatly give the preference to the Irish
agitator; his services to his country have been much greater, his
exertions much more effective, and his career much more consistent; for,
however insincere he may be on certain points, he has never been guilty
of professing principles diametrically opposite to his convictions; he
cannot be accused of any such hypocrisy as that of professing Toryism
while in heart a Radical. He has consistently supported, and very mainly
procured, by his own exertions, many measures important to his country;
not to name others, that of Catholic Emancipation. But there is not a
single measure which owes its success to the exertions of Peel; though
he may have been the nominal instrument of carrying them, their triumph
has been in reality the work of others, and they would have been passed
with equal or greater readiness had he never existed. The Corn Bill, on
which he rests his principal claim, has doubtless lost much more by his
long-continued opposition, than it has gained by his tardy conversion.
He has done nothing but adopt those principles which had already become
dominant through the exertions of others, and has lived entirely on the
fruit of other people’s intellects. Every one must admit, that in all
this O’Connell is, beyond comparison, superior to Peel. In other
respects, too, the bold and open _bonhommie_ of the Irish agitator, is
far preferable to the cold and repulsive egotism of the English
statesman.

That the career of the man who, with weak principles, as above
described, attempts to play a conspicuous part in politics, will be
pregnant with humiliation, is what we might at once predict. In the
present instance of Peel this has been most strikingly exemplified.
Unable to nourish himself with the food of truth, he has scantily
sustained himself by eating his professions. Perpetually has he opposed,
to the best of his power, men whose principles he has afterwards been
compelled to adopt. After gaining power by such opposition, he has been
forced to confess that he gained it by injuring his country. Even should
we take the most favourable view of his conduct to Canning, that the
nature of the case will allow, how much has it still of a humiliating
character! He is reluctantly induced, at a great sacrifice to his
feelings, to join the unfortunate opposition against that statesman,
solely, as he _believes_, from a stern sense of public duty. Yet he is
obliged afterwards to confess that Canning was much wiser than himself
in the matter, and to carry the very measure on account of which his
friend had been so mercilessly assailed. He discovers that the violence
done to his feelings, not only was productive of no good to his country,
but actually of detriment. He discovers that his former objections were
not (as had been professed) to the principle of the measure, but only
because the public mind was not yet ripe for it, and that as soon as the
public mind ripened, his own would ripen too. What regret must thus be
excited in the mind awakened to the consciousness of its long mistake!

If he had been satisfied that his opposition to Canning had proceeded
from a firm and well-grounded conviction, from an unswerving sense of
public duty, his conduct, however repugnant to his feelings, would, on
the whole, be a just subject of pride, and the sacrifice of his
friendship to his duty would entitle him to gratitude and respect. But,
alas! it turns out that this firm conviction was wanting, that it was
based on a foundation of sand; that what principles he had were vague
and weak, and were liable to be biassed all the time, much more than he
knew, by extraneous and contingent circumstances. This is the reason why
they afterwards gave way, when their yielding was demanded by his
political position. The law of duty that was deemed so stern and
inflexible, proved, when the test was applied, to be pliant and elastic;
the convictions which were believed to be based on the firmest
Protestant principle, turned out to be chiefly dependent on public
ripeness. And when he reflected that he had gained his power by so
mistaken a course, by so unfounded an opposition to Canning, surely this
would call for feelings of repentance on account of his previous errors,
this would at least demand some expression of that contrition and
humiliation, which seem so distasteful to his nature. But this is what
he seems peculiarly disinclined to do, and till some such avowal of
repentance has been made, we cannot think that he will have expiated his
error.

His position with respect to the Whigs is of a similarly humiliating
kind. What must he now think of that bitter opposition which he formerly
promoted and encouraged against them, now that he discover that he is
fully prepared to carry out their extremest principles? Must it not be a
subject of penitence to him to discover, that here again his policy was,
under his present views, injurious to his country; that his power has
been based on an opposition to people wiser, as he now confesses, than
himself? Yet here, too, he most strangely resists any avowal of
contrition or humiliation.

This phenomenon is not of an amiable nature, nor one which would dispose
us to a favourable view of his career. We can scarcely, I think, wonder,
all things considered, that his previous conduct, and more especially
that towards Canning, should have been brought under discussion in
Parliament, as liable to the suspicion of premeditate duplicity and
insincerity--of having, in fact, been similar to that of his three last
years with respect to the Corn Laws. Ill, indeed, would it have spoken
for the political morality of that Honourable House, if his conduct had
been passed over without notice, as the usual and proper course which
might be looked for from a British Statesman. Upon this question we will
leave others to decide, for this is a point on which every one must
entertain his own opinion. Since such has avowedly been his conduct for
the three last years, there is nothing to prevent us from extending it
over the whole of his public life. We do not, however, purpose to enter
minutely into any such researches. We can only wonder at the very
needless amount of agitation into which his supporters were thrown, when
the subject, not long since, was broached in Parliament. A belief was
there expressed, that his conduct on the Catholic Question had been
equally insincere with his recent behaviour on the Corn Laws; that he
had then, as now, suffered his colleagues and the public to deceive
themselves, and had not openly avowed his real opinions. Sir R. Peel is
roused to the greatest indignation at such an assertion. Yet surely this
anger in him is somewhat out of place. His present insincerity, or
deceit by sufferance, he does not attempt to deny;--it would, indeed, be
useless for him to do so. Why, then, is he so indignant at the idea that
his former conduct should have been similar to his present? Was
insincerity a greater crime twenty years ago than it is now? Is deceit
in the green tree worse than it is in the dry? If his public duty in
1845 authorised him to allow Lord Stanley, Lord Ashburton, and his party
generally, “to deceive themselves,” why might it not have authorised him
in 1825 to allow Mr. Canning and Lord Liverpool to deceive themselves
also? If it be lawful for him now to mask and suppress his real
opinions, why should it not have been so then? Yet by his energetic
protestations he would seem to think that it must have been highly
censurable. Such charges could only proceed, if we believe him, from the
base and vindictive malice of political opponents. Yet what are these
charges? The charges of having done then precisely what he has avowedly
been doing now, and what it can scarcely be questioned he has done in
the case of the Whigs also; the charge of having suppressed his real
opinions, and led his colleagues and the public astray; of having
opposed a measure professedly on principle, when in reality he was only
waiting for sufficient symptoms of “public ripeness,” or for some other
favourable conjuncture, as might best suit his views.

His indignation, then, seems to me to be the severest censure that could
be passed on his conduct; and since he takes such pains to condemn
himself, we will not trouble ourselves to defend him. We will leave him
to his own tender mercies; from no quarter can his castigation proceed
better than from his own hand.

We will merely hint a few remarks on the line of defence he has adopted.
He seems to think that it all turns on some verbal expressions of his
own, and that if he establish his position on these, no possible ground
is left for suspecting him of insincerity. He insists several times, “I
repeat that the whole of this question turns on the point, Did I, or did
I not (at a certain time) use such and such expressions to Lord
Liverpool?” We cannot agree with him in thinking that the question turns
mainly upon this, or even that it is much affected by it. The question,
in our apprehension, turns upon this:--Seeing that you have been,
through an unknown portion of your career, accustomed to suppress and
mask your opinions, and allow people, as you phrase it, to deceive
themselves, have we any reason to think that your conduct was more
ingenuous in your youth than it was in your mature prime, and is in your
declining age? Seeing what your practice has recently been, we think
that people must be allowed on these matters to judge for themselves,
and to form their own opinion on your insincerity, as to its nature, its
duration, and its amount. Indeed, if the question were to be decided by
his own words, it would fare ill with his case; for, as we saw above, in
a passage of his revised and corrected speech, his own expressions on
this matter make against him more than those of his bitterest opponent
could do. Were we to believe his own assertion, that the same course
which he pursued in 1829, with respect to the Catholic Question, had
suggested itself to his mind so early as in 1825, we should be forced to
regard his conduct to Canning as disgraced by most culpable hypocrisy.
He must have opposed that statesman upon hollow and deceitful grounds,
and must have obtained power upon false pretences. We do not assert that
such was actually the case, but if we are to believe his statements it
must have been so. We can only hope that his account of the business was
incorrect, and that the foresight he would seek to attribute to himself
had no real existence. If, then, any body is maligning him, it would
seem to be himself; and when he is thus merciless to his own character,
he can scarcely wonder at some severity from the hands of his foes. We
have no wish for our part to say any thing of him so injurious, as that
which he has left on record against himself; and we will leave him
therefore, as before, to smart beneath the lash of his own
self-inflicted chastisement.

There is another charge, quite distinct from the preceding, brought
against him with respect to his conduct towards Canning; viz., that he
sanctioned the violent attacks made against that statesman by some of
his supporters.[23]

His own language, indeed, is free from this violence, but we can
scarcely avoid thinking that blame attaches to him for indifference in
the matter, for suffering his followers to employ an ungenerous mode of
warfare against his rival, when it may reasonably be supposed that a
decided expression of disapproval on his part would have gone far to put
a stop to this. His conduct in the case of the Whigs was very similar,
and their very generous behaviour at the present time to him, affords a
most striking contrast to his previous treatment of them. As to the
actual guilt to be imputed to these direct assailants of Canning, we
hear very different estimates. That their attacks had a very powerful
effect upon him personally, and were bitterly felt by him, there can be
no doubt; and there seems no good ground for questioning the opinion of
his relatives, that they had a share in hastening his death. It is
urged, however, in their behalf, that they were doing no more than what
is frequently done in politics; that they were young men, accustomed to
see violent personal attacks considered an ordinary weapon of political
warfare, and they would probably therefore think that theirs were
perfectly _en régle_; that their assaults were not more bitter than what
have often been made on other statesmen; that public men must expect
this kind of annoyance, and that it was impossible to anticipate that
they would produce so unwonted an effect in this instance. Granting them
the full benefit of these apologies, there will still remain a
considerable share of blame. If a practice is culpable, however general,
those who adopt it must bear in some measure the guilt of any evil
consequences that ensue. School-boys are in the habit of flinging stones
without any very great regard to the damage they may occasion, and the
practice among them not being looked on as blamable, we cannot, from
proofs that a boy has flung these stones, argue in him any very
peculiarly evil nature. Nevertheless, nobody can deny, that if one of
these boys, though not much more careless or vicious than his fellows,
should chance to aim so full at a more than usually delicate head, that
his stone should be the cause of death, this should be a subject of
repentance to him, a lesson that he should remember with humiliation for
the rest of his life, and one which should be frequently quoted as a
useful example of the culpability of the practice. A guilt of a nature
analogous to this is what we should attribute to these assailants; the
guilt of great wantonness and meanness, though not of _malice
prepense_.

And if a person whose years, or whose position, such as a tutor to these
boys, ought to have rendered him wiser, should have been standing by at
the time, while these stones were raining against a friend or rival of
his, with the view of diverting and pleasing him, and should have
regarded the matter with indifference, thinking to himself it is no more
than what all boys do, it is not likely that any harm will come from it
this time more than any other;--he also should look on his connivance,
under the circumstances, as matter of humiliation and repentance. A
culpability similar to this very possibly attaches to Sir R. Peel, and
if so, it should not be looked upon as in any way light and trivial,
however much it may be sought to be sheltered by custom or example.

His blame indeed in this matter would be rather negative than positive,
rather of omission than of commission, and would not therefore afford
ground for any positive charge. Very probably, by the ordinary rules of
political warfare, his conduct in this affair would be justifiable. It
would be deemed sufficient by them that he should be clear from all such
violence himself; it would not be thought incumbent on him to take any
especial pains to stop it in others. Had he, however, been of a generous
nature, we should have expected more than this; and we think in that
case he would have taken more energetic measures to repress this wanton
and culpable practice, especially against one who had been his friend.
There is certainly nothing in his conduct on this occasion to applaud;
no generous traits, as there might have been, to raise him in our
estimation. But this is more, perhaps, than we could reasonably expect;
men do not look for grapes from thistles, nor for generosity from Peels.
We cannot well make it an actual charge against a man, that he was not
generous; absence of generosity is not guilt, but poverty of character.
That Sir R. Peel’s conduct on this occasion may have evinced poverty of
character, is no more than what his general career would dispose us to
believe. A higher mind would not have been contented with doing no more
than what was ordinarily done; he would have seen more clearly the
culpability of the practice, though established by usage, and would have
blamed it in stronger language than many of his party would think it
merited. We think, therefore, that it is a passage in his career which
he should look on with deep humiliation, although we should not be
disposed to consider it the ground of any very serious charge.

It is not, however, in any way a matter of wonder that some should
entertain a severer judgment; for Sir R. Peel’s subsequent conduct has
been such, that it justifies much liberty of opinion on these matters.
It is in these cases that a perfect sincerity and ingenuousness of
conduct is of the greatest use in purging a character which may
undeservedly have been placed in untoward and suspicious circumstances.
If his own wily and deceitful behaviour has very much weakened the
defence which such a character would have afforded him, he has none but
himself to blame. We can feel no pity for him under such imputations,
for these suspicions are no more than the natural and proper punishment
which general insincerity calls down upon itself. As one of the rewards
of truthful and ingenuous conduct is that it fortifies the whole
character, and repels unmerited suspicion, so the fitting and
appropriate punishment of hypocrisy is that it throws a tarnish over the
whole career, and prevents the assumption of the high tone of blameless
and unassailable purity.

Nor can we leave unnoticed the weakness of his retort on his assailants,
when he complains so loudly of these old accusations being disturbed
after so long a slumber. He would argue from this that they arise
entirely from party malice. “I ask,” says he, “whether, if I had not
brought forward the present measure, I should have heard a word of all
these accusations?” Very likely not; we quite agree with him that in
that case they would probably have lain dormant without much revival of
notice. But so acute a mind must, one would think, perceive that their
re-appearance at the present moment might reasonably be expected,
independent of all party or unworthy motives. His whole recent conduct
has been extraordinary and unprecedented, and people are naturally
anxious to trace up the hidden springs in which so remarkable a policy
takes its rise. But more than that--it is his recent conduct which more
especially establishes his insincerity; and does he forget that it is on
the suspicion of insincerity, that the culpability of much of his
previous course depends? His career cannot well be judged _a priori_,
but it can be so much better, _a posteriori_. When he refers to the
character given him by Canning, as a testimony of his integrity, does he
think that Canning would have so expressed himself, if he had known at
that time what was to be his future conduct on the Catholic question?
Does he not see that it is his subsequent behaviour which entirely
nullifies all the praises that Canning may have bestowed upon him, even
if it were not futile in every way to refer to such compliments? And
does he not see that his recent conduct in the case of the Corn Laws
aggravates the suspicion of insincerity? It is this which has reasonably
awakened a scrutiny into the previous events of his career; it is this
which has excited that discussion which has fixed for ever an unmusical
dissonance between the names of Canning and of Peel.

For out own part, putting aside his culpability in the matter, we would
look upon his relation with these maligners of Canning, to be not so
much blamable as ominous. However much we may be disposed to acquit him
of any connivance in the matter, yet the mere fact that his power owed
obligation at its outset to so violent an opposition against a man like
Canning--an opposition which so deeply imbittered the career of that
generous and high-minded statesman, this mere fact, I say, is an
unfortunate and untoward fact, one which would stand as no happy augury
at the commencement of the brightest course of pure and irreproachable
patriotism. But when it stands at the commencement of a career like his,
of that long tissue of inconsistent profession, of masked and
disingenuous policy, it is a gloomy and an inauspicious fact, one which
fully justifies the expression of his antagonist, in calling his an
ill-omened and a sinister career.

Whatever view be taken, there is no ground for complaint, if his conduct
be strictly and rigidly scrutinised; for really, all things considered,
he is not a subject who can lay claim to any excessive and scrupulous
delicacy. For our part, when we hear his conduct to Canning censured,
though it may be too severely, we are rather disposed to reserve our
pity for Canning, than to give any portion of our tenderness to the
fragile and sensitive Peel. For is it not precisely one of the
complaints to which he is justly liable, that he was not duly alive to
the evil of such attacks when made against the character of another, and
that he profited by the support of those who made them, without any very
energetic remonstrance? Did he not stand by while the iron was eating
into the soul of his former friend, without any very great and poignant
grief, without any severe disturbance of his equanimity? He appears to
have maintained a magnanimous composure, and philosophically to have
reaped the advantages, unmindful, in his short-sighted views, of what
might happen to himself. “_Eheu! quam temere in nosmet legem sancimus
iniquam!_” Now, when his own conduct is assailed, though on just and
reasonable grounds, while that of Canning was attacked on the most
frivolous and unreasonable, whither has suddenly vanished that stoical
fortitude with which he so firmly bore up against the attacks on his
friend? Now it is his turn to wince and to complain, to protest against
all rancour in politics, to deprecate all asperity of tone, to claim a
mild and courteous mode of discussion. Maxims most good and true in
themselves, but why were they not remembered earlier? Where were they
among his former party? where were they when those unjust attacks were
made, which now form a just subject of attack in their turn? It was not
from him nor his partisans that the voice was raised which stigmatised
those proceedings. No: his present complaints are idle: to be of avail
we ought to have heard of them earlier. His position at present is no
more than the result of that natural and equitable action, by which
injustice, though late, punishes itself. It is a law of nature from
which no man may escape; neither a beggar nor a Premier. One wrong
begets another, of like brood and kind with itself. Τὸ γὰρ
δυσσεβὲς ἔργον μετὰ μὲν πλείονα τίκτει, σφετέρᾳ δ’ εἰκότα γέννᾳ.[24]
The cup which in his youth he tranquilly suffered a nobler soul to drain
to the dregs, how should he refuse in his declining years to put his
lips to the margin? Let him try its taste with the best face he can,
without superfluous whinings or complainings. He need not be
unnecessarily apprehensive of its effect; it will not act on him as it
did on a nobler nature. The chill and callous organisation of the
egotist will receive no more than a beneficial stimulus from the potion
which is death to the generous soul. The darts which would find their
way direct to the frank and open heart, will fall blunt and powerless
long before they reach those hidden and inaccessible recesses of his
own, cased as it is in a triple mail of coldness, secrecy, and
self-delusion. Should a stray one, piercing that elephantine hide,
awaken an unwonted smart, our pity would be steeled by the
reflection,--“_Pallas te hoc vulnere, Pallas immolat_,” and we should
watch the flow of blood, with no apprehension of a serious effect, but
with feelings of pleasure, arising from the sense of a somewhat
satisfied justice.

What, then, is the moral of the whole matter? A short and simple one.

LET NO ONE ASPIRE TO A LEADING PART IN POLITICS, UNLESS HE POSSESS
GENUINE AND EARNEST CONVICTIONS: LET NO ONE WHO HAS NOT SUCH FIRM
PRINCIPLES IN HIS HEART, GIVE UTTERANCE TO ENERGETIC PROFESSIONS WITH
HIS LIPS: LET NO ONE WHO HAS NOT A GREAT SOUL SET UP FOR BEING A GREAT
MAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

If Sir R. Peel’s career as a public man were over, the reflections
suggested by it, however interesting in a speculative point of view,
would not be of much immediate practical importance. But such is by no
means the case: this mysterious character is still among us, playing his
part upon the stage, and possessed of very extensive influence and
popularity. It is this, indeed, which renders his example more
peculiarly baneful and demoralising, for, owing to the favour he has
gained by his recent measures, the hollowness and insincerity of his
previous career are by many wholly overlooked. The admiration lavished
on such a policy as this, must exercise a most pernicious influence,
injurious to the character of public men, and of the nation at large.
Every thing that can counteract this mistaken tendency, would be a real
benefit; and it is chiefly with this view that we have been induced to
contribute our mite in an otherwise ungenial task. But when we find
skilful insincerity receiving the praises due only to disinterested
virtue, we feel called upon to lift our feeble voice against so fatal a
delusion. The prospect, by no means improbable, of his return to power,
renders such efforts still more important. For such an event is far more
likely than many would be inclined to deem. However deserted he may be
by his old friends, a new and rising party is gathering around him, and
the old champion of the High Tories is become the flower of the Ultra
Radicals. The strongest hopes are entertained by these of his speedy
return to the post of Minister. We are told, as quoted above, that he is
to be triumphantly borne into power on the shoulders of the people, and
in that enviable position to remain as long as he pleases; a sort of
perpetual Grand Vizier. He has made friends, it would appear, with the
Mammon of the Cotton Lords, that when the Landlords failed they might
receive him into everlasting habitations. That he has sufficient
popularity and influence for this purpose is not to be questioned, and
the jealousies of the two great rival parties are likely to be
favourable to his views. If it be true that he has all along been
working to this consummation, that his secret and steady aim has been to
come out as the Popular Minister of the movement, however severely his
previous conduct must be censured, we cannot deny it a certain amount of
skill. We hope, however, that it will meet with the ill success that it
deserves. It is impossible to think that a character like this, however
able, is fitted to govern the nation. That the popular will, whatever it
may be, will be readily executed by him, is perfectly clear; but
something more than this is necessary to constitute a good Minister.
They must indeed be a peculiar kind of Liberals who would gladly ally
themselves with such a leader as this.

    “License they mean, when they cry liberty,
    For who loves that must first be wise and good.”

Now their chosen master, Sir Robert, has unfortunately placed himself in
such a position, that he cannot be both wise and good. His course must
either have been very much mistaken, or very insincere, so that if he be
wise he cannot be good, and if he be good he cannot be wise. It is
impossible, therefore, that he can be both, though perfectly possible
that he may be neither. We cannot, then, congratulate the Ultra party
upon the acquisition that they have made; and if as friends they find
reason to be satisfied with their new champion, they will be the first
of his friends who have done so.

Surely, however, we are not yet so badly off, but that we may find men
both wiser and better for our Ministers. Let us hope that the new
government, in spite of its very inauspicious commencement, may at
least, by its honesty and sincerity, form a brilliant contrast to its
predecessor. They have a great task before them, one which will test
their worth and their abilities to the utmost, and afford the amplest
scope to their energies; viz. the improvement of the social condition of
the labouring classes. Let them know at once, and let them openly
proclaim it, that this will require far higher and more extensive
principles than those of political economy; that it will not be
accomplished by the “competition” or by the “state of nature” proposed
by an Episcopal economist, nor by the mere process of buying in the
cheapest and selling in the dearest market. Nay, let them be well
assured that it will require an infringement of this sacred principle,
however blasphemous it may sound in the ears of our Liberal
cottonocracy. It will require an interference with the market of labour,
and with the lordly privileges of capital. They must be prepared to
encounter the censure of many a dogmatic economist, the odium of many a
wealthy capitalist, and even the ingratitude of many of the people upon
whom their benefits shall be conferred. The problem is one for which
their predecessor, Sir Robert, was evidently totally unfitted, for it
will require minds above the spirit of the time, Statesmen who must
anticipate, not follow, the reigning popular doctrines. Their present
conduct will show whether they are really Liberals, or merely false and
empty assumers of the name; whether they are in possession of the high
and true principles which conduce to the virtue and happiness of States,
or whether, like the mass, they are principally engrossed in commercial
and industrial doctrines. It cannot be disguised that they have made a
very poor beginning, disgraceful to their name and to their former
achievements; let us hope that shame may serve to stimulate them for the
future to something more glorious and honourable.

Sir Robert Peel’s conduct will serve them in many matters as a useful
example, as a solemn warning, as a practical illustration of the homely
adage, that “honesty is the best policy.” We have seen enough of the
evils entailed by a masked and disingenuous policy, which delights in
allowing people to deceive themselves. Let us now contrast with it the
advantages of a sincere, open, and consistent course. Let us profit by
the late Premier’s career as an example, in which case it will not have
been without its use; and let us, by so doing, avoid the disgrace of
falling again under his power.

  _Printed by William Blackwood & Sons, Edinburgh._


FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Dix Ans à la Cour du Roi Louis Philippe, et Souvenirs du Temps de
l’Empire et de la Restauration._ Par B. APPERT, de la Société Royale des
Prisons de France. Berlin and Paris, 1846.

[2] According to old usage, each defunct King of France awaited, at the
entrance of the vault at St. Denis, the body of his successor, and was
not consigned to his final resting-place till its arrival.

[3] Biog. Univ. xiii. 482-491, (Eugene.)

[4] Histoire de mon Tempe par Frederick IV., p. 174.

[5] Viz. Vimiera, the Douro, Talavera, Busaco, Fuentes d’Onoro,
Salamanca, Vittoria, the Pyrenees, the Bidassoa, the Nive, the Nivelle,
Orthes, Toulouse, Quatre Bras, and Waterloo.

[6] _Wanderungen eines alten Soldaten._ Von Wilhelm, Baron von Rahden.
Berlin, 1846.

[7] Even in the House there are some free-traders by no means
irreproachable on this head, gentlemen whose speeches are profuse in
invectives against the whole body of the landlords, and who, when freed
from Parliamentary restraint, denounce them as robbers, and openly
express “their desire of levelling the aristocracy to the dust.” However
sincere these patriots may be, this ungenerous tone does not betoken
that large and comprehensive mind which we look for in a Member of
Parliament; and it is the fortunate possessors of minds like these, who,
in our days, pleasantly style themselves Liberals! _Lucus a non
lucendo._ Where will this abuse of language stop? An American
slave-breeder will be the next claimant of the name, when these
Parliamentary Thersitæ set themselves up as Liberals!

[8] And this for a considerable period of time. In the last case of the
Corn Laws, by his own account, it would seem to have been about _three
years_.

[9] See this point well put in Whewell’s Treatise on Morals--a book
which we strongly recommend to Sir Robert’s perusal, as containing many
interesting views on these topics, and likely to be of peculiar service
to _him_.

[10] _Vide_ again Whewell’s Treatise.

[11] In the matter of the Factory Bill.

[12] Simply in its peculiar naïveté. We do not mean to assimilate the
Irish character with that of Peel.

[13]

    “_Cleon._--There, I’m the first, you see, to bring ye a chair.
     _Sausage-seller._--But a table--here I’ve brought it, first and
        foremost.
     _Cleon._--See here this little half meal-cake from Pylos,
    Made from the flour of victory and success.
     _Sausage-seller._--But here’s a cake! See here! which the heavenly
        goddess
    Patted and flatted herself, with her ivory hand,
    For your own eating.
           *       *       *       *       *
     _Cleon._--This slice of rich sweet-cake, take it from me.
     _Sausage-seller._--This whole great rich sweet-cake, take it from me.
     _Cleon_ [_to the S. S._]--Ah, but hare-pie--where will you get hare-pie?
     _Sausage-seller_ [_aside._]--Hare-pie! What shall I do? Come, now’s
        the time,
    O mind, invent me now some sneaking trick.
     _Cleon._ [_to the S. S. showing the dish which he is going to
                  present._]--Look there, you poor rapscallion!
                         _Sausage-seller._ Pshaw, no matter.
    I’ve people of my own there in attendance.
    They’re coming here.--I see them.
     _Cleon._--Who? What are they?
     _Sausage-seller._--Envoys with bags of money.
     _Cleon._--Where? Where are they?
    Where? Where?
     _Sausage-seller._--What’s that to you? Can’t ye be civil?
    Why don’t you let the foreigners alone?--
          [_While Cleon’s attention is absorbed in looking for the
              supposed envoys, the Sausage-seller dexterously snatches
              the hare-pie out of his hands, and presents it to the
              Demus._]
    There’s a hare-pie, my dear own little Demus,
    A nice hare-pie, I’ve brought ye!--See, look there!
     _Cleon_ [_returning._]--By Jove, he’s stolen it, and served it up!
     _Sausage-seller._--Just as you did the prisoners at Pylos.
     _Demus._--Where did ye get it? How did ye steal it? Tell me.
     _Sausage-seller._--The scheme and the suggestion were Divine;
    The theft and the execution simply mine.
     _Cleon._--I took the trouble.
                _Sausage-seller._ But I served it up.
     _Demus._--Well, he that brings the thing must get the thanks.
     _Cleon_ [_aside._]--Alas, I’m circumvented and undone,
    Out-faced and over-impudentified.”

    _The Knights_ of Aristophanes, translated by Frere, l. 1164-9,
    and 1189-1206.

[14] We would not apply this strong language to all the advocates of the
measure, but only to those who uphold it on principle as an enlightened
and liberal one. If it is honestly put forward on low commercial
grounds, not on high moral ones; if it is frankly confessed that it is
an ignoble and selfish measure, in which our love of sugar and of
revenue prevails over the love of our fellows; if we own that we have
not virtue enough to resist these palpable and material temptations for
the sake of the impalpable and invisible ones of right and
humanity;--let it pass, (sorry though it be;)--our pious and enlightened
nation is already disfigured with too many of these commercial blots, to
make this further additional one matter of much especial censure. We can
only lament that having made some beginning in the true and good line,
we are so easily induced to give it up; that whereas before we could
point to one brilliant exception as a source of light and hope, this is
now to be extinguished, and we are to relapse into total darkness. But
it is the advocacy of this measure on principle, as an eminently liberal
and Christian one, as a triumph of truth, liberty, and reason, which is
so peculiarly disgusting, and argues the corruption of the people. It is
the sneer at every thing like true generous principle, the laugh at the
high moral, the complacency in the low commercial, the assertion of the
paramount importance of mere considerations of lucre over all the laws
of humanity, that forms the bad feature in the case of these holy
Liberals. When we find people, in a tone of profound piety, putting
forth the purely commercial principle of buying in the cheapest and
selling in the dearest market, as an inviolable law of the Great Parent
of the Universe, the infringement of which, even to avert the deepest
suffering from our fellows, is an impious rebellion against His will;
when we are implored not to do evil, that good may come, (the evil being
a want of sweetness in our tea, and the good, the preserving from
slavery and degradation a large number of our race;) when we are
exhorted to deal freely in slave produce, for the sake of promoting
“peace and good-will among all mankind;” then, I say, that this servile
liberality, this Evangelical cupidity, this Christianity of the ’Change,
is beyond all expression detestable, and more worthy of the shafts of
Voltaire’s satire than the Christianity of the Inquisition. The present
measure will probably cause a greater amount of suffering in the course
of a few years, than the Inquisition did during the whole period of its
existence.

[15] The above conversation, though with no pretensions to exact
accuracy in the expressions, is strictly founded on fact.

[16] Hansard’s Debates, vol. xx. New Series, p. 731. The speech is said,
in a note on p. 727, to have been “inserted with the permission and
approbation of Mr. Secretary Peel.”

[17] The expression which was chiefly insisted on in that discussion,
and which he strenuously laboured to disprove, was that in which he was
reported to have said, that in 1825 he gave it as his opinion to Lord
Liverpool that “something ought to be done for the Catholics.” He
strongly denied having ever used those words, and as indeed they are not
found in many of the reports of his speech, there would not appear to be
sufficient evidence that he did so. But it was labour lost to disprove
the point, for this sentence after all was by no means so clear or
explicit as that which stands in his own revised report. He might have
stated that something ought to be done for the Catholics, without its
being thereby evident, that by that something he meant the measure of
Catholic Emancipation. Some other course might have “suggested itself to
his mind,” as a solution of the difficulty. But when he tells us in so
many words, that the course which then suggested itself to his mind was
the very same which he afterwards pursued in proposing the measure of
Catholic Emancipation, no room for question is left; this is a precise
and explicit statement to which we do not see how two meanings can well
be given. When such a statement stands in his own corrected report, it
was worse than idle so strenuously to disclaim the weaker one.

[18] Meng-tseu, Book II. chap. 6, Art. 30. Pauthier’s Translation.

[19] This chronology might seem difficult to conciliate with the life of
an individual, but it must be remembered that the Robert Peel never
dies. There are always in the world not only one, but many
representatives of the character.

[20] Meng-tseu, Book II. chap. 7, Art. 37. Pauthier’s Translation.

[21] Talleyrand is a good example.

[22] Catholic Bill, Factory Bill, Corn Bill.

[23] That this opposition to Canning was characterised by a peculiar
virulence on the part of some of its members, appears to be
indisputable, inasmuch as it seems to be the received opinion of those
best acquainted with Canning, that it had a considerable share in
causing his death. Thus, not to mention other testimonies, his widow,
when Huskisson subsequently joined some of these politicians in office,
writes to him to reproach him with having joined her husband’s
murderers. Peel himself at the time did not escape from severe blame on
account of it, and one of his relatives, Mr Dawson, is mentioned as one
of the most notable of the culprits.

[24] Translated by Shelley:

    “Revenge and wrong bring forth their kind:
    The foul cubs like the parents are.”


[Transcriber’s Note:

Obvious printer errors corrected silently.

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Volume
61, No. 375, January-June, 1847, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKWOOD'S EDINBURGH MAGAZINE, JAN-JUNE 1847 ***

***** This file should be named 58129-0.txt or 58129-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/1/2/58129/

Produced by Brendan OConnor, Jonathan Ingram, Wayne Hammond
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Miller Of Old Church, by Ellen Glasgow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Miller Of Old Church

Author: Ellen Glasgow

Release Date: April 30, 2006 [EBook #18286]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MILLER OF OLD CHURCH ***




Produced by Doug Levy






THE MILLER OF OLD CHURCH

by Ellen Glasgow

     To my sister Cary Glasgow McCormack
     In loving acknowledgment of help
     and sympathy through the years

CONTENTS

     BOOK FIRST

     JORDAN'S JOURNEY


     Chapter

     I.     At Bottom's Ordinary
     II.    In Which Destiny Wears the Comic Mask
     III.   In Which Mr. Gay Arrives at His Journey's End
     IV.    The Revercombs
     V.     The Mill
     VI.    Treats of the Ladies' Sphere
     VII.   Gay Rushes Into a Quarrel and Secures a Kiss
     VIII.  Shows Two Sides of a Quarrel
     IX.    In Which Molly Flirts
     X.     The Reverend Orlando Mullen Preaches a Sermon
     XI.    A Flight and an Encounter
     XII.   The Dream and the Real
     XIII.  By the Mill-race
     XIV.   Shows the Weakness in Strength
     XV.    Shows the Tyranny of Weakness
     XVI.   The Coming of Spring
     XVII.  The Shade of Mr. Jonathan
     XVIII. The Shade of Reuben
     XIX.   Treats of Contradictions
     XX.    Life's Ironies
     XXI.   In Which Pity Masquerades as Reason


     BOOK SECOND

     THE CROSS-ROADS


     Chapter

     I.    In which Youth Shows a Little Seasoned
     II.   The Desire of the Moth
     III   Abel Hears Gossip and Sees a Vision
     IV.   His Day of Freedom
     V.    The Shaping of Molly
     VI.   In Which Hearts Go Astray
     VII.  A New Beginning to an Old Tragedy
     VIII. A Great Passion in a Humble Place
     IX.   A Meeting in the Pasture
     X.    Tangled Threads
     XI.   The Ride to Piping Tree
     XII.  One of Love's Victims
     XIII. What Life Teaches
     XIV.  The Turn of the Wheel
     XV.   Gay Discovers Himself
     XVI.  The End

     Author's Note:  The scene of this story is not the
     place of the same name in Virginia.



BOOK FIRST

JORDAN'S JOURNEY

THE MILLER OF OLD CHURCH



CHAPTER I


AT BOTTOM'S ORDINARY


It was past four o'clock on a sunny October day, when a stranger, who
had ridden over the "corduroy" road between Applegate and Old Church,
dismounted near the cross-roads before the small public house known to
its frequenters as Bottom's Ordinary. Standing where the three roads
meet at the old turnpike-gate of the county, the square brick building,
which had declined through several generations from a chapel into a
tavern, had grown at last to resemble the smeared face of a clown under
a steeple hat which was worn slightly awry. Originally covered with
stucco, the walls had peeled year by year until the dull red of the
bricks showed like blotches of paint under a thick coating of powder.
Over the wide door two little oblong windows, holding four damaged
panes, blinked rakishly from a mat of ivy, which spread from the rotting
eaves to the shingled roof, where the slim wooden spire bent under the
weight of creeper and innumerable nesting sparrows in spring. After
pointing heavenward for half a century, the steeple appeared to have
swerved suddenly from its purpose, and to invite now the attention of
the wayfarer to the bar beneath. This cheerful room which sprouted, like
some grotesque wing, from the right side of the chapel, marked not only
a utilitarian triumph in architecture, but served, on market days to
attract a larger congregation of the righteous than had ever stood up
to sing the doxology in the adjoining place of worship. Good and bad
prospects were weighed here, weddings discussed, births and deaths
recorded in ever-green memories, and here, also, were reputations
demolished and the owners of them hustled with scant ceremony away to
perdition.

From the open door of the bar on this particular October day, there
streamed the ruddy blaze of a fire newly kindled from knots of resinous
pine. Against this pleasant background might be discerned now and then
the shapeless silhouette of Betsey Bottom, the innkeeper, a soft and
capable soul, who, in attaching William Ming some ten years before, had
successfully extinguished his identity without materially impairing her
own. Bottom's Ordinary had always been ruled by a woman, and it would
continue to be so, please God, however loudly a mere Ming might protest
to the contrary. In the eyes of her neighbours, a female, right or
wrong, was always a female, and this obvious fact, beyond and above any
natural two-sided jars of wedlock, sufficed in itself to establish Mrs.
Ming as a conjugal martyr. Being an amiable body--peaceably disposed to
every living creature, with the exception of William--she had hastened
to the door to reprimand him for some trivial neglect of the grey mule,
when her glance lighted upon the stranger, who had come a few minutes
earlier by the Applegate road. As he was a fine looking man of full
habit and some thirty years, her eyes lingered an instant on his face
before she turned with the news to her slatternly negro maid who was
sousing the floor with a bucket of soapsuds.

"Thar's nobody on earth out thar but young Mr. Jonathan Gay come back to
Jordan's Journey," she said. "I declar I'd know a Gay by his eyes if I
war to meet him in so unlikely a place as Kingdom Come. He's talkin'
to old Adam Doolittle now," she added, for the information of the maid,
who, being of a curious habit of mind, had raised herself on her knees
and was craning her neck toward the door, "I can see his lips movin',
but he speaks so low I can't make out what he says."

"Lemme git dar a minute, Miss Betsey, I'se got moughty sharp years, I
is."

"They're no sharper than mine, I reckon, and I couldn't hear if I stood
an' listened forever. It's about the road most likely, for I see old
Adam a-pintin'."

For a minute after dismounting the stranger looked dubiously at the
mottled face of the tavern. On his head the sunlight shone through
the boughs of a giant mulberry tree near the well, and beyond this the
Virginian forest, brilliant with its autumnal colours of red and copper,
stretched to the village of Applegate, some ten or twelve miles to the
north.

Starting southward from the cross-roads, the character of the country
underwent so sudden a transformation that it looked as if man, having
contended here unsuccessfully with nature, had signed an ignominious
truce beneath the crumbling gateposts of the turnpike. Passing beyond
them a few steps out of the forest, one found a low hill, on which
the reaped corn stood in stacks like weapons of a vanished army, while
across the sunken road, the abandoned fields, overgrown with broomsedge
and life-everlasting, spread for several miles between "worm fences"
which were half buried in brushwood. To the eyes of the stranger, fresh
from the trim landscapes of England, there was an aspect of desolation
in the neglected roads, in the deserted fields, and in the dim grey
marshes that showed beyond the low banks of the river.

In the effort to shake off the depression this loneliness had brought
on his spirits, he turned to an ancient countryman, wearing overalls
of blue jeans, who dozed comfortably on the circular bench beneath the
mulberry tree.

"Is there a nearer way to Jordan's Journey, or must I follow the
turnpike?" he asked.

"Hey? Young Adam, are you thar, suh?"

Young Adam, a dejected looking youth of fifty years, with a pair of
short-sighted eyes that glanced over his shoulder as if in fear of
pursuit, shuffled round the trough of the well, and sat down on the
bench at his parent's side.

"He wants to know, pa, if thar's a short cut from the ornary over to
Jordan's Journey," he repeated.

Old Adam, who had sucked patiently at the stem of his pipe during the
explanation, withdrew it at the end, and thrust out his lower lip as a
child does that has stopped crying before it intended to.

"You can take a turn to the right at the blazed pine a half a mile on,"
he replied, "but thar's the bars to be pulled down an' put up agin."

"I jest come along thar, an' the bars was down," said young Adam.

"Well, they hadn't ought to have been," retorted old Adam, indignantly.
"Bars is bars whether they be public or private, an' the man that pulls
'em down without puttin' 'em up agin, is a man that you'll find to be
loose moraled in other matters."

"It's the truth as sure as you speak it, Mr. Doolittle," said a wiry,
knocked-kneed farmer, with a hatchet-shaped face, who had sidled up to
the group. "It warn't no longer than yesterday that I was sayin' the
same words to the new minister, or rector as he tries to get us to call
him, about false doctrine an' evil practice. 'The difference between
sprinklin' and immersion ain't jest the difference between a few drips
on the head an' goin' all under, Mr. Mullen,' I said, 'but 'tis the
whole difference between the natur that's bent moral an' the natur that
ain't.' It follows as clear an' logical as night follows day--now, I ax
you, don't it, Mr. Doolittle--that a man that's gone wrong on immersion
can't be trusted to keep his hands off the women?"

"I ain't sayin' all that, Solomon Hatch," responded old Adam, in a
charitable tone, "seein' that I've never made up my own mind quite clear
on those two p'ints--but I do say, be he immersed or sprinkled, that
the man who took down them bars without puttin' 'em up ain't a man to be
trusted."

"'Twarn't a man, 'twas a gal," put in young Adam, "I seed Molly
Merryweather goin' toward the low grounds as I come up."

"Then it's most likely to have been she," commented Solomon, "for she is
a light-minded one, as is proper an' becomin' in a child of sin."

The stranger looked up with a laugh from the moss-grown cattle
trough beside which he was standing, and his eyes--of a peculiar dark
blue--glanced merrily into the bleared ones of old Adam.

"I ain't so blind yet as not to know a Gay when I see one," said the
labourer, with a sly chuckle. "If I hadn't closed the eyes of old Mr.
Jonathan when he was found dead over yonder by the Poplar Spring, I'd as
soon as not take my Bible oath that he'd come young agin an' was ridin'
along back to Jordan's Journey."

"Do you believe down here that my uncle killed himself?" asked the young
man, with a furtive displeasure in his voice, as if he alluded to a
disagreeable subject in response to some pressure of duty.

"'Tis as it may be, suh, I can't answer for that. To this day if you get
Solomon Hatch or Betsey Bottom, (axin' her pardon for puttin' her last),
started on the subject they'll contend till they're blue in the face
that 'twas naught done but pure murder. However, I'm too old at my time
of life to take up with any opinion that ain't pleasant to think
on, an', when all's said an' done, pure murder ain't a peaceable,
comfortable kind of thing to believe in when thar's only one Justice of
the Peace an' he bed-ridden since Christmas. When you ax me to pin my
faith on any p'int, be it for this world or the next, my first question
consarnin' it is whether that particular p'int happens to be pleasant.
'Tis that little small argyment of mine that has confounded Mr. Mullen
more than once, when he meets me on equal ground outside the pulpit.
'Mebbe 'tis an' mebbe 'tisn't,' as I remarked sociably to him about the
matter of eternal damnation, 'but you can't deny, can you, suh, bein'
outside the pulpit an' bound to speak the truth like the rest of us,
that you sleep a long sight easier in yo' bed when you say to yo'self
that mebbe 'tisn't?'"

"You see pa's old, an' he won't harbour any belief at his time of
life that don't let him rest comfortable," remarked young Adam, in an
apologetic aside. "It's that weakness of his that keeps him from bein' a
thorough goin' good Christian."

"That strange young clergyman has stirred us all up about the
doctrines," said Solomon Hatch. "He's opened Old Church agin, an' he
works terrible hard to make us feel that we'd rather be sprinkled on the
head than go under all over. A nice-mannered man he is, with a pretty
face, an' some folks hold it to be a pity that we can't change our ideas
about baptism and become Episcopals in our hearts, jest to oblige him.
The women have, mostly, bein' an accommodatin' sex in the main, with the
exception of Mrs. Mallory, the blacksmith's mother, who declars she'd
rather give up eternal damnation any day than immersion."

"I ain't goin' so fur as that," rejoined old Adam, "an' mo'over, when
it comes to the p'int, I've never found any uncommon comfort in either
conviction in time of trouble. I go to Mr. Mullen's church regular every
Sunday, seein' the Baptist one is ten miles off an' the road heavy, but
in my opinion he's a bit too zealous to turn over the notions of the
prophets an' set up his own. He's at the age when a man knows everything
on earth an' generally knows it wrong."

"You see pa had been settin' on the anxious bench for forty years,"
explained young Adam, "an' when Mr. Mullen came, he took it away from
under him, so to speak, while he was still settin' on it."

"'Twas my proper place," said old Adam resentfully, "when it comes to
crops or the weather I am firm fixed enough in my belief, but in matters
of religion I hold with the onsartain."

"Only his powerful belief in the Devil an' all his works keeps him from
bein' a heathen," observed young Adam in awe-stricken pride. "Even Mr.
Mullen can't move him, he's so terrible set."

"Well, he ain't my Redeemer, though doubtless he'd be cast down if he
was to hear as I'd said so," chuckled the elder. "The over earnest, like
the women folk, are better not handled at all or handled techily. I'm
near blind as it is, but ain't that the man yonder leadin' his horse out
of the Applegate road?"

"'Taint the rector, but the miller," responded his son. "He's bringin'
over Mrs. Bottom's sack of meal on the back of his grey mare."

"Ah, he's one of the folks that's gone over neck an' crop to the
Episcopals," said Solomon Hatch. "His folks have been Presbyterians over
at Piping Tree sence the time of Noah, but he recites the Creed now as
loud as he used to sing the doxology. I declar his voice boomed out so
in my ears last Sunday that I was obleeged to put up my hands to keep
'em from splittin'. Have you ever marked, Mr. Doolittle, havin' had the
experience of ninety years, that when a man once takes up with a heresy,
he shouts a heap louder than them that was born an' baptised in it? It
seems as if they can't desert the ancient ways without defying 'em as
well."

"'Tis so, 'tis so," admitted old Adam, wagging his head, "but Abel
Revercomb was al'ays the sort that could measure nothin' less than a
bushel. The pity with big-natured folk is that they plough up a mountain
and trip at last over a pea-vine!"

From the gloom and brightness of the Applegate road there emerged the
large figure of a young man, who led a handsome grey mare by the halter.
As he moved against the coloured screen of the leaves something of the
beauty of the desolate landscape showed in his face--the look of almost
autumnal sadness that one finds, occasionally, in the eyes of the
imaginative rustic. He wore a pair of sheepskin leggins into which the
ends of his corduroy trousers were stuffed slightly below the knees. His
head was bare, and from the open neck of his blue flannel shirt, faded
from many washings, the muscles in his throat stood out like cords in
the red-brown flesh. From his uncovered dark hair to his heavy boots, he
was powdered with the white dust of his mill, the smell of which floated
to the group under the mulberry tree as he passed up the walk to the
tavern.

"I lay he seed Molly Merryweather comin' up from the low grounds,"
remarked Solomon, when the young man had moved out of earshot.

"Thar's truth spoken for once, if only by accident," retorted old Adam.
"Yonder comes Reuben Merryweather's wagon now, laden with fodder. Is
thar anybody settin' on it, young Adam? My eyes is too po' to make out."

"Molly Merryweather, who else?" responded the younger.

The wagon approached slowly, piled high with fodder and drawn by a pair
of old oxen. In the centre of the load a girl was sitting, with a pink
sunbonnet on her shoulders, and the light wind, which drove in gusts
from the river, blowing the bunch of clustering brown curls on her neck.
She was a small vivid creature, with a sunburned colour and changeable
blue eyes that shone almost green in the sunlight.

"Terr'ble light minded as you can tell to look at her," said Solomon
Hatch, "she's soft enough, so my wife says, where sick folks an'
children an' animals are consarned, but she acts as if men war
born without common feelin's of natur an' didn't come inside the
Commandments. It's beyond me how a kind-hearted woman can be so
unmerciful to an entire sex."

"Had it been otherwise 'twould have been downright disproof of God's
providence and the bond of matrimony," responded old Adam.

"True, true, Mr. Doolittle," admitted Solomon, somewhat abashed. "Thar
ain't any in these parts as can equal you on the Scriptures, as I've
said over an' over agin. It's good luck for the Almighty that He has got
you on His side, so to speak, to help Him confound His enemies."

"Thar're two sides to that, I reckon, seein' I confound not only His
enemies, but His sarvents. Sech is the shot an' shell of my logic that
the righteous fall before it as fast as the wicked--faster even I might
say if I war speakin' particular. Have you marked how skeery Mr. Mullen
has growed about meetin' my eyes over the rail of the pulpit? Why, 'twas
only yesterday that I brought my guns to bear on the resurrection of
the body, an' blowed it to atoms in his presence. 'Now thar's Reuben
Merryweather who buried one leg at Manassas, Mr. Mullen,' I said as
pleasant an' natchel as if I warn't about to confound him, 'an' what I'd
like to have made clear an' easy to me, suh, is what use the Almighty is
goin' to make of that odd leg on the Day of Jedgment? Will he add a
new one onto Reuben,' I axed, 'when, as plain as logic will have it,
it won't be a resurrection, but a creation, or will he start that leg
a-trampin' by itself all the way from Manassas to jine the other at Old
Church?' The parson had been holdin' pretty free all the mornin' with
nobody daring to contradict him, and a man more taken aback by the power
of logic my sight never lit on. 'Spare me, Mr. Doolittle,' was all he
said, never a word mo'. 'Spare me, Mr. Doolittle.'"

"Ah, a tough customer you are," commented Solomon, "an' what answer did
you make to that, suh?"

Old Adam's pipe returned to his mouth, and he puffed slowly a minute.
"'Twas a cry for mercy, Solomon, so I spared him," he responded.

The wagon had reached the well, and without stopping, the large
white-and-red oxen moved on into the turnpike. Bending from her high
seat, Molly Merryweather smiled at the miller, who made a single stride
toward her. Then her glance passed to the stranger, and for an instant
she held his gaze with a pair of eyes that appeared to reflect his in
shape, setting and colour. In the man's face there showed perplexity,
admiration, ironic amusement; in the girl's there was a glimmer of the
smile with which she had challenged the adoring look of the miller.

The flush left the features of young Revercomb, and he turned back, with
a scowl on his forehead, while old Adam cackled softly over the stem of
his pipe.

"Wiles come as natchel to women as wickedness to men, young Adam," he
said. "The time to beware of 'em is in yo' youth befo' they've bewitched
yo'. Why, 'tis only since I've turned ninety that I've trusted myself to
think upon the sex with freedom."

"I'm bewarin'," replied his son, "but when Molly Merryweather widens her
eyes and bites her underlip, it ain't in the natur of man or beast to
stand out agin her. Why, if it had been anybody else but the rector I
could have sworn I saw him squeezin' her hand when he let down the bars
for her last Sunday."

"It's well knowed that when he goes to upbraid her for makin' eyes at
him durin' the 'Have mercy on me,' he takes a mortal long time about the
business," responded Solomon, "but, good Lord, 'tain't fur me to wish
it different, seein' it only bears out all I've argured about false
doctrines an' evil practice. From the sprinklin' of the head thar's but
a single step downward to the holdin' of hands."

"Well, I'm a weak man like the rest of you," rejoined young Adam, "an'
though I'm sound on the doctrines--in practice I sometimes backslide.
I'm thankful, however, it's the lesser sin an' don't set so heavy on the
stomach."

"Ah, it's the light women like Molly Merryweather that draws the eyes of
the young," lamented old Adam.

"A pretty bit of vanity, is she?" inquired the stranger lightly, and
fell back the next instant before the vigorous form of the miller, who
swung round upon him with the smothered retort, "That's a lie!" The
boyish face of the young countryman had paled under his sunburn and he
spoke with the suppressed passion of a man who is not easily angered and
who responds to the pressure of some absorbing emotion.

"Lord, Lord, Abel, Mr. Jonathan warn't meanin' no particular disrespect,
not mo' was I," quavered old Adam.

"You're too pipin' hot, miller," interposed Solomon. "They warn't
meanin' any harm to you nor to the gal either. With half the county
courtin' her it ain't to be expected that she'd go as sober as a grey
mare, is it?"

"Well, they're wastin' their time," retorted the miller, "for she
marries me, thank God, this coming April."

Turning away the next instant, he vaulted astride the bare back of the
mare, and started at a gallop in the direction of the turnpike.

"I'll be blessed if that little gal of Reuben Merryweather's ain't his
religion," commented young Adam.

"An' he's of the opinion that he's going to marry her this comin'
spring," cackled Solomon. "Well, I could be namin' two or three others
of the same mind, if I'd take the trouble. It's all sensible enough to
lambaste the women when they don't pick up every virtue that we throw
away, but what's to be expected of 'em, I ax, when all the men sence
Adam have been praisin' the sober kind of gal while they was runnin'
arter the silly? Thar're some among 'em, I reckon, as have reasoned out
to themselves that a man's pursuit speaks louder in the years, arter
all, than his praise. Now, thar's a fine, promisin' farmer, like the
miller gone runnin' loose, mo's the pity."

"A kind heart at bottom," said old Adam, "but he's got a deal of larnin'
to do befo' he'll rest content to bide along quietly in the same world
with human natur."

"Oh, he's like the Revercombs from the beginnin'," protested Solomon,
"slow an' peaceable an' silent until you rouse 'em, but when they're
once roused, they're roused beyond God or devil."

"Is this young Cain or Abel the head of the family?" inquired the
stranger.

"Bless you, no, Mr. Jonathan, he ain't the head--for thar's his brother
Abner still livin'--but, head or tail, he's the only part that counts,
when it comes to that. Until the boy grew up an' took hold of things,
the Revercombs warn't nothin' mo' than slack fisted, out-at-heel po'
white trash, as the niggers say, though the old man, Abel's grandfather,
al'ays lays claim to bein' connected with the real Revercombs, higher
up in the State--However that may be, befo' the war thar warn't no place
for sech as them, an' 'tis only since times have changed an' the bottom
begun to press up to the top that anybody has heerd of 'em. Abel went to
school somehow by hook or crook an' got a good bit of book larnin', they
say, an' then he came back here an' went to turnin' up every stone an'
stick on the place. He ploughed an' he sowed an' he reaped till he'd
saved up enough to buy that piece of low ground betwixt his house and
the grist-mill. Then Ebenezer Timberlake died of the dropsy an' the
first thing folks knew, Abel had moved over and turned miller. All the
grain that's raised about here now goes to his mill, an' they say he'll
be throwin' out the old and puttin' in new-fangled machinery befo' the
year is up. He's the foremost man in these parts, suh, unless you war to
come to Jordan's Journey to live like yo' uncle."

"To live like my uncle," repeated the young man, with an ironic
intonation that escaped the ears of old Adam. "But what of the miller's
little sweetheart with the short hair and the divine smile? Whose
daughter is she?"

Old Adam's thin lips flattened until a single loosened tooth midway of
his lower gum wagged impishly back and forth. His face, sunburned
and frosted like the hardened rind of some winter fruit, revealed the
prominent bones of the skull under the sunken flesh. One of his gnarled
old hands, trembling and red, clutched the clay bowl of his pipe; the
other, with the callous skin of the palm showing under the bent fingers,
rested half open on the leather patch that covered the knee of his
overalls. A picture of toilworn age, of the inevitable end of all mortal
labour, he had sat for hours in the faint sunshine, smiling with his
sunken, babyish mouth at the brood of white turkeys that crowded about
the well.

"Well, she's Reuben Merryweather's granddaughter, suh," replied Solomon
in the place of the elder. "He was overseer at Jordan's Journey, you
know, durin' the old gentleman's lifetime, after the last Jordan died
and the place was bought by yo' uncle. Ah, 'twas different, suh, when
the Jordans war livin'!"

Some furtive malice in his tone caused the stranger to turn sharply upon
him.

"The girl's mother--who was she?" he asked.

"Janet Merryweather, the prettiest gal that ever set foot on these
roads. Ah, 'twas a sad story, was hers, an' the less said about it,
the soonest forgotten. Thar was some folks, the miller among 'em, that
dropped dead out with the old minister--that was befo' Mr. Mullen's
time--for not wantin' her to be laid in the churchyard. A hard case,
doubtless, but a pious man such as I likes to feel sartain that however
much he may have fooled along with sinful women in this world, only the
most respectable of thar sex will rise around him at the Jedgment."

"And the father?" inquired the stranger, with a sound as if he drew in
his breath sharply.

"Accordin' to the Law an' the Prophets she hadn't any. That may be goin'
agin natur, suh, but 'tis stickin' close to Holy Writ an' the wisdom of
God."

To this the young man's only response was a sudden angry aversion that
showed in his face. Then lifting his horse's head from the trodden grass
by the well, he sprang into the saddle, and started, as the miller had
done, over the three roads into the turnpike. Remembering as he passed
the gate posts that he had spoken no parting word to the group under the
mulberry tree, he raised himself in his stirrups, and called back "Good
day to you. Many thanks," in his pleasant voice.



CHAPTER II


IN WHICH DESTINY WEARS THE COMIC MASK


Putting his horse to a canter, Mr. Jonathan Gay rode through the old
gate into the turnpike. His still indignant look was fixed on the
heavy wheelruts ahead, while his handsome though fleshy figure inclined
slightly forward in the saddle after a foreign fashion. Seen close
at hand his face, which was impressive at a distance, lost a certain
distinction of contour, as though the marks of experience had blurred,
rather than accentuated, the original type. The bones of forehead and
nose still showed classic in outline, but in moulding the mouth and chin
nature had not adhered closely to the aristocratic structure beneath.
The flesh sagged a little in places; the brow was a trifle too heavy,
the jaw a trifle too prominent, the lips under the short dark moustache
were a trifle too full. Yet in spite of this coarseness of finish, his
face was well coloured, attractive, and full of generous, if whimsical,
humour. A judge of men would have seen in it proof that Mr. Gay's
character consisted less in a body of organized tendencies than in a
procession of impulses.

White with dust the turnpike crawled straight ahead between blood-red
clumps of sumach and bramble on which the faint sunlight still shone. At
intervals, where the dripping from over-hanging boughs had worn the
road into dangerous hollows, boles of young saplings had been placed
cross-wise in a corduroy pattern, and above them clouds of small belated
butterflies drifted in the wind like blown yellow rose leaves. On the
right the thin corn shocks looked as if they were sculptured in bronze,
and amid them there appeared presently the bent figure of a harvester,
outlined in dull blue against a sky of burnt orange. From the low
grounds beside the river a mist floated up, clinging in fleecy shreds to
the short grass that grew in and out of the bare stubble. The aspect of
melancholy, which was depressing even in the broad glare of noon, became
almost intolerable under the waning light of the afterglow. Miles of
loneliness stretched on either side of the turnpike, which trailed,
without fork or bend, into the flat distance beyond the great pine at
the bars.

For the twentieth time since he had left the tavern, Mr. Gay, whose
habit it was to appear whimsical when he felt despondent, declared to
himself that he'd be damned if the game was worth half what the candle
was likely to cost him. Having arrived, without notable misadventure,
at the age of thirty, he had already reduced experience to a series
of episodes and had embraced the casual less as a pastime than as a
philosophy.

"If the worst comes to the worst--hang it!--I suppose I may hunt a Molly
Cotton-tail," he grumbled, bringing his horse's gait down to an amble.
"There ought to be good hounds about, judging from the hang-dog look of
the natives. Why in thunder did the old boy want to bury himself and
his heirs forever in this god-forsaken land's end, and what in the deuce
have mother and Aunt Kesiah done with themselves down here for the last
twenty years? Two thousand acres? Damn it! I'd rather have six feet
on the good English soil! Came to get rid of one woman, did he?--and
tumbled into a pretty puddle with another as soon as he got here. By
George, it's in the bone and it is obliged to come out in the blood.
A Gay will go on ogling the sex, I suppose, as long as he is able to
totter back from the edge of the grave."

As he approached the blazed pine, a spot of darkness, which he had at
first mistaken for a small tree, detached itself from the surrounding
shadows, and assumed gradually a human shape. His immediate impression
was that the shape was a woman and that she was young. With his next
breath he became aware that she was also beautiful. In the fading light
her silhouette stood out as distinctly against the mellow background of
the sky, as did the great pine which marked the almost obliterated path
over the fields. Her dress was the ordinary calico one, of some dull
purplish shade, worn by the wives and daughters of the neighbouring
farmers; and on her bare white arm, with its upturned sleeve, she
carried a small split basket half filled with persimmons. She was of
an almost pure Saxon type--tall, broad-shouldered, deep-bosomed, with
a skin the colour of new milk, and soft ashen hair parted smoothly over
her ears and coiled in a large, loose knot at the back of her head. As
he reached her she smiled faintly and a little brown mole at the corner
of her mouth played charmingly up and down. After the first minute, Gay
found himself fascinated by this single imperfection in her otherwise
flawless features. More than her beauty he felt that it stirred his
blood and aroused in him the physical tenderness which he associated
always with some vague chivalrous impulse.

She moved slightly when he dismounted beside her, and a number of
small splotches of black circling around her resolved themselves into a
bodyguard of little negroes, clad in checked pinafores, with the scant
locks wrapped tightly with crimson cotton.

"May I let down the bars for you?" he asked, turning to look into her
face with a smile, "and do you take your collection of piccaninnies
along for protection or for amusement?"

"Grandma doesn't like me to go out alone, sir--so many dreadful things
happen," she answered gently, with an utter absence of humour. "I can't
take anybody who is at work, so I let the little darkies come. Mary Jo
is the oldest and she's only six."

"Is your home near here?"

"I live at the mill. It's a mile farther on, but there is a short cut."

"Then you are related to the miller, Mr. Revercomb--that fine looking
chap I met at the ordinary?"

"He is my uncle. I am Blossom Revercomb," she answered.

"Blossom? It's a pretty name."

Her gaze dwelt on him calmly for and instant, with the faintest quiver
of her full white lids, which appeared to weigh heavily on her rather
prominent eyes of a pale periwinkle blue.

"My real name is Keren-happuch," she said at last, after a struggle with
herself, "grandma bein' a great Scripture reader, chose it when I was
born--but they call me Blossom, for short."

"And am I permitted, Miss Keren-happuch, to call you Blossom?"

Again she hesitated, pondering gravely.

"Mary Jo, if you unwrap your hair your mother will whip you," she
said suddenly, and went on without a perceptible change of tone,
"Keren-happuch is an ugly name, and I don't like it--though grandma says
we oughtn't to think any of the Bible names ugly, not even Gog. She
is quite an authority on Scripture, is grandma, and she can repeat the
first chapter in Chronicles backward, which the minister couldn't do
when he tried."

"I'd like to hear the name that would sound ugly on your lips, Miss
Keren-happuch."

If the sons of farmers had sought to enchant her ears with similar
strains, there was no hint of it in the smiling eyes she lifted to his.
The serenity of her look added, he thought, to her resemblance to some
pagan goddess--not to Artemis nor to Aphrodite, but to some creature
compounded equally of earth and sky. Io perhaps, or Europa? By Jove he
had it at last--the Europa of Veronese!

"There'll have to be a big frost before the persimmons get sweet," she
observed in a voice that was remarkably deep and full for a woman.
With the faint light on her classic head and her milky skin, he found
a delicious piquancy in the remark. Had she gossiped, had she even
laughed, the effect would have been disastrous. Europa, he was vaguely
aware, would hardly have condescended to coquetry. Her speech, like her
glance, would be brief, simple, direct.

"Tell me about the people here," he asked after a pause, in which he
plucked idly at the red-topped orchard grass through which they were
passing. Behind them the six little negroes walked primly in single
file, Mary Jo in the lead and a chocolate-coloured atom of two toddling
at the tail of the procession. From time to time shrill squeaks went up
from the rear when a startled partridge whirred over the pasture or a
bare brown foot came down on a toad or a grasshopper.

As she made no reply, he added in a more intimate tone, "I am Jonathan
Gay, of Jordan's Journey, as I suppose you know."

"The old gentleman's nephew?" she said, while she drew slightly away
from him. "Mary Jo, did you tell Tobias's mammy that he was coming
along?"

"Nawm, I ain done tole nobody caze dar ain nobody done ax me."

"But I said that you were not to bring him without letting Mahaly know.
You remember what a whipping she gave him the last time he came!"

At this a dismal howl burst from Tobias. "I
ain't-a-gwine-ter-git-a-whuppin'!"

"Lawd, Miss Blossom, hit cyarn' hut Tobias ez hit ud hut de res'er us,"
replied Mary Jo, with fine philosophy, "case dar ain but two years er
'im ter whup."

"I ain't-a-gwine-ter-git-a-whuppin'!" sang Tobias in a passionate
refrain.

"Now that's just it," said Gay, feeling as though he should like to
throttle the procession of piccaninnies. "What I can't understand is why
the people about here--those I met at Bottom's Ordinary, for instance,
seem to have disliked me even before I came."

Without surprise or embarrassment, she changed the basket from her right
to her left arm, and this simple movement had the effect of placing him
at a distance, though apparently by accident.

"That's because of the old gentleman, I reckon," she answered, "my folks
all hated him, I don't know why."

"But can you guess? You see I really want to understand. I've been away
since I was eight years old and I have only the haziest memories."

The question brought them into a sudden intimacy, as if his impulsive
appeal to her had established a relation which had not existed the
minute before. He liked the look of her strong shoulders, of her deep
bosom rising in creamy white to her throat; and the quiver of her red
lower lip when she talked, aroused in him a swift and facile emotion.
The melancholy of the landscape, reacting on the dangerous softness of
his mood, bent his nature toward her like a flame driven by the wind.
Around them the red-topped orchard grass faded to pale rose in the
twilight, and beyond the crumbling rail fence miles of feathery
broomsedge swept to the pines that stood straight and black against the
western horizon. Impressions of the hour and the scene, of colour and
sound, were blended in the allurement which Nature proffered him, for
her own ends, through the woman beside him. Not Blossom Revercomb, but
the great Mother beguiled him. The forces that moved in the wind, in the
waving broomsedge, and in the call of the whip-poor-will, stirred in
his pulses as they stirred in the objects around him. That fugitive
attraction of the body, which Nature has shielded at the cost of finer
attributes, leaped upon him like a presence that had waited in earth and
sky. Loftier aspirations vanished before it. Not his philosophy but the
accident of a woman's face worked for destiny.

"I never knew just how it was," she answered slowly as if weighing her
words, "but your uncle wasn't one of our folks, you know. He bought
the place the year before the war broke out, and there was always some
mystery about him and about the life he led--never speaking to anybody
if he could help it, always keeping himself shut up when he could. He
hadn't a good name in these parts, and the house hasn't a good name
either, for the darkies say it is ha'nted and that old Mrs. Jordan--'ole
Miss' they called her--still comes back out of her grave to rebuke the
ha'nt of Mr. Jonathan. There is a path leading from the back porch to
the poplar spring where none of them will go for water after nightfall.
Uncle Abednego swears that he met his old master there one night when he
went down to fill a bucket and that a woman was with him. It all comes,
I reckon, of Mr. Jonathan having been found dead at the spring, and you
know how the darkies catch onto any silly fancy about the dead walking.
I don't believe much in ha'nts myself, though great-grandma has seen
many a one in her day, and all the servants at Jordan's Journey will
never rest quiet. I've always wondered if your mother and Miss Kesiah
were ever frightened by the stories the darkies tell?" For a moment she
paused, and then added softly, "It was all so different, they say, when
the Jordans were living."

Again the phrase which had begun to irritate him! Who were these dead
and gone Jordans whose beneficent memory still inhabited the house they
had built?

"I don't think my mother would care for such stories," he replied after
a minute. "She has never mentioned them in her letters."

"Of course nobody really puts faith in them, but I never pass the
spring, if I can help it, after the sun has gone down. It makes me feel
so dreadfully creepy."

"The root of this gossip, I suppose, lies in the general dislike of my
uncle?"

"Perhaps--I'm not sure," she responded, and he felt that her rustic
simplicity possessed a charm above the amenities of culture. "The old
clergyman--that was before Mr. Mullen's day--when we all went to the
church over at Piping Tree--used to say that the mercy of God would have
to exceed his if He was ever going to redeem him. I remember hearing
him tell grandma when I was a child that there were a few particulars
in which he couldn't answer with certainty for God, and that old Mr.
Jonathan Gay was one of 'em. 'God Almighty will have to find His own way
in this matter,' he used to declare, 'for I wash my hands of it.' I'm
sorry, sir," she finished contritely, "I forgot he was your own blood
relation."

In the spirit of this contrition, she changed the basket back again to
her left arm; and perceiving his advantage, Gay acted upon it with his
accustomed alacrity.

"Don't apologize, please, I am glad I have this from your lips--not from
a stranger's."

Under the spell of her beauty, he was aware of a pleasurable sensation,
as though the pale rose of the orchard grass had gone to his head and
coloured his vision. There was a thrill in feeling her large, soft arm
brushing his sleeve, in watching the rise and fall of her bosom under
her tight calico dress.

"I shall always know that we were friends--good friends, from the
first," he resumed after a minute.

"You are very kind, sir," she answered, "this is my path over the stile
and it is growin' late--Tobias's mother will surely give him a whippin'.
I hope you don't mind my havin' gathered these persimmons on your land,"
she concluded, with an honesty which was relieved from crudeness by her
physical dignity, "they are hardly fit to eat because there has been so
little frost yet."

"Well, I'm sorry for that, Miss Keren-happuch, or shall it be Blossom?"

"I like Blossom better," she answered shyly, lifting her scant calico
skirt with one hand as she mounted the stile.

"Then good night, lovely Blossom," he called gaily while he turned
back into the bridle path which led like a frayed white seam over the
pasture.



CHAPTER III


IN WHICH MR. GAY ARRIVES AT HIS JOURNEY'S END


Broad and low, with the gabled pediment of the porch showing through
boughs of oaks, and a flight of bats wheeling over the ivied roof, the
house appeared to Gay beyond a slight swell in the meadows. The grove
of oaks, changing from dark red to russet, was divided by a short
walk, bordered by clipped box, which led to the stone steps and to two
discoloured marble urns on which broken-nosed Cupids were sporting. As
he was about to slip his reins over the back of an iron chair on the
lawn, a shriek in a high pitched negro voice pierced his ears from a
half shuttered dormer-window in the east wing.

"Fo' de Lawd, hit's de ha'nt er ole marster! Yessuh--Yessuh,--I'se
a-comin'--I'se a-comin'."

The next instant the window slammed with a bang, and the sound of flying
footsteps echoed through the darkened interior of the house.

"Open the door, you fool! I'm not a ghost!" shouted Gay, but the only
response came in an hysterical babble of moans from the negro quarters
somewhere in the rear and in the soft whir in his face of a leatherwing
bat as it wheeled low in the twilight. There was no smoke in the
chimneys, and the square old house, with its hooded roof and its vacant
windows, assumed a sinister and inhospitable look against the background
of oaks. His mother and his aunt, he concluded, were doubtless away for
their winter's shopping, so lifting his horse's head from the grass, he
passed between the marble urns and the clipped box, and followed a path,
deep in leaves, which led from the west wing of the house to the outside
kitchen beyond a paved square at the back. Half intelligible words
floated to him as he approached, and from an old pear-tree near the door
there was a flutter of wings where a brood of white turkeys settled to
roost. Beyond the bole of the tree a small negro in short skirts was
"shooin'" a large rooster into the henhouse, but at the muffled fall of
Gay's horse's hoofs on the dead leaves, she turned with a choking sound,
and fled to the shelter of the kitchen at her back.

"My time's done come, but I ain't-a-gwine! I ain't-a-gwine!" wailed
the chorus within. "Ole marster's done come ter fotch me, but I
ain't-a-gwine! O Lawd, I ain't-a-gwine! O Jesus, I ain't-a-gwine!"

"You fools, hold your tongues!" stormed the young man, losing his
temper. "Send somebody out here to take my horse or I'll give you
something to shout over in earnest."

The shrieks trembled high for an instant, and then died out in a
despairing moan, while the blanched face of an old servant appeared in
the doorway.

"Is hit you er yo' ha'nt, Marse Jonathan?" he inquired humbly.

"Come here, you doddering idiot, and take my horse."

But half reassured the negro came a step or two forward, and made
a feeble clutch at the reins, which dropped from his grasp when the
roosting turkeys stirred uneasily on the bough above.

"I'se de butler, marster, en I ain never sot foot in de stable sence de
days er ole miss."

"Where's my mother?"

"Miss Angela, she's done gone up ter town en Miss Kesiah she's done gone
erlong wid 'er."

"Is the house closed?"

"Naw, suh, hit ain closed, but Miss Molly she's got de keys up yonder at
de house er de overseer."

"Well, send somebody with a grain of sense out here, and I'll look up
Miss Molly."

At this the butler vanished promptly into the kitchen, and a minute
later a half-grown mulatto boy relieved Gay of his horse, while he
pointed to a path through an old apple orchard that led to the cottage
of the overseer. As the young man passed under the gnarled boughs to a
short flagged walk before the small, whitewashed house in which "Miss
Molly" lived, he wondered idly if the lady who kept the keys would prove
to be the amazing little person he had seen some hours earlier perched
on the load of fodder in the ox-cart. The question was settled almost
before it was asked, for a band of lamplight streamed suddenly from the
door of the cottage, and in the centre of it appeared the figure of
a girl in a white dress, with red stockings showing under her short
skirts, and a red ribbon filleting the thick brown curls on her
forehead. From her movements he judged that she was mixing a bowl of
soft food for the old hound at her feet, and he waited until she had
called the dog inside for his supper, before he went forward and spoke
her name in his pleasant voice.

At the sound she turned with a start, and he saw her vivid little face,
with the wonderful eyes, go white for a minute.

"So you are Mr. Jonathan? I thought so," she said at last, "but
grandfather told me you sent no word of your coming."

She spoke quickly, with a refinement of accent which puzzled him until
he remembered the malicious hints Solomon Hatch had let fall at the
tavern. That she was, in reality, of his blood and the child of his
uncle, he had not doubted since the moment she had smiled at him from
her seat on the oxcart. How much was known, he now wondered. Had his
uncle provided for her? Was his mother--was his Aunt Kesiah--aware of
the truth?

"She missed my letter, I suppose," he replied. "Has she been long away?"

"Only a week. She is expected home day after to-morrow."

"Then I shall beg you to open the house for me."

She had turned back to the old hound, and was bending over to place his
bowl of bread and milk on the hearth. A log fire, in which a few pine
branches stood out illuminated like boughs of flame, filled the big
stone fireplace, which was crudely whitewashed to resemble the low walls
of the room. A kettle hung on an iron crane before the blaze, and the
singing of the water made a cheerful noise amid a silence which struck
Gay suddenly as hostile. When the girl raised her head he saw that her
face had grown hard and cold, and that the expression of her eyes had
changed to one of indignant surprise. The charming coquetry had fled
from her look, yet her evident aversion piqued him into a half smiling,
half serious interest. He wondered if she would marry that fine looking
rustic, the miller, and if the riotous Gay blood in her veins would
flow placidly in her mother's class? Had she, too, inherited, if not the
name, yet the weaknesses of an older race? Was she, like himself, cursed
with swift fancies and swifter disillusionments? How frail she was, and
how brilliant! How innocent and how bitter!

He turned away, ostensibly to examine a print on the wall, and while his
back was toward her, he felt that her gaze stabbed him like the
thrust of a knife. Wheeling quickly about, he met her look, but to his
amazement, she continued to stare back at him with the expression of
indignant surprise still in her face. How she hated him and, by Jove,
how she _could_ hate! She reminded him of a little wild brown animal as
she stood there with her teeth showing between her parted red lips and
her eyes flashing defiance. The next minute he found himself asking if
she could ever grow gentle--could ever soften enough to allow herself
to be stroked? He remembered Solomon Hatch's remark that "she was
onmerciful to an entire sex," and in spite of his effort at composure, a
laugh sprang to his lips.

In the centre of the room a table was laid, and going over to it, she
busied herself with the cups and saucers as though she were anxious to
put a disagreeable presence out of her thoughts.

"May I share your supper?" he asked, and waited, not without amusement,
for her answer.

"I'm sorry there isn't any for you at the big house," she answered
politely. "If you will sit down, I'll tell Delily to bring in some
batter bread."

"And you?"

"I'll have mine with grandfather. He's out in the barn giving medicine
to the red cow."

While she spoke Delily entered with a plate of cornbread and a pot of
coffee, and a minute later Reuben Merryweather paused on the threshold
to shake off a sprinkling of bran from his hair and beard. He was a
bent, mild looking old man, with a wooden leg which made a stumping
noise when he walked, and a pair of wistful brown eyes, like those of an
aged hound that has been worn out by hard service. Past seventy now,
his youth had been trained to a different civilization, and there was
a touching gentleness in his face, as if he expressed still the mental
attitude of a class which had existed merely as a support or a foil to
the order above it. Without spirit to resent, he, with his fellows, had
endured the greatest evils of slavery. With the curse of free labour
on the land, there had been no incentive for toil, no hire for the
labourer. Like an incubus the system had lain over them, stifling
all energy, checking all progress, retarding all prosperity save the
prosperity of the great land-owners. Then the soil had changed hands,
and where the plough had broken the earth, the seeds of a democracy had
germinated and put forth from the very blood of the battlefields. In the
upward pressure of class, he had seen the stability of custom yield at
last to the impetus of an energy that was not racial but individual. Yet
from the transition he had remained always a little apart. Reverence had
become for him a habit of mind, and he had learned that respect could
outlive even a belief in the thing upon which it was founded. Mr.
Jonathan and he had been soldiers together. His old commander still
entered his thoughts to the rattle of musketry and the roar of cannon,
and a single sublime action at Malvern Hill had served in the mind of
the soldier to spread a legendary glamour over a life which held hardly
another incident that was worthy of remembrance.

At his entrance Molly melted from her hostile attitude, and while she
hung on the old man's breast, Gay noticed, with surprise, that she
was made up of enchanting curves and delicious softness. Her sharpened
features grew rounder, and her thin red lips lost their hardness of
outline. When she raised her head after a minute, he saw that the light
in her eyes adorned and enriched her. By Jove, he had never imagined
that she could change and colour like that!

"You are late, grandfather," said the girl, "I was coming to look for
you with a lantern."

"The red cow kept me," answered the old man, adding as he held out his
hand to Gay, "So you've come at last, Mr. Jonathan. Your mother will be
pleased."

"I was sorry to find her absent," replied Gay, "and I was just asking
your granddaughter if she would permit me to join you at supper?"

"To be sure--to be sure," responded Reuben, with a cheerfulness which
struck Gay as singularly pathetic. "After supper Molly will go over with
Patsey and see that you are made comfortable."

The old hound, blind and toothless, fawned at his knees, and leaning
over, he caressed it with a knotted and trembling hand.

"Has Spot had his supper, Molly?"

"Yes, grandfather. He can eat only soft bread and gravy." At her voice
the hound groped toward her, and stooping, she laid her soft, flushed
cheek on his head.

"Well, sit down, suh, sit down," said Reuben, speaking timidly as if
he were not sure he had chosen the right word. "If you'll tell Delily,
honey, Mr. Jonathan will have his supper."

"On condition that you let me share yours, Mr. Merryweather," insisted
Gay, in his genial tone. "If you're going to make company of me, I shall
go hungry until to-morrow."

From a wooden safe in the corner Molly brought a plate and a cup, and
made a place for the young man at the end of the red-and-white cloth on
the table. Then she turned away, without speaking, and sat down behind
the tin coffeepot, which emitted a fragrant steam.

"Cream and sugar?" she inquired presently, meeting his eyes over the
glass lamp which stood midway between them.

Gay had been talking to Reuben about the roads--"jolly bad roads,"
he called them, "wasn't it possible to make them decent for riding?"
Looking up at the girl's question, he answered absently, "two lumps.
Cream? Yes, please, a little," and then continued to stare at her with
a vague and impersonal wonder. She was half savage, of course, with red
hands, and bad manners and dressed like a boy that had got into skirts
for a joke--but, by George, there was something about her that bit into
the fancy. Not a beauty like his Europa of the pasture (who was, when
it came to that?)--but a fascinating little beggar, with a quality of
sudden surprises that he could describe by no word except "iridescent."
He liked the high arch of her brows; but her nose wasn't good and her
lips were too thin except when she smiled. When she smiled! It was her
smile, after all, that made her seem a thing of softness and bloom born
to be kissed.

Reuben ate his food rapidly, pouring his coffee into the saucer,
and drinking it in loud gulps that began presently to make Gay feel
decidedly nervous. Once the young man inadvertently glanced toward
him, and turning away the instant afterwards, he found the girl's eyes
watching him with a defiant and threatening look. Her passionate defence
of Reuben reminded Gay of a nesting bird under the eye of the hunter.
She did not plead, she dared--actually dared him to criticise the old
man even in his thoughts!

That Molly herself was half educated and possessed some smattering of
culture, it was easy to see. She was less rustic in her speech than his
Europa, and there was the look of breeding, or of blood, in the fine
poise of her head, in her small shapely hands, which he remembered were
a distinguishing mark of the Gays.

"Mr. Mullen came for you in his cart," said Reuben, glancing from one
to the other of his hearers with his gentle and humble look. "I told him
you must have forgotten as you'd ridden down to the low grounds."

"No, I didn't forget," replied Molly, indifferent apparently to the
restraint of Gay's presence, "I did it on purpose." Meeting the young
man's amused and enquiring expression, she added defiantly, "There are
plenty of girls that are always ready to go with him and it's because
I'm not that he wants me."

"He's not the only one, to judge from what I heard at the ordinary."

She shrugged her shoulders--an odd gesture for a rustic coquette--while
a frown overshadowed her features.

"They're all alike," she retorted scornfully. "If you go over to the
mill you'll probably find Abel Revercomb sulking and brow-beating his
mother because I smiled at you this afternoon. And I did it only to
plague him!"

"Molly's a good girl," said Reuben, rather as if he expected the
assertion to be disputed, "but she was taught to despise folks when she
was a baby--wasn't you, pretty?"

"Not you--never you, grandfather."

The intimate nature of the conversation grated upon Gay not a little.
There was something splendidly barbaric about the girl, and yet the
mixture of her childishness and her cynicism affected him unpleasantly
rather than otherwise. His ideal woman--the woman of the early Victorian
period--was submissive and clinging. He was perfectly assured that
she would have borne her wrongs, and even her mother's wrongs, with
humility. Meekness had always seemed to him the becoming mental and
facial expression for the sex; and that a woman should resent appeared
almost as indelicate as that she should propose.

When supper was over, and Reuben had settled to his pipe, with the old
hound at his feet, Molly took down a bunch of keys from a nail in the
wall, and lit a lantern with a taper which she selected from a china
vase on the mantelpiece. Once outside she walked a little ahead of Gay
and the yellow blaze of the lantern flitted like a luminous bird over
the flagged walk bordered by gooseberry bushes. Between the stones,
which were hollowed by the tread of generations, nature had embroidered
the bare places with delicate patterns of moss.

At the kitchen the girl stopped to summon Patsey, the maid, who was
discovered roasting an apple at the end of a long string before the
logs.

"I am going to the big house. Come and make up the bed in the blue
room," Gay heard through the door.

"Yes'm, Miss Molly, I'se a-comin' in jes a minute."

"And bring plenty of lightwood. He will probably want a fire."

With this she appeared again on the outside, crossed the paved square to
the house, and selecting a large key, unlocked the door, which grated on
its hinges as Gay pushed it open. Following her into the hall, he stood
back while she lit a row of tallow candles, in old silver sconces, which
extended up the broad mahogany staircase to the upper landing. One by
one as she applied the taper, the candles flashed out in a misty circle,
and then rising in a clear flame, shone on her upraised hand and on the
brilliant red of her lips and cheeks.

"That is your mother's room," she said, pointing to a closed door, "and
this is yours. Patsey will make a fire."

"It's rather gloomy, isn't it?"

"Shall I bring you wine? I have the key to the cellar."

"Brandy, if you please. The place feels as if it had been shut up for a
century."

"It was your uncle's room. Do you mind sleeping here? It's the easiest
to get ready."

"Not with a fire--and I may have a lamp, I suppose?"

At his question Patsey appeared with an armful of resinous pine, and a
few minutes later, a cheerful blaze was chasing the shadows up the great
brick chimney. When Molly returned with the brandy, Gay was leaning
against the mantelpiece idly burning a bunch of dried cat-tails he had
taken from a blue-and-white china vase.

"It's a gloomy old business, isn't it?" he observed, glancing from the
high canopied bed with its hangings of faded damask to an engraving of
the Marriage of Pocahontas between the dormer-windows. "If there are
ghosts about, I suppose I'd better prepare to face them."

"Only in the west wing, the darkies say, but I think they are bats.
As for those in the haunt's walk, I never believed in them. Patsey is
bringing your brandy. Can I do anything else for you?"

"Only tell me," he burst out, "why in thunder the whole county hates
me?"

She laughed shortly. "I can't tell you--wait and find out."

Here audacity half angered, half paralyzed him.

"What a vixen you are!" he observed presently with grudging respect.

The crimson flooded her face, and he watched her teeth gleam
dangerously, as if she were bracing herself for a retort. The impulse to
torment her was strong in him, and he yielded to it much as a boy might
have teased a small captive animal of the woods.

"With such a temper you ought to have been an ugly woman," he said, "but
you're so pretty I'm strongly inclined to kiss you."

"If you do, I'll strike you," she gasped.

The virgin in her showed fierce and passionate, not shy and fleeting.
That she was by instinct savagely pure, he could tell by the look of
her.

"I believe it so perfectly that I've no intention of trying," he
rejoined.

"I'm not half so pretty as my mother was," she said after a pause.

Her loyalty to the unfortunate Janet touched him to sympathy. "Don't
quarrel with me, Molly," he pleaded, "for I mean to be friends with
you."

As he uttered the words, he was conscious of a pleasant feeling of
self-approbation while his nature vibrated to the lofty impulse. This
sensation was so gratifying while it lasted that his manner assumed a
certain austerity as one who had determined to be virtuous at any cost.
Morally he was on stilts for the moment, and the sense of elevation was
as novel as it was insecure.

"I know you are a good girl, Molly," he observed staidly, "that is why I
am so anxious to be your friend."

"Is there nothing more that I can do for you?" she inquired, with frigid
reserve, as she took up the lantern.

"Yes, one thing--you can shake hands."

The expression of indignant surprise appeared again in her face, and she
fell back a step, shaking her head stubbornly as she did so.

"I'd rather not--if you don't mind," she answered.

"But if I do mind--and I do."

"Still I'd rather not."

"Do you really dislike me as much as you dislike the miller?"

"More."

"Or the rector?"

"Oh, far more. You are a Gay."

"Yes, I am a Gay," he might have retorted, "and you, my pretty savage,
are very much a Gay, also."

Swinging the lantern in her hand, she moved to the door, as if she were
anxious to put an end to a conversation which had become suddenly too
intimate. On the threshold she looked back, and remarked in a precise,
authoritative voice:

"There are blankets in the bottom drawer if you find you haven't
covering enough."

"I shall remember--there are blankets in the bottom drawer."

"Patsey will bring hot water at eight and Uncle Abednego will give you
breakfast in the dining-room."

"Then I'm not to have it with you?"

"With me? Oh, I live with grandfather. I never come to the big house
except when Mrs. Gay is in town."

"Do you see nothing, then, of my mother when she is at home?"

"Sometimes I help her to make raspberry vinegar or preserves. If you
hear a noise in the night it is only the acorns dropping on the roof.
There are so many oaks. Good night, Mr. Jonathan."

"Good night," he returned, "I wish you'd shake hands,"--but she had
vanished.

The room was cosy and warm now--and flinging himself into a chair with
deep arms that stood on the hearth, he lit his cigar and sipped drowsily
the glass of brandy she had left on a silver tray on the table.
The ceiling was ridiculously high--what a waste of good bricks and
mortar!--the room was ridiculously large! On the smooth white walls
reddish shadows moved in a fantastic procession, and from the big
chintz-covered lounge the monstrous blue poppies leaped out of the
firelight. The high canopy over the bed was draped with prim folds of
damask, and the coverlet was of some quaint crocheted work that hung in
fringed ends to the floor. Here again from the threadbare velvet carpet
the blue poppies stared back at him.

An acorn dropped on the roof, and in spite of Molly's warning, he
started and glanced toward the window, where a frosted pattern of ivy
showed like a delicate lacework on the small greenish panes. Another
dropped; then another. Gradually he began to listen for the sound and to
miss it when there came a long silence. One might easily imagine it
to be the tapping of ghostly fingers--of the fingers of pretty Janet
Merryweather--some quarter of a century earlier. Her daughter was hardly
more than twenty now, he supposed, and he wondered how long the mad
idyllic period had lasted before her birth? Turning to the books on the
table, he opened one and a yellowed fragment of paper fluttered to the
floor at his feet. When he stooped after it, he saw that there was a
single word on it traced faintly in his uncle's hand: "To-morrow."

And then, being a person whose imagination dealt with the obvious,
he undressed, blew out the light, and fell peacefully asleep to the
dropping of acorns.



CHAPTER IV


THE REVERCOMBS


On the morning after the meeting at Bottom's Ordinary, Abel Revercomb
came out on the porch of the little house in which he lived, and looked
across the steep rocky road to the mill-race which ran above a silver
stream known as Sycamore Creek. The grist-mill, a primitive log
building, worked after ancient methods, had stood for a hundred years
or more beside a crooked sycamore tree, which grew mid-way of the stream
and shaded the wheel and the shingled roof from the blue sky above. The
old wooden race, on which the young green mosses shone like a coating of
fresh paint on a faded surface, ran for a short distance over the brook,
where the broad yellow leaves drifted down to the deep pond below.
Across the slippery poplar log, which divided the mill from the road and
the house occupied by the miller, there was a stretch of good corn land,
where the corn stood in shocks after the harvest, and beyond this the
feathery bloom of the broomsedge ran to the luminous band of marshes on
the far horizon.

From the open door before which the miller was standing, there came the
clatter of breakfast dishes and the sound of Scripture text quoted in
the voice of his mother. Above his head several strings of red pepper
hung drying, and these rustled in the wind with a grating noise that
seemed an accompaniment to the speaker in the kitchen.

"The Lord said that, an' I reckon He knew His own mind when He was
speakin' it," remarked Sarah Revercomb as she put down the coffeepot.

"I declare there's mother at it again," observed Abel to himself with
a frown--for it was Sarah's fate that an excess of virtue should have
wrought all the evil of a positive vice. From the days of her infancy,
when she had displayed in the cradle a power of self-denial at which her
pastor had marvelled, she had continued to sacrifice her inclinations
in a manner which had rendered unendurable the lives around her. Her
parents had succumbed to it; her husband had died of it; her children
had resigned themselves to it or rebelled against it according to the
quality of their moral fibre. All her life she had laboured to make
people happy, and the result of this exalted determination was a cowed
and resentful family.

"Yo' buckwheat cakes will be stone cold if you don't come along in,
Abel," she called now from the kitchen. "You've been lookin' kind of
sallow these last days, so I've got a spoonful of molasses and sulphur
laid right by yo' plate."

"For heaven's sake, take it away," he retorted irritably. "I don't need
it."

"I reckon I can tell by the look of you better than you can by the
feelin'," rejoined Sarah grimly, "an' if you know what's good for you,
you'll come and swallow it right down."

"I'll be hanged if I do!" exclaimed Abel without moving, and his tone
implied that the ceaseless nagging had got at last on his nerves. He
was a robust, well-built, red-brown young fellow, who smelt always of
freshly ground meal, as though his body, from long usage, had grown to
exhale the cleanly odour of the trade he followed. His hair was thick,
dark and powdered usually with mill-dust. His eyes, of a clear bright
hazel, deep-set and piercing, expressed a violence of nature which his
firm, thin-lipped mouth, bare of beard or moustache, appeared to deny.
A certain tenacity--a suggestion of stubbornness in the jaw, gave the
final hint to his character, and revealed that temperamental intolerance
of others of the rustic who has risen out of his class. An opinion once
embraced acquired the authority of a revelation; a passion once yielded
to was transformed into a principle. Impulsive, generous, undisciplined,
he represented, after all, but the reaction from the spirit of racial
submission which was embodied in Reuben Merryweather. Tradition
had bound Reuben in thongs of steel; Abel was conscious only of his
liberated intelligence--of a passionate desire to test to the fullest
the certainty of that liberation. As the elder had suffered beneath the
weight of the established order, so the younger showed the disturbing
effects of a freedom which had resulted from a too rapid change in
economic conditions rather than from the more gradual evolution of
class. When political responsibility was thrust on the plainer people
instead of sought by them, it was but natural that the process of
adjustment should appear rough rather than smooth. The land which had
belonged to the few became after the war within reach of the many.
At first the lower classes had held back, paralyzed by the burden of
slavery. The soil, impoverished, wasted, untilled, rested under the
shadow of the old names--the old customs. This mole-like blindness of
the poorer whites persisted still for a quarter of a century; and the
awakening was possible only after the newer authority was but a shadow;
the past reverence but a delusion. When the black labourer worked, not
freely, but for hire, the wages of the white labourer went up as by
magic. To rise under the old system had been so impossible that Abel's
ancestors had got out of the habit of trying. The beneficent charity of
the great landowners had exhausted the small incentive that might have
remained--and to give had been so much the prerogative of a single
class, that to receive had become a part of the privileges of another.
In that pleasant idyllic period the one act which went unhonoured and
unrewarded was the act of toil. So in the odour of shiftlessness Abel's
father had died; so after ninety years his grandparents still sat by the
hearth to which his mother had called him.

The house, an oblong frame building, newly shingled, was set back from
the road in a straggling orchard of pear-trees, which bore a hard
green fruit too sour to be used except in the form of preserves. Small
shanties, including a woodhouse, a henhouse, and a smokehouse for drying
bacon and hams, flanked the kitchen garden at the rear, while in front a
short, gravelled path, bordered by portulaca, led to the paling gate at
the branch road which ran into the turnpike a mile or so farther on. In
Abel's dreams another house was already rising in the fair green meadow
beyond the mill-race. He had consecrated a strip of giant pine to this
purpose, and often, while he lingered in the door of his mill, he felt
himself battling against the desire to take down his axe and strike his
first blow toward the building of Molly's home. His mother might nag
at him about Molly now, but let them be married, he told himself, with
sanguine masculine assurance, and both women would reconcile themselves
to a situation that neither could amend. Before the immediate ache of
his longing for the girl, all other considerations evaporated to thin
air. He would rather be unhappy with her, he thought passionately, than
give her up!

"Abel, if you don't stop mopin' out thar an' come along in, I'll clear
off the dishes!" called his mother again in her rasping voice
which sounded as if she were choking in a perpetual spasm of moral
indignation.

Jerking his shoulders slightly in an unspoken protest, Abel turned
and entered the kitchen, where Sarah Revercomb--tall, spare and
commanding--was preparing two bowls of mush for the aged people, who
could eat only soft food and complained bitterly while eating that. She
was a woman of some sixty years, with a stern handsome face under harsh
bands of yellowish gray hair, and a mouth that sank in at one corner
where her upper teeth had been drawn. Her figure was erect and flat as a
lath, and this flatness was accentuated by the extreme scantiness of
her drab calico dress. In her youth she had been beautiful in a hard,
obvious fashion, and her eyes would have been still fine except for
their bitter and hostile expression.

At the table there were Abner Revercomb, some ten or twelve years
older than Abel, and Archie, the youngest child, whom Sarah adored and
bullied. Blossom was busy about something in the cupboard, and on either
side of the stove the old people sat with their small, suspicious eyes
fixed on the pan of mush which Sarah was dividing with a large wooden
spoon into two equal portions. Each feared that the other would receive
the larger share, and each watched anxiously to see into which bowl the
last spoonful would fall. For a week they had not spoken. Their old age
was racked by a sharp and furious jealousy, which was quite exclusive
and not less exacting than their earlier passion of love.

With a finishing swirl of the big wooden spoon, the last drops of mush
fell into grandfather's bowl, while a sly and injured look appeared
instantly on the face of his wife. She was not hungry, but it annoyed
her unspeakably that she should not be given the larger portion of food.
Her rheumatism was severer than her husband's, and it seemed to her that
this alone should have entitled her to the greater share of attention.
There was a fierce contempt in her manner when she alluded to his age
or to his infirmities, for although he was three years her elder, he was
still chirpy and cheerful, with many summers, as she said resentfully,
left in him yet.

"Breakfast is ready, grannies," remarked Sarah, who had allowed her
coffee to grow cold while she looked after the others; "are you ready to
eat?"

Grandmother's sly little eyes slanted over her hooked nose in the
direction of the two bowls which her daughter-in-law was about to
sprinkle with sugar. An idea entered her old head which made her chuckle
with pleasure, and when her mush had been covered, she croaked out
suddenly that she would take her breakfast unsweetened. "I'm too bad to
take sugar--give that to him--he has a stomach to stand it," she said.
Though her mouth watered for sweets, by this trick she had outwitted
grandfather, and she felt that it was better than sugar.

The kitchen was a large, comfortable room, with strings of red peppers
hanging from the ceiling, and boards of sliced apples drying on upturned
flour barrels near the door. The bright homespun carpet left a strip of
bare plank by the stove, and on this stood two hampers of black walnuts
ready for storing. A few coloured prints, culled from garden magazines,
were tacked on the wall, and these, without exception, represented
blossoms of a miraculous splendour and size. In Sarah's straitened
and intolerant soul a single passion had budded and expanded into
fulfillment. Stern to all mortal things, to flowers alone she softened
and grew gentle. From the front steps to the back, the kitchen
was filled with them. Boxes, upturned flour barrels, corners of
china-shelves and window-sills, showed bowers of luxuriant leaf and
blossom. Her calla lilies had long been famous in the county; they
had taken first prizes at innumerable fairs, and whenever there was a
wedding or a funeral in the neighbourhood, the tall green stalks were
clipped bare of bloom. Many were the dead hands that had been laid in
the earth clasping her lilies. This thought had been for years the chief
solace in her life, and she was accustomed to refer to it in the heat
of religious debates, as though it offered infallible proof of her
contention. After calla lilies, fuchias and tuberoses did best in her
hands, and she had nursed rare night blooming cereus for seven years
in the hope that it would arrive at perfection the following June. Her
marriage had been a disappointment to her, for her husband, a pleasant,
good-looking fellow, had turned out an idler; her children, with the
exception of Archie, the youngest, had never filled the vacancy in her
life; but in her devotion to flowers there was something of the ecstasy
and all of the self-abandonment she had missed in her human relations.

As he sat down at the table, the miller nodded carelessly to his
brothers, who, having finished their bacon and cornbread, were waiting
patiently until the buckwheat cakes should be ready. The coloured
servant was never allowed to cook because, as Sarah said, "she could not
abide niggers' ways," and Blossom, standing before the stove, with her
apron held up to shield her face, was turning the deliciously browning
cakes with a tin cake lifter.

"Ain't they done yet, daughter?" asked Abner in his amiable drawling
voice. He was a silent, brooding man, heavily built, with a coarse
reddish beard, stained with tobacco juice, which hung over his chest.
Since the death of his wife, Blossom's mother, some fifteen years
before, he had become more gloomy, more silent, more obstinately
unapproachable. He was one who appeared to dwell always in the shadow of
a great grief, and this made him generally respected by his neighbours
though he was seldom sought. People said of him that he was "a solid
man and trustworthy," but they kept out of his way unless there was road
mending or a sale of timber to be arranged.

Blossom tossed the buckwheat cakes into a plate and brought them to her
father, who helped himself with his knife. When she passed them to Abel,
who was feeding his favorite hound puppy, Moses, with bacon, he shook
his head and drew back.

"Give them to mother, Blossom, she never eats a bite of breakfast," he
said. He was the only one of Sarah's sons who ever considered her, but
she was apt to regard this as a sign of weakness and to resent it with
contumely.

"I ain't hungry," she replied grimly, "an' I reckon I'd rather you'd say
less about my comfort, Abel, and do mo'. Buckwheat cakes don't come well
from a son that flies into his mother's face on the matter of eternal
damnation."

Without replying, Abel helped himself to the cakes she had refused and
reached for the jug of molasses. Sarah was in one of her nagging moods,
he knew, and she disturbed him but little. The delight and the desire of
first love was upon him, and he was thinking rapturously of the big pine
that would go to the building of Molly's house.

Grandmother, who wanted syrup, began to cry softly because she must eat
her tasteless mush. "He's got the stomach to stand it," she repeated
bitterly, while her tears fell into her bowl.

"What is it, granny? Will you try a bite of buckwheat?" inquired Sarah
solicitously. She had never failed in her duty to her husband's parents,
and this virtue also, she was inclined to use as a weapon of offense to
her children.

"Give it to him--he's got teeth left to chaw on," whimpered grandmother,
and her old chest heaved with bitterness because grandfather, who was
three years the elder, still retained two jaw teeth on one side of his
mouth.

A yellow-and-white cat, after vainly purring against grandmother's
stool, had jumped on the window-sill in pursuit of a belated wasp, and
Sarah, rushing to the rescue of her flowers, cuffed the animal soundly
and placed her in grandfather's lap. He was a lover of cats--a harmless
fancy which was a source of unceasing annoyance to his wife.

"Abel, I wish you'd mend that leak in the smokehouse after breakfast,"
remarked Sarah, in an aggressive tone that meant battle. "Two shingles
are gone an' thare four more that want patchin'."

"I can't, I've got work to do at the mill," replied Abel, as he rose
from his chair. "Solomon Hatch sent me his corn to grind and he's coming
over to get the sacks."

"Well, I reckon I'm worth as much as Solomon Hatch, a little pasty faced
critter like that," rejoined Sarah.

"Why can't Archie do it? What is he good for?"

"I'm going hunting with Jim Halloween," returned Archie sullenly, "he's
got some young dogs he wants to break in to rabbit running."

"I might have known thar warn't nobody to do what I ask 'em," observed
Sarah in the voice and manner of a martyr. "It's rabbits or girls,
one or the other, and if it ain't an old hare it's some light-moraled
critter like Molly Merryweather."

Abel's face had changed to a dull red and his eyes blazed.

"Say anything against Molly, mother, an' I'll never speak to you again!"
he cried out angrily.

"Thar, thar, ma, you an' Abel are too pepper tongued to get into a
quarrel," remarked Abner, the silent, who seldom spoke except for the
promotion of peace. "I'll mend the roof for you whenever you want it."

"I reckon I've got as much right to use my tongue as anybody else has,"
retorted Sarah, indignant because a solution had been found and her
grievance was annulled. "If a girl ain't a fast one that gets as good as
engaged to half the young men in the county, then I'd like to know who
is, that's all?"

Then, as Abel called sharply to his fox-hound puppy and flung himself
from the room, she turned away and went to sprinkle her calla lilies.
There was an agony in her breast, though she would have bitten out her
tongue sooner than have confessed it. Her strength lay in the fact that
never in her life had she admitted even to herself, that she had been in
the wrong.



CHAPTER V


THE MILL


Outside, a high wind was driving the fallen leaves in swirls and eddies,
and as Abel crossed the road to the mill, he smelt the sharp autumn
scent of the rotting mould under the trees. Frost still sparkled on the
bright green grasses that had overgrown the sides of the mill-race, and
the poplar log over the stream was as wet as though the dancing shallows
had skimmed it. Over the motionless wheel the sycamore shed its broad
yellow leaves into the brook, where they fluttered downward with a noise
that was like the wind in the tree-tops.

Inserting a key into the rusty lock, which was much too large for it,
Abel opened the door, and counted Solomon Hatch's sacks of grist, which
stood in a row beside a raised platform where an old mill-stone was
lying. Other sacks belonging to other farmers were arranged in
an orderly group in one corner, and his eye passed to them in a
businesslike appraisement of their contents. According to an established
custom of toll, the eighth part of the grain belonged to the miller;
and this had enabled him to send his own meal to the city markets, where
there was an increasing demand for the coarse, water-ground sort. Some
day he purposed to turn out the old worn-out machinery and supply its
place with modern inventions, but as yet this ambition was remote, and
the mill, worked after the process of an earlier century, had raised his
position to one of comparative comfort and respectability. He was
known to be a man of character and ambition. Already his name had been
mentioned as a possible future representative of the labouring classes
in the Virginia assembly. "There is no better proof of the grit that is
in the plain people than the rise of Abel Revercomb out of Abner, his
father," some one had said of him. And from the day when he had picked
his first blackberries for old Mr. Jonathan and tied his earnings in a
stocking foot as the beginning of a fund for schooling, the story of his
life had been one of struggle and of endurance. Transition had been the
part of the generation before him. In him the democratic impulse was
no longer fitful and uncertain, but had expanded into a stable and
indestructible purpose.

Before starting the wheel, which he did by thrusting his arm through the
window and lifting the gate on the mill-race, Abel took up a broom, made
of sedges bound crudely together, and swept the smooth bare floor, which
was polished like that of a ballroom by the sacks of meal that had been
dragged back and forth over the boards. From the rafters above, long
pale cobwebs were blown gently in the draught between the door and
window, and when the mill had started, the whole building reverberated
to the slow revolutions of the wheel outside.

The miller had poured Solomon Hatch's grist into the hopper, and was
about to turn the wooden crank at the side, when a shadow fell over the
threshold, and Archie Revercomb appeared, with a gun on his shoulder and
several fox-hounds at his heels.

"You'll have to get Abner to help you dress that mill-rock, Abel," he
said, "I'm off for the morning. That's a good pup of yours, but he's old
enough to begin learning."

With the inherited idleness of the Revercombs, he combined the
headstrong impulses and dogged obstinacy of his mother's stock, yet
because of his personal charm, these faults were not only tolerated but
even admired by his family.

"You're always off in the mornings when there's work to be done,"
replied Abel, "but for heaven's sake, bring home a string of hares to
put ma into a better humour. She whets her tongue on me and I'll be
hanged if it's right."

"She never used to do it till you went over to Mr. Mullen's church and
fell in love with Molly Merryweather. Great Scott, I'm glad I don't
stand in either of your shoes when it comes to that. Life's too short to
pay for your religion or your sweetheart every day you live."

"It would have been the same anyway--she's put out with me about
nothing. I had a right to go to Old Church if I wanted to, and what on
earth has she got against Mr. Mullen anyway, except that he couldn't
recite the first chapter in Chronicles? What kind of religion does that
take I'd like to know?"

The meal poured softly out of the valve into the trough beneath, and
lifting a wooden scoop he bent over and scattered the pile in the
centre. A white dust had settled on his hair and clothes, and this
accentuated the glow in his face and gave to his whole appearance a
picturesque and slightly theatrical cast.

"If it hadn't been Molly, it would have been some one else," he added
impulsively. "Ma would be sure to hate any woman she thought I'd fallen
in love with. It's born in her to be contrary just as it is in that
hopvine out yonder that you can't train up straight."

"All the same, if I were going through fire and water for a girl, I'd be
pretty sure to choose one that would make it worth my while at the end.
I wouldn't put up with all that hectoring for the sake of anybody that
was as sweet to half a dozen other fellows as she was to me."

Abel's face darkened threateningly under his silvered hair.

"If you are trying to hint anything against Molly, you'd as well stop in
the beginning," he said. "It isn't right--I'll be hanged if it is!--that
every man in the county should be down on a little thing like that, no
bigger than a child. It wasn't her fault, was it, if her father played
false with her mother?"

"Oh, I'm not blaming her, am I? As far as that goes all the women like
her well enough, and so do all the dogs and the children. The trouble
seems to be, doesn't it, merely that the men like her too much? She's
got a way with her, there's no question about that."

"Why in thunder do you want to blacken her character?"

"I wasn't blackenin' her character. I merely meant that she was a flirt,
and you know that as well as I do--better, I shouldn't wonder."

"It's the way she was brought up. Her mother was crazy for ten years
before she died, and she taught Molly all that foolishness about the
meanness of men."

"Oh, well, it's all right," said Archie carelessly, "only look out that
you don't go too near the fire and get scorched."

Whistling to the hounds that were nosing among some empty barrels in a
dark corner, he shouldered his gun more firmly and went off to his hunt.

After he had gone, the miller stood for a long while, watching the
meal pour from the valve. A bit of chaff had settled on his lashes,
but without moving his hand to brush it away, he shook his head once
or twice with the gesture of an animal that is stung by a wasp. "Why do
they keep at me about her?" he asked passionately. "Is it true that she
is only playing with me as she plays with the others?"--but the pain was
too keen, and turning away with a sigh, he rested his elbows on the
sill of the window and looked out at the moving wheel under the gauzy
shadows. The sound of the water as it rushed through the mill-race into
the buckets and then fell from the buckets into the whirlpool beneath,
was loud in his ears while his quick glance, passing over the drifting
yellow leaves of the sycamore, discerned a spot of vivid red in the
cornlands beyond. The throbbing of his pulses rather than the assurance
of his eyes told him that Molly was approaching; and as the bit of
colour drew nearer amid the stubble, he recognized the jacket of crimson
wool that the girl wore as a wrap on chill autumn mornings. On her head
there was a small knitted cap matching the jacket, and this resting on
her riotous brown curls, lent a touch of boyish gallantry to her slender
figure. Like most women of mobile features and ardent temperament, her
beauty depended so largely upon her mood that Abel had seen her change
from positive plainness to amazing loveliness in the space of a minute.
Her small round face, with its wonderful eyes, dimpled now over the
crimson jacket.

"Abel!" she called softly, and paused with one foot on the log while the
water sparkled beneath her. Ten minutes before he had vowed to himself
that she had used him badly and he would hold off until she made
sufficient amends; but in forming this resolution, he had reckoned
without the probable intervention of Molly.

"I thought--as long as I was going by--that I'd stop and speak to you,"
she said.

He shook his head, unsoftened as yet by her presence. "You didn't treat
me fair yesterday, Molly," he answered.

"Oh, I wanted to tell you about that. I quite meant to go with you--only
it went out of my head."

"That's a pretty excuse, isn't it, to offer a man?"

"Well, you aren't the only one I've offered it to," she dimpled
enchantingly, "the rector had to be satisfied with it as well. He asked
me, too, and when I forgot I'd promised you, I said I'd go with him to
see old Abigail. Then I forgot that, too," she added with a penitent
sigh, "and went down to the low grounds."

"You managed to come up in time to meet Mr. Jonathan at the
cross-roads," he commented with bitterness.

A less daring adventurer than Molly would have hesitated at his tone and
grown cautious, but a certain blithe indifference to the consequences of
her actions was a part of her lawless inheritance from the Gays.

"I think him very good-looking, don't you?" she inquired sweetly.

"Good-looking? I should think not--a fat fop like that."

"Is he fat? I didn't notice it--but, of course, I didn't mean that he
was good-looking in your way, Abel."

The small flowerlike shadows trembled across her face, and beneath her
feet the waves churned a creamy foam that danced under her like light.
His eyes warmed to her, yet he held back, gripped by a passion of
jealousy. For the first time he felt that he was brought face to face
with a rival who might prove to have the advantage.

"I am coming over!" called Molly suddenly, and a minute later she stood
in the square sunshine that entered the mill door.

Had he preserved then his manner of distant courtesy, it is probable
that she would have melted, for it was not in her temperament to draw
back while her prey showed an inclination for flight. But it was his
nature to warm too readily and to cool too late, a habit of constitution
which causes, usually, a tragedy in matters of sex.

"You oughtn't to treat me so, Molly!" he exclaimed reproachfully, and
made a step toward her.

"I couldn't help forgetting, could I? It was your place to remind me."

Thrust, to his surprise, upon the defensive he reached for her hand,
which was withdrawn after it had lain an instant in his.

"Well, it was my fault, then," he said with a generosity that did him
small service. "The next time I'll remind you every minute."

She smiled radiantly as he looked at her, and he felt that her
indiscretions, her lack of constancy, her unkindness even, were but the
sportive and innocent freaks of a child. In his rustic sincerity he was
forever at the point of condemning her and forever relenting before the
appealing sweetness of her look. He told himself twenty times a day that
she flirted outrageously with him, though he still refused to admit that
in her heart she was to blame for her flirting. A broad and charitable
distinction divided always the thing that she was from the thing that
she did. It was as if his love discerned in her a quality of soul of
which she was still unconscious.

"Molly," he burst out almost fiercely, "will you marry me?"

The smile was still in her eyes, but a slight frown contracted her
forehead.

"I've told you a hundred times that I shall never marry anybody," she
answered, "but that if I ever did---"

"Then you'd marry me."

"Well, if I were obliged to marry _somebody_, I'd rather marry you than
anybody else."

"So you do like me a little?"

"Yes, I suppose I like you a little--but all men are the same--mother
used always to tell me so."

Poor distraught Janet Merryweather! There were times when he was seized
with a fierce impatience of her, for it seemed to him that her ghost
stood, like the angel with the drawn sword, before the closed gates of
his paradise. He remembered her as a passionate frail creature, with
accusing eyes that had never lost the expression with which they had met
and passed through some hour of despair and disillusionment.

"But how could she judge, Molly? How could she judge?" he pleaded "She
was ill, she wasn't herself, you must know it. All men are not alike.
Didn't I fight her battles more than once, when you were a child?"

"I know, I know," she answered gratefully, "and I love you for it.
That's why I don't mind telling you what I've never told a single one of
the others. I haven't any heart, Abel, that's the truth. It's all play
to me, and I like the game sometimes and sometimes I hate it. Yet,
whether I like it or hate it, I always go on because I can't help it.
Your mother once said I had a devil that drives me on and perhaps she
was right--it may be that devil that drives me on and won't let me stop
even when I'm tired, and it all bores me. The rector thinks that I'll
marry him and turn pious and take to Dorcas societies, and Jim Halloween
thinks I'll marry him and grow thrifty and take to turkey raising--and
you believe in the bottom of your heart that in the end I'll fall
into your arms and find happiness with your mother. But you're
wrong--all--all--and I shan't do any of the things you expect of me. I
am going to stay here as long as grandfather lives, so I can take care
of him, and then I'll run off somewhere to the city and trim hats for a
living. When I was at school in Applegate I trimmed hats for all of the
pupils."

"Oh, Molly, Molly, I'll not give you up! Some day you'll see things
differently."

"Never--never. Now, I've warned you and it isn't my fault if you keep on
after this."

"But you do like me a little, haven't you said so?"

Her frown deepened.

"Yes, I do like you--a little."

"Then I'll keep on hoping, anyhow."

Her smile came back, but this time it had grown mocking.

"No, you mustn't hope," she answered, "at least," she corrected
provokingly, "you mustn't hope--too hard."

"I'll hope as hard as the devil, darling--and, Molly, if you marry me,
you know, you won't have to live with my mother."

"I like that, even though I'm not going to marry you."

"Come here," he drew her toward the door, "and I'll show you where our
house will stand. Do you see that green rise of ground over the meadow?"

"Yes, I see it," her tone was gentler.

"I've chosen that site for a home," he went on, "and I'm saving a good
strip of pine--you can see it over there against the horizon. I've half
a mind to take down my axe and cut down the biggest of the trees this
afternoon!"

If his ardour touched her there was no sign of it in the movement with
which she withdrew herself from his grasp.

"You'd better finish your grinding. There isn't the least bit of a
hurry," she returned with a smile.

"If you'll go with me, Molly, you may take your choice and I'll cut the
tree down for you."

"But I can't, Abel, because I've promised Mr. Mullen to visit his
mother."

The glow faded from his eyes and a look like that of an animal under the
lash took its place.

"Come with me, not with him, Molly, you owe me that much," he entreated.

"But he's such a good man, and he preaches such beautiful sermons."

"He does--I know he does, but I love you a thousand times better."

"Oh, he loves me because I am pretty and hard to win--just as you do,"
she retorted. "If I lost my hair or my teeth how many of you, do you
think, would care for me to-morrow?"

"I should--before God I'd love you just as I do now," he answered with
passion.

A half mocking, half tender sound broke from her lips.

"Then why don't you--every one of you, fall head over ears in love with
Judy Hatch?" she inquired.

"I don't because I loved you first, and I can't change, however badly
you treat me. I'm sometimes tempted to think, Molly, that mother is
right, and you are possessed of a devil."

"Your mother is a hard woman, and I pity the wife you bring home to
her."

The softness had gone out of her voice at the mention of Sarah's name,
and she had grown defiant and reckless.

"I don't think you are just to my mother, Molly," he said after a
moment, "she has a kind heart at bottom, and when she nags at you it is
most often for your good."

"I suppose it was for my mother's good that she kept her from going to
church and made the old minister preach a sermon against her?"

"That's an old story--you were only a month old. Can't you forget it?"

"I'll never forget it--not even at the Day of Judgment. I don't care how
I'm punished."

Her violence, which seemed to him sinful and unreasonable, reduced him
to a silence that goaded her to a further expression of anger. While
she spoke he watched her eyes shine green in the sunlight, and he told
himself that despite her passionate loyalty to her mother, the blood of
the Gays ran thicker in her veins than that of the Merryweathers. Her
impulsiveness, her pride, her lack of self-control, all these marked her
kinship not to Reuben Merryweather, but to Jonathan Gay. The qualities
against which she rebelled cried aloud in her rebellion. The inheritance
she abhorred endowed her with the capacity for that abhorrence. While
she accused the Gays, she stood revealed a Gay in every tone, in every
phrase, in every gesture.

"It isn't you, Molly, that speaks like that," he said, "it's something
in you." She had tried his patience almost to breaking, yet in the very
strain and suffering she put upon him, she had, all unconsciously to
them both, strengthened the bond by which she held him.

"If I'd known you were going to preach, I shouldn't have stopped to
speak to you," she rejoined coldly. "I'd rather hear Mr. Mullen."

He stood the attack without flinching, his hazel eyes full of an angry
light and the sunburnt colour in his face paling a little. Then when she
had finished, he turned slowly away and began tightening the feed strap
of the mill.

For a minute Molly paused on the threshold in the band of sunlight. "For
God's sake speak, Abel," she said at last, "what pleasure do you think I
find in being spiteful when you won't strike back?"

"I'll never strike back; you may keep up your tirading forever."

"I wouldn't have said it if I'd known you'd take it so quietly."

"Quietly? Did you expect me to pick you up and throw you into the
hopper?"

"I shouldn't have cared--it would have been better than your expression
at this minute. It's all your fault anyway, for not falling in love with
Judy Hatch, as I told you to."

"Don't worry. Perhaps I shall in the end. Your tantrums would wear the
patience of a Job out at last. It seems that you can't help despising a
man just as soon as he happens to love you."

"I wonder if that's true?" she said a little sadly, turning away from
him until her eyes rested on the green rise of ground over the meadow,
"I've seen men like that as soon as they were sure of their wives, and
I've hated them for it."

"What I can't understand," he pursued, not without bitterness, "is why
in thunder a man or a woman who isn't married should put up with it for
an instant?"

At his words she left the door and came slowly back to his side, where
he bent over the meal trough.

"The truth is that I like you better than anyone in the world, except
grandfather," she said, "but I hate love-making. When I see that look
in a man's face and feel the touch of his hands upon me I want to strike
out and kill. My mother was that way before I was born, and I drank it
in with her milk, I suppose."

"I know it isn't you fault, Molly, and yet, and yet---"

She sighed, half pitying his suffering, half impatient of his
obtuseness. As he turned away, her gaze rested on his sunburnt neck,
rising from the collar of his blue flannel shirt, and she saw that his
hair ended in a short, boyish ripple that was powdered with mill-dust. A
sudden tenderness for him as for a child or an animal pierced her like a
knife.

"I shouldn't mind your kissing me just once, if you'd like to, Abel,"
she said.

A little later, when he had helped her over the stile and she was
returning home through the cornlands, she asked herself with passionate
self-reproach why she had yielded to pity? She had felt sorry for Abel,
and because she had felt sorry she had allowed him to kiss her. "Only
I meant him to do it gently and soberly," she thought, "and he was so
rough and fierce that he frightened me. I suppose most girls like that
kind of thing, but I don't, and I shan't, if I live to be a hundred.
I've got no belief in it--I've got no belief in anything, that is the
trouble. I'm twisted out of shape, like the crooked sycamore by the
mill-race."

A sigh passed her lips, and, as if in answer to the sound, there came
the rumble of approaching wheels in the turnpike. As she climbed the low
rail fence which divided the corn-lands from the highway, she met the
old family carriage from Jordan's Journey returning with the two ladies
on the rear seat. The younger, a still pretty woman of fifty years, with
shining violet eyes that seemed always apologizing for their owner's
physical weakness, leaned out and asked the girl, in a tone of gentle
patronage, if she would ride with the driver?

"Thank you, Mrs. Gay, it's only a quarter of a mile and I don't mind the
walk."

"We've brought an overcoat--Kesiah and I--a good thick one, for your
grandfather. It worried us last winter that he went so lightly clad
during the snow storms."

Molly's face changed, and her eyes sparkled with pleasure.

"Oh, thank you, thank you!" she exclaimed, losing her manner of distant
politeness. "I've been trying to persuade him to buy one, but he hates
to spend money on himself."

Kesiah, who had leaned back during the conversation, with the scowling
look she wore when her heart was moved, nodded grimly while she felt in
the black travelling bag she carried for Mrs. Gay's salts. She was one
of those unfortunate women of a past generation, who, in offering no
allurement to the masculine eye, appeared to defeat the single end
for which woman was formed. As her very right to existence lay in her
possible power to attract, the denial of that power by nature, or the
frustration of it by circumstances, had deprived her, almost from
the cradle, of her only authoritative reason for being. Her small,
short-sighted eyes, below a false front which revealed rather than
obscured her bare temples, flitted from object to object as though in
the vain pursuit of some outside justification of her indelicacy in
having permitted herself to be born.

"Samson tells me that my son has come, Molly," said Mrs. Gay, in a
flutter of emotion. "Have you had a glimpse of him yet?"

The girl nodded. "He took supper at our house the night he got here."

"It was such a surprise. Was he looking well?"

"Very well, I thought, but it was the first time I had seen him, you
know."

"Ah, I forgot. Are you sure you won't get in, child? Well, drive on,
Samson, and be very careful of that bird cage."

Samson drove on at the command, and Molly, plodding obstinately after
the carriage, was enveloped shortly in the cloud of dust that floated
after the wheels.



CHAPTER VI


TREATS OF THE LADIES' SPHERE


As the carriage rolled up the drive, there was a flutter of servants
between the white columns, and Abednego, the old butler, pushed aside
the pink-turbaned maids and came down to assist his mistress to alight.

"Take the bird cage, Abednego, I've bought a new canary," said Mrs. Gay.
"Here, hold my satchel, Nancy, and give Patsey the wraps and umbrellas."

She spoke in a sweet, helpless voice, and this helplessness was
expressed in every lovely line of her figure. The most casual observer
would have discerned that she had surrendered all rights in order to
grasp more effectively at all the privileges. She was clinging and small
and delicate and her eyes, her features, her plaintive gestures, united
in an irresistible appeal to emotions.

"Where is Jonathan?" she asked, "I hoped he would welcome me."

"So I do, dearest mother--so I do," replied the young man, running
hurriedly down the steps and then slipping his arm about her. "You came
a minute or two earlier than I expected you, or I should have met you in
the drive."

Half supporting, half carrying her, he led the way into the house and
placed her on a sofa in the long drawing-room.

"I am afraid the journey has been too much for you," he said tenderly.
"Shall I tell Abednego to bring you a glass of wine."

"Kesiah will mix me an egg and a spoonful of sherry, dear, she knows
just how much is good for me."

Kesiah, still grasping her small black bag, went into the dining-room
and returned, bearing a beaten egg, which she handed to her sister.
In her walk there was the rigid austerity of a saint who has adopted
saintliness not from inclination, but from the force of a necessity
against which rebellion has been in vain. Her plain, prominent features
wore, from habit, a look of sullen martyrdom that belied her natural
kindness of heart; and even her false brown front was arranged in
little hard, flat curls, as though an artificial ugliness were less
reprehensible in her sight than an artificial beauty.

In the midst of the long room flooded with sunshine, the little lady
reclined on her couch and sipped gently from the glass Kesiah had handed
her. The tapestried furniture was all in soft rose, a little faded from
age, and above the high white wainscoting on the plastered walls, this
same delicate colour was reflected in the rich brocaded gowns in the
family portraits. In the air there was the faint sweet scent of cedar
logs that burned on the old andirons.

"So you came all the way home to see your poor useless mother,"
murmured Mrs. Gay, shielding her cheek from the firelight with a peacock
hand-screen.

"I wanted to see for myself how you stand it down here--and, by Jove,
it's worse even than I imagined! How the deuce have you managed to drag
out twenty years in a wilderness like this among a tribe of barbarians?"

"It is a great comfort to me, dear, to think that I came here on your
uncle's account and that I am only following his wishes in making the
place my home. He loved the perfect quiet and restfulness of it."

"Quiet! With that population of roosters making the dawn hideous! I'd
choose the quiet of Piccadilly before that of a barnyard."

"You aren't used to country noises yet, and I suppose at first they are
trying."

"Do you drive? Do you walk? How do you amuse yourself?"

"One doesn't have amusement when one is a hopeless invalid; one has only
medicines. No, the roads are too heavy for driving except for a month or
two in the summer. I can't walk of course, because of my heart, and as
there has been no man on the place for ten years, I do not feel that
it is safe for Kesiah to go off the lawn by herself. Once she got into
quite a dreadful state about her liver and lack of exercise--(poor dear
mother used to say that the difference between the liver of a lady and
that of another person, was that one required no exercise and the
other did)--but Kesiah, who is the best creature in the world, is very
eccentric in some ways, and she imagines that her health suffers when
she is kept in the house for several years. Once she got into a temper
and walked a mile or two on the road, but when she returned I was in
such a state of nervousness that she promised me never to leave the lawn
again unless a gentleman was with her."

"What an angel you must be to have suffered so much and complained so
little!" he exclaimed with fervour, kissing her hand.

Her eyes, which reminded him of dying violets, drooped over him above
the peacock feathers she waved gently before her.

"Poor Kesiah, it is hard on her, too," she observed, "and I sometimes
think she is unjust enough to blame me in her heart."

"But she doesn't feel things as you do, one can tell that to look at
her."

"She isn't so sensitive and silly, you dear boy, but my poor nerves are
responsible for that, you must remember. If Kesiah had been a man she
would have been an artist, and it was really a pity that she happened to
be born a woman. When she was young she had a perfect mania for drawing,
and it used to distress mother so much. A famous portrait painter--I
can't recall his name though I am sure it began with S--saw one of her
sketches by accident and insisted that we ought to send her to Paris to
study. Kesiah was wild to go at the time, but of course it was out of
the question that a Virginia lady should go off by herself and paint
perfectly nude people in a foreign city. There was a dreadful scene, I
remember, and Kesiah even wrote to Uncle William Burwell and asked him
to come down and win mother over. He came immediately, for he was the
kindest soul, but, of course after he understood, he decided against
it. Why on earth should a girl want to go streaking across the water to
study art, he asked, when she had a home she could stay in and men folk
who could look after her? They both told her she made herself ridiculous
when she talked of ambition, and as they wouldn't promise her a penny
to live on, she was obliged in the end to give up the idea. She nursed
mother very faithfully, I must say, as long as she lived, never leaving
her a minute night or day for the last year of her illness. Don't
misjudge poor Kesiah, Jonathan, she has a good heart at bottom, though
she has always been a little soured on account of her disappointment."

"Oh, she was cut out for an old maid, one can see that," rejoined Gay,
only half interested in the history of his aunt, for he seldom exerted
his imagination except under pressure of his desires, "and, by the way,
mother, what kind of man was my Uncle Jonathan?"

"The dearest creature, my son, heaven alone knows what his loss meant
to me! Such consideration! Such generosity! Such delicacy! He and Kesiah
never got on well, and this was the greatest distress to me."

"Did you ever hear any queer stories about him? Was he--well--ah, wild,
would you say?"

"Wild? Jonathan, I am surprised at you! Why, during the twenty years
that I knew him he never let fall so much as a single indelicate word in
my presence."

"I don't mean that exactly--but what about his relations with the women
around here?"

She flinched as if his words had struck her a blow.

"Dear Jonathan, your poor uncle would never have asked such a question."

Above the mantel there was an oil portrait of the elder Jonathan at the
age of three, painted astride the back of an animal that disported the
shape of a lion under the outward covering of a lamb.

"Ah, that's just it," commented Gay, while his inquiring look hung on
the picture. After a minute of uncertainty, his curiosity triumphed over
his discretion and he put, in an apologetic tone, an equally indelicate
question. "What about old Reuben Merryweather's granddaughter? Has she
been provided for?"

For an instant Mrs. Gay looked at him with shining, reproachful eyes
under a loosened curl of fair hair which was threaded with sliver. Those
eyes, very blue, very innocent, seemed saying to him, "Oh, be careful,
I am so sensitive. Remember that I am a poor frail creature, and do not
hurt me. Let me remain still in my charmed circle where I have always
lived, and where no unpleasant reality has ever entered." The quaint
peacock screen, brought from China by old Jonathan, cast a shadow on her
cheek, which was flushed to the colour of a faded rose leaf.

"Yes, the girl is an orphan, it is very sad," she replied, and her tone
added, "but what can I do about it? I am a woman and should know nothing
of such matters!"

"Was she mentioned in my uncles's will, do you remember?"

His handsome, well-coloured face had taken a sudden firmness of outline,
and even the sagging flesh of his chin appeared to harden with the
resolve of the moment. Across his forehead, under the fine dark hair
which had worn thin on the temples, three frowning wrinkles leaped out
as if in response to some inward pressure.

"There was something--I can't remember just what it was--Mr.
Chamberlayne will tell you about it when he comes down to-morrow to talk
over business with Kesiah. They keep all such things away from me out of
consideration for my heart. But I've never doubted for an instant that
your uncle did everything that was just and generous in the matter. He
sent the girl to a good school in Applegate, I remember, and there was
a bequest of some sort, I believe--something that she comes into on her
twenty-first birthday."

"She isn't twenty-one then, is she?"

"I don't know, Jonathan, I really can't remember."

"Perhaps Aunt Kesiah can tell me something about her?"

"Oh, she can and she will--but Kesiah is so violent in all her opinions!
I had to ask her never to mention Brother Jonathan's name to me because
she made me quite ill once by some dreadful hints she let fall about
him."

She leaned back wearily as if the conversation had exhausted her, while
the peacock firescreen slipped from her hand and dropped on the white
fur rug at her feet.

"If you'll call Kesiah, Jonathan, I'll go upstairs for a rest," she said
gently, yet with a veiled reproach. "The journey tired me, but I forgot
it in the pleasure of seeing you."

All contrition at once, he hastily summoned Kesiah from the storeroom,
and between them, with several solicitous maids in attendance, they
carried the fragile little lady up to her chamber, where a fire of
resinous pine was burning in the big colonial fireplace.

An hour afterwards, when Kesiah had seen her sister peacefully dozing,
she went, for the first time since her return, into her own bedroom, and
stood looking down on the hearth, where the servants had forgotten to
light the sticks that were laid cross-wise on the andirons. It was the
habit of those about her to forget her existence, except when she
was needed to render service, and after more than fifty years of such
omissions, she had ceased, even in her thought, to pass judgment upon
them. In her youth she had rebelled fiercely--rebelled against nature,
against the universe, against the fundamental injustice that divided her
sister's lot from her own. Generations existed only to win love or to
bestow it. Inheritance, training, temperament, all combined to develop
the racial instinct within her, yet something stronger than these--some
external shaping of clay--had unfitted her for the purpose for which
she was designed. And since, in the eyes of her generation, any
self-expression from a woman, which was not associated with sex, was
an affront to convention, that single gift of hers was doomed to wither
away in the hot-house air that surrounded her. A man would have struck
for freedom, and have made a career for himself in the open world, but
her nature was rooted deep in the rich and heavy soil from which she
had tried to detach it. Years after her first fight, on the day of her
mother's death, she had suffered a brief revival of youth; and then she
had pulled in vain at the obstinate tendrils that held her to the spot
in which she had grown. She was no longer penniless, she was no longer
needed, but she was crushed. The power of revolt was the gift of
youth. Middle-age could put forth only a feeble and ineffectual
resistance--words without passion, acts without abandonment. At times
she still felt the old burning sense of injustice, the old resentment
against life, but this passed quickly now, and she grew quiet as soon
as her eyes fell on the flat, spare figure, a little bent in the
chest, which her mirror revealed to her. The period was full of woman's
advancement--a peaceful revolution had triumphed around her--yet she had
taken no part in it, and the knowledge left her unmoved. She had read
countless novels that acclaimed hysterically the wrongs of her sex, but
beneath the hysterics she had perceived the fact that the newer woman
who grasped successfully the right to live, was as her elder sister
who had petitioned merely for the privilege to love. The modern heroine
could still charm even after she had ceased to desire to. Neither in the
new fiction nor in the old was there a place for the unhappy woman who
desired to charm but could not; she remained what she had always been--a
tragic perversion of nature which romance and realism conspired to
ignore. Women in novels had revolted against life as passionately as
she--but one and all they had revolted in graceful attitudes and
with abundant braids of hair. A false front not only extinguished
sentiment--it put an end to rebellion.

"Miss Kesiah, dar's Marse Reuben in de hall en he sez he'd be moughty
glad ef'n you'd step down en speak a wud wid 'im."

"In a moment, Abednego. I must take off my things."

Withdrawing the short jet-headed pins from her bonnet with a hurried
movement, she stabbed them into the hard round pincushion on her bureau,
and after throwing a knitted cape over her shoulders, went down the wide
staircase to where Reuben awaited her in the hall. As she walked she
groped slightly and peered ahead of her with her nervous, short-sighted
gaze.

At the foot of the staircase, the old man was standing in a patient
attitude, resting upon his wooden leg, which was slightly in advance
of his sound one. His fine bearded face might have been the face of a
scholar, except for its roughened skin and the wistful, dog-like look in
the eyes.

In response to Kesiah's greeting, he explained that he had come at once
to acknowledge the gift of the overcoat and to "pay his respects."

"I am glad you like it," she answered, and because her heart was
swelling with kindness, she stammered and grew confused while the
anxious frown deepened between her eyebrows. A morbid horror of making
herself ridiculous prevented her always from making herself understood.

"It will be very useful to me, ma'am, when I am out of doors in bad
weather," he replied, wondering if he had offended her by his visit.

"We got it for that purpose," and becoming more embarrassed, she added
hastily, "How is the red cow, Mr. Merryweather?"

"She mends slowly, ma'am. I am givin' her bran mash twice a day and
keepin' her in the barn. Have you noticed the hogs? They're a fine lot
this year and we'll get some good hams at the killin'."

"No, I hadn't looked at them, but I've been struck with the corn you've
brought up recently from the low grounds."

For a minute or two they discussed the crops, both painfully ill at ease
and uncertain whether to keep up the conversation or to let it trail
off into silence. Then at the first laboured pause, Reuben repeated his
message to Mrs. Gay and stamped slowly out of the back door into the
arms of Jonathan, who was about to enter.

"Halloo! So it's you!" exclaimed the young man in the genial tone which
seemed at once to dispel Kesiah's embarrassment. "I've wanted to talk
with you for two days, but I shan't detain you now for I happen to
know that your granddaughter is hunting for you already. I'll come up
to-morrow and chat awhile in the barn."

Reuben bowed and passed on, a little flattered by the other's intimate
tone, while Gay followed Kesiah into the drawing-room, and put a
question to her which had perplexed him since the night of his arrival.

"Aunt Kesiah, was old Reuben Merryweather on friendly terms with my
uncle?"

She started and looked at him with a nervous twitching of her eyelids.

"I think so, Jonathan, at least they appeared to be. Old Reuben was born
on the place when the Jordans still lived here, and I am sure your uncle
felt that it would be unjust to remove him. Then they fought through the
war together and were both dangerously wounded in the same charge."

He gazed at her a moment in silence, narrowing his intense blue eyes
which were so like the eyes of Reuben's granddaughter.

"Did my uncle show any particular interest in the girl?" he inquired,
and added a little bitterly, "It's not fair to me that I shouldn't know
just where I am standing."

"Yes, he did show a particular interest in her and was anxious that
she should be educated above her station. She was even sent off to a
boarding-school in Applegate, but she ran away during the middle of the
second session and came home. Her grandfather was ill with pneumonia,
and she is sincerely devoted to him, I believe."

"Was there any mention of her in Uncle Jonathan's will?"

"None whatever. He left instructions with Mr. Chamberlayne, however,
which are to be made known next April on Molly's twenty-first birthday.
It is all rather mysterious, but we only know that he owned considerable
property in the far West, which he left away from us and in trust to
his lawyer. I suppose he thought your mother would not be alive when
the girl came of age; for the doctors had agreed that she had only a few
years to live at the utmost."

"What in the devil did my poor mother have to do with it?"

She hesitated an instant, positively scowling in her perplexity.

"Only that I think--I believe your Uncle Jonathan would have married the
girl's mother--Janet Merryweather--but for your mother's influence."

"How in the deuce! You mean he feared the effect on her?"

"He broke it to her once--his intention, I mean--and for several days
afterwards we quite despaired of her life. It was then that she made him
promise--he was quite distracted with remorse for he adored Angela--that
he would never allude to it again while she was alive. We thought then
that it would be only for a short while, but she has outlived him ten
years in spite of her heart disease. One can never rely on doctors, you
know."

"But what became of the girl--of Janet Merryweather, I mean?"

"That was the sad part, though it happened so long ago--twenty
years--that people have almost forgotten. It seems that your uncle had
been desperate about her for a time--before Angela came to live with
him--and Janet counted rather recklessly upon his keeping his word and
marrying her as he had promised. When her trouble came she went quite
out of her mind--perfectly harmless, I believe, and with lucid intervals
in which she suffered from terrible melancholia. Her child inherits many
of her characteristics, I am told, though I've never heard any harm
of the girl except that she flirts with all the clowns in the
neighbourhood."

"Uncle Jonathan appears to have been too ready with his promises, but,
I suppose, he thought there was a difference between his obligation to
Janet Merryweather and to his brother's widow?"

"There was a difference, of course. Janet Merryweather could hardly have
had Angela's sensitive feelings--or at least it's a comfort to think
that, even if it happens not to be true. Before the war one hardly
ever heard of that class, mother used to say, it was so humble and
unpresuming--but in the last twenty-five or thirty years it has
overrun everything and most of the land about here has passed into its
possession."

She checked herself breathlessly, surprised and indignant that she
should have expressed her feelings so openly.

"Yes, I dare say," returned Jonathan--"The miller Revercomb is a good
example, I imagine, of just the thing you are speaking of--a kind of new
plant that has sprung up like fire-weed out of the ashes. Less than half
a century produced him, but he's here to stay, of that I am positive.
After all, why shouldn't he, when we get down to the question? He--or
the stock he represents, of course--is already getting hold of the
soil and his descendants will run the State financially as well as
politically, I suppose. We can't hold on, the rest of us--we're losing
grip--and in the end it will be pure pluck that counts wherever it comes
from."

"Ah, it's just that--pluck--but put the miller in the crucible
and you'll find how little pure gold there is to him. It is not in
prosperity, but in poverty that the qualities of race come to the
surface, and this remarkable miller of yours would probably be crushed
by a weight to which poor little Mrs. Bland at the post-office--she was
one of the real Carters, you know--would hardly bend her head."

"Perhaps you're right," he answered, and laughed shortly under his
breath, "but in that case how would you fix the racial characteristics
of that little firebrand, Molly Merryweather?"



CHAPTER VII


GAY RUSHES INTO A QUARREL AND SECURES A KISS


At dawn next morning Jonathan Gay, who had spent a restless night in
his uncle's room, came out into the circular drive with his gun on
his shoulder, and strolled in the direction of the meadows beyond the
haunted Poplar Spring at the end of the lawn. It was a rimy October
morning, and the sun rising slowly above the shadowy aspens in the
graveyard, shone dimly through the transparent silver veil that hung
over the landscape. The leaves, still russet and veined with purple on
the boughs overhead, lay in brown wind-rifts along the drive, where they
had been blown during the night before the changeful weather had settled
into a frosty stillness at daybreak.

"By Jove, it's these confounded acorns that keep me awake," thought Gay,
with a nervous irritation which was characteristic of him when he had
been disturbed. "A dozen ghosts couldn't have managed to make themselves
more of a nuisance."

Being an emotional person in a spasmodic and egotistical fashion,
he found himself thinking presently of Janet Merryweather, as he had
thought more than once during the wakeful hours of the night. He felt,
somehow, that she had been treated detestably, and he was angry with
his uncle for having left him, as he described it, "in such a deuce of a
hole." "One can't acknowledge the girl, I suppose, though for the matter
of that those tell-tale eyes of hers are not only an acknowledgment, but
a condemnation."

With a low whistle, he brought his gun quickly down from his shoulder as
a partridge, rising with a gentle whir from the red-topped orchard grass
in front of him, skimmed lightly into the golden pathway the sun made
through the mist. At the same instant a shot rang out close beside him,
and the bird dropped at his feet while Archie Revercomb sauntered slowly
across the pasture. A string of partridges and several rabbits hung
from his shoulder, and at his heels a pack of fox-hounds followed with
muzzles held close to the moist ground.

For a minute Gay's angry astonishment left him rooted to the spot.
Accustomed to the rigid game laws of England, and ignorant of the
habits of the country into which he had come, he saw in the act, not the
ancient Virginian acceptance of the bird as the right of the hunter, but
a lawless infringement of his newly acquired sense of possession.

"You confounded rogue!" he exclaimed hotly, "so you're not only shooting
my partridges, but you're actually shooting them before my eyes."

"What's that?" asked Archie, only half understanding the words, "were
you after that bird yourself then?"

"Well, rather, my friend, and I'll trouble you at the same time to hand
over that string on your shoulder."

"Hand them over? Well, I like that! Why, I shot them."

"But you shot them on my land didn't you?"

"What in the devil do you mean by that? My folks have shot over these
fields before yours were ever heard of about here. A bird doesn't happen
to be yours, I reckon, just because it takes a notion to fly over your
pasture."

"Do you mean to tell me that you don't respect a man's right to his
game?"

"A man's game is the bird in the bag, not in the air, I reckon. This
land was open hunting in the time of the Jordans, and we're not going to
keep off of it at the first bid of any Tom-fool that thinks he's got a
better right to it."

The assumption of justice angered Gay far more than the original
poaching had done. To be flouted in his own pasture on the subject of
his own game by a handsome barbarian, whom he had caught red-handed in
the act of stealing, would have appealed irresistibly to his sense of
humour, if it had not enraged him.

"All the same I give you fair warning," he retorted, "that the next time
I find you trespassing on my land, I'll have the law after you."

"The law--bosh! Do you think I'm afraid of it?"

Somewhere at the back of Gay's brain, a curtain was drawn, and he saw
clearly as if it were painted in water colour, an English landscape and
a poacher, who had been caught with a stolen rabbit, humbly pulling
the scant locks on his forehead. Well, this was one of the joys of
democracy, doubtless, and he was in for the rest of them. These people
had got the upper hand certainly, as Aunt Kesiah had complained.

"If you think I'll tamely submit to open robbery by such insolent
rascals as you, you're mistaken, young man," he returned.

The next instant he sprang aside and knocked up Archie's gun, which had
been levelled at him. The boy's face was white under his sunburn, and
the feathers on the partridges that hung from his shoulder trembled as
though a strong wind were blowing.

"Rascal, indeed!" he stammered, and spat on the ground after his words
in the effort to get rid of the taste of them, "as if the whole county
doesn't know that you're another blackguard like your uncle before you.
Ask any decent woman in the neighbourhood if she would have been seen in
his company!"

His rage choked him suddenly, and before he could speak again the other
struck him full in the mouth.

"Take that and hold your tongue, you young savage!"

Then as he stooped for his gun, which he had laid down, a shot passed
over his head and whizzed lightly across the meadow.

"The next time I'll take better aim!" called Archie, turning away. "I'll
shoot as straight as the man who gave your uncle his deserts down at
Poplar Spring!"

Whistling to his dogs, he ran on for a short distance; then vaulting the
rail fence he disappeared into the tangle of willows beside the stream
which flowed down from the mill.

While he watched him the anger in Gay's face faded slowly into disgust.

"Now I've stirred up a hornet's nest," he thought, annoyed by his
impetuosity. "Who, I wonder, was the fellow, and what a fool--what a
tremendous fool I have been!"

With his love of ease, of comfort, of popularity, the situation appeared
to him to be almost intolerable. The whole swarm would be at his head
now, he supposed; for instead of silencing the angry buzzing around his
uncle's memory, he had probably raised a tumult which would deafen his
own ears before it was over. Here, as in other hours and scenes, his
resolve had acted less as a restraint than as a spur which had impelled
him to the opposite extreme of conduct.

Still rebuking his impulsiveness, he shouldered his gun again, and
followed slowly in the direction Archie had taken. The half bared
willows by the brook distilled sparkling drops as the small red sun rose
higher over the meadows, and it was against the shimmering background of
foliage, that the figure of Blossom Revercomb appeared suddenly out of
the mist. Her scant skirts were lifted from the cobwebs on the grass,
and her mouth was parted while she called softly after a cow that had
strayed down to the willows.

"You, sir!" she exclaimed, and blushed enchantingly under the pearly dew
that covered her face. "One of our cows broke pasture in the night and
we think she must have crossed the creek and got over on your side of
the meadow. She's a wonderful jumper. We'll have to be hobbling her
soon, I reckon."

"Do you milk?" he asked, charmed by the mental picture of so noble a
dairymaid.

"Except when grandma is well enough. You can't leave it to the darkies
because they are such terrible slatterns. Put a cow in their hands and
she's sure to go dry before three months are over."

She looked up at him, while the little brown mole played hide and seek
with a dimple.

"Have you ever been told that you are beautiful, Miss Keren-happuch?" he
inquired with a laugh.

Her pale eyes, like frosted periwinkles, dropped softly beneath his
gaze.

"How can you think so, sir, when you have seen so many city ladies?"

"I've seen many, but not one so lovely as you are this morning with the
frost on your cheeks."

"I'm not dressed. I just slip on any old thing to go milking."

"It's not the dress, that doesn't matter--though I can imagine you in
trailing purple velvet with a trimming of sable."

An illumination shone in her face, as if her soul had suddenly
blossomed.

"Purple velvet, and what else did you say, sir?" she questioned.

"Sable--fur, you know, the richest, softest, queenliest fur there is."

"I'd like to see it," she rejoined.

"Well, it couldn't improve you!--remember always that the fewer fine
clothes you have on the better. Tell me, Blossom," he added, touching
her shoulder, "have you many lovers?"

She shook her head. "There are so few about here that any woman would
look at."

"I've been told that there's an engaging young rector."

"Mr. Mullen--well, so he is--and he preaches the most beautiful sermons.
But he fancies Molly Merryweather, they say, like all the others, though
he won't be likely to marry anybody from around here, I suppose."

Her drawling Southern tongue lent a charm, he felt, to her naive
disclosures.

"Like all the others?" he repeated smiling. "Do you mean to tell me
that Reuben's piquant little granddaughter is a greater belle in the
neighbourhood than you are?"

"She has a way with them," said Blossom sweetly. "I don't know what it
is and I am sure she is a good, kind girl--but I sometimes think men
like her because she is so contrary. My Uncle Abel has almost lost his
head about her, yet she plays fast and loose with him in the cruelest
fashion."

"Oh, well, she'll burn her fingers some day, at her own fire, and then
she'll be sorry."

"I don't want her to be sorry, but I do wish she'd try just a little
to be kind--one day she promises to marry Abel and the next you'd think
she'd taken a liking to Jim Halloween."

"Perhaps she has a secret sentiment for the rector?" he suggested, to
pique her.

"But I don't believe he will marry anybody around here," she insisted,
while the colour flooded her face.

The discovery that she had once cherished--that she still cherished,
perhaps, a regard for the young clergyman, added a zest to the
adventure, while it freed his passion from the single restraint of which
he had been aware. It was not in his nature to encourage a chivalrous
desire to protect a woman who had betrayed, however innocently, a
sentiment for another man. When the Reverend Mr. Mullen inadvertently
introduced an emotional triangle, he had changed the situation from one
of mere sentimental dalliance into direct pursuit. By some law of reflex
action, known only to the male mind at such instants, the first sign
that she was not to be won threw him into the mental attitude of the
chase.

"Are the fascinations of your Mr. Mullen confined to the pulpit?" he
inquired after a moment, "or does he wear them for the benefit of the
heterodox when he walks abroad?"

"Oh, he's not my Mr. Mullen, sir," she hastened to explain though her
words trailed off into a sound that was suspiciously like a sigh.

"Molly Merryweather's Mr. Mullen, then?"

"I don't think he cares for Molly--not in that way."

"Are you quite as sure that Molly doesn't care for him in that way?"

"She couldn't or she wouldn't be so cruel. Then she never goes to
lectures or Bible classes or mission societies. She is the only girl in
the congregation who never makes him anything to wear. Don't you think,"
she asked anxiously, "that if she really cared about him she would have
done some of these things?"

"From my observation of ladies and clergymen," replied Gay seriously, "I
should think that she would most likely have done all of them."

She appeared relieved, he thought, by the warmth of his protestation.
Actually Mr. Mullen had contributed a decided piquancy to the episode.

"I'm afraid, Blossom," he said after a moment, "that I am beginning
to be a little jealous of the Reverend Mullen. By the way, what is the
Christian name of the paragon?"

"Orlando, sir."

"Ye Gods! The horror grows! Describe him to me, but paint him mildly if
you wish me to survive it."

For a minute she thought very hard, as though patiently striving to
invoke a mental image.

"He's a little taller than you, but not quite--not quite so broad."

"Thank you, you _have_ put it mildly."

"He has the most beautiful curly hair--real chestnut--that grows in two
peaks high on his forehead. His eyes are grey and his mouth is small,
with the most perfect teeth. He doesn't wear any moustache, you see, to
hide them, and they flash a great deal when he preaches---"

"Hold on!"

"I beg you pardon, sir."

"I mean that I am overcome. I am mentally prostrated before such
perfections. Blossom, you are in love with him."

"Oh, no, sir; but I do like to watch him in the pulpit. He gesticulates
so beautifully."

"And now--speak truth and spare not--how do I compare with him?"

"Oh, Mr. Jonathan, you are so different!"

"Do you imply that I am ugly, Blossom?"

"Why, no--not ugly. Indeed I didn't mean that."

"But I'm not so handsome as Reverend Orlando?--now, confess it."

She blushed, and he thought her confusion the most charming he had ever
seen.

"Well, perhaps you aren't quite so--so handsome; but there's something
about you, sir," she added eagerly, "that reminds me of him."

"By Jove! You don't mean it!"

"I can't tell just what it is, but it is something. You both look as
though you'd lived in a city and had learned to wear your Sunday clothes
without remembering that they are your Sunday clothes. Of course, your
hair doesn't curl like his," she added honestly, "and I doubt if you'd
look nearly so well in the pulpit."

"I'm very sure I shouldn't, but Blossom---"

"What, Mr. Jonathan?"

"Do you think you will ever like me as well as you like Mr. Mullen?"

His gay and intimate smile awaited her answer, and in the pause, he
stretched out his hand and laid it on her large round arm a little
above the elbow. The flush deepened in her face, and he felt a slight
trembling under his fingers like the breast of a frightened bird.

"Blossom," he repeated, half mocking, half tender, "do you think you
will ever like me better than you like Mr. Mullen?"

At this her rustic pride came suddenly between them, and withdrawing
her arm from his clasp, she stepped out of the bridle path into the wet
orchard grass that surrounded them.

"I've known him so much longer," she replied.

"And if you know me longer will you like me better, Blossom?"

Then as she still drew back, he pressed nearer, and spoke her name again
in a whisper.

"Blossom--Blossom, are you afraid of me? Do you think I would hurt you?"

The gentleness in his voice stayed her flight for an instant, and in
that instant, as she looked up at him, he stooped quickly and kissed her
mouth.

"What a damned ass I've made of myself," he thought savagely, when she
broke from him and fled over the mill brook into the Revercombs' pasture
beyond. She did not look back, but sped as straight as a frightened hare
to the covert; and by this brilliant, though unconscious coquetry, she
had wrested the victory from him at the moment when it had appeared to
fall too easily into his hands.

"Well, it's all right now. I'll take better care in the future," he
thought, his self-reproach extinguished by the assurance that, after
all, he had done nothing that justified the intrusion of his conscience.
"By Jove, she's a beauty--but she's not my kind all the same," he added
as he strolled leisurely homeward--for like many persons whose moral
standard exceeds immeasurably their ordinary rule of conduct, he
cherished somewhere in an obscure corner of his brain an image of
perfection closely related to the type which he found least alluring in
reality. Humanly tolerant of those masculine weaknesses he shared, he
had erected mentally a pinnacle of virtue upon which he exacted that
a frailer being should maintain an equilibrium. A pretty woman, it was
true, might go at a merry pace provided she was not related to him, but
he required that both his mother and his aunt should be above suspicion.
In earlier days he had had several affairs of sentiment with ladies to
whom he declined to bow if he happened to be walking with a member of
his family; and this fine discrimination was characteristic of him, for
it proved that he was capable of losing his heart in a direction where
he would refuse to lift his hat.

At the late breakfast to which he returned, he found Mr. Chamberlayne,
who had ridden over from Applegate to consult with Kesiah. In appearance
the lawyer belonged to what is called "the old school," and his manner
produced an effect of ostentation which was foreign to his character
as a Christian and a gentleman. His eyebrows, which were still dark
and thick, hung prominently over his small, sparkling eyes behind gold
rimmed spectacles, while a lock of silver hair was brushed across his
forehead with the romantic wave which was fashionable in the period when
Lord Byron was the favorite poet. Kindness and something more--something
that was almost a touching innocence, looked from his face. "It is a
good world--I've always found it to be a good world, and if I've ever
heard anything against it, I've refused to believe it," his look seemed
to say.

All through breakfast he rambled on after his amiable habit--praising
the food, praising the flowers, praising the country, praising
the universe. The only creature or object he omitted to praise was
Kesiah--for in his heart he regarded it as an outrage on the part of
Providence that a woman should have been created quite so ugly. While
he talked he kept his eyes turned away from her, gazing abstractedly
through the window or at a portrait of Mrs. Gay, painted in the first
year of her marriage, which hung over the sideboard. In the mental world
which he inhabited all women were fair and fragile and endowed with
a quality which he was accustomed to describe as "solace." When
occasionally, as in the case of Kesiah, one was thrust upon his
notice, to whom by no stretch of the imagination these graces could be
attributed, he disposed of the situation by the simple device of gazing
above her head. In his long and intimate acquaintance, he had never
looked Kesiah in the face, and he never intended to. He was perfectly
aware that if he were for an instant to forget himself so far as to
contemplate her features, he should immediately lose all patience with
her. No woman, he felt, had the right to affront so openly a man's ideal
of what the sex should be. When he spoke of her behind her back it was
with indignant sympathy as "poor Miss Kesiah," or "that poor good soul
Kesiah Blount"--for in spite of a natural bent for logic, and more than
forty years of sedulous attendance upon the law, he harboured at the
bottom of his heart an unreasonable conviction that Kesiah's plainness
was, somehow, the result of her not having chosen to be pretty.

"Any sport, Jonathan?" he inquired cheerfully, while he buttered his
waffles. "If I scared up one Molly Cotton-tail out of the briars I did
at least fifty."

"No, I didn't get a shot," replied Gay, "but I met a poacher on my land
who appeared to have been more successful. There seems to be absolutely
no respect for a man's property rights in this part of the country. The
fellow actually had the impudence to stop and bandy words with me."

"Well, you mustn't be too hard on him. His ancestors, doubtless, shot
over your fields for generations, and he'd probably look upon an attempt
to enforce the game laws as an infringement of his privileges."

"Do you mean that the landowner is utterly unprotected?"

"By no means--go slow--go slow--you might search the round globe, I
believe for a more honest or a more peaceable set of neighbours. But
they've always been taught, you see, to regard the bird in the air as
belonging to the man with the gun. On these large estates game was so
plentiful in the old days and pot-hunters, as they call them, so few,
that it didn't pay a man to watch out for his interest. Now that the
birds are getting scarce, the majority of farmers in the State are
having their lands posted, but your uncle was too little of a sportsman
to concern himself in the matter."

"Well, I knocked a tooth out of the fellow, so the whole county will be
after me like a pack of hounds, I suppose. I wonder who he was, by the
way--young, good looking, rather a bully?"

"The description fits a Revercomb. As they are your next neighbours it
was probably the miller or his brother."

"I know the miller, and it wasn't he--but when I come to think of it,
the youngster had that same rustic look to him. By Jove, I am sorry it
was a Revercomb," he added under his breath.

A frown had settled on the face of the old gentleman, and he poured the
syrup over his buckwheat cakes with the manner of a man who is about to
argue a case for the defence when his natural sympathies are with the
prosecution.

"They are an irascible family from the mother down," he observed, "and
I'm sorry you've got into trouble with them so soon for the miller is
probably the most popular man in the county." He paused, cleared his
throat, and after a tentative glance at Kesiah, which fell short of her
bosom, decided to leave the sentence in his mind unspoken while they
remained in her presence.

A little later, when the two men were smoking in the library, Gay
brought the conversation back again to the point at which the lawyer had
so hastily dropped it.

"Am I likely, then, to have trouble with the Revercombs?" he asked, with
a disturbing memory of Blossom's flaxen head under the hooded shawl.

"It's not improbable that the family will take up the matter. These
country folk are fearful partisans, you see. However, it may lead
to nothing worse than the miller's refusing to grind your corn or
forbidding you to use the bridle path over his pasture."

"Had my uncle any friction in that quarter when he lived here?"

Mr. Chamberlayne's cigar had gone out while he talked, and striking a
match on a silver box, he watched the thin blue flame abstractedly an
instant before he answered.

"Were you ever told," he inquired, "that there was some talk of
arresting Abner Revercomb before the coroner's jury agreed on a
verdict?"

"Abner? He's the eldest of the brothers, isn't he? No, I hadn't heard of
it."

"It was only the man's reputation for uprightness, I believe, that
prevented the arrest. The Revercombs are a remarkable family for their
station in life, and they derive their ability entirely from their
mother, who was one of the Hawtreys. They belong to the new order--to
the order that is rapidly forging to the surface and pushing us
dilapidated aristocrats out of the way. These people have learned a
lot in the last few years, and they are learning most of all that the
accumulation of wealth is the real secret of dominance. When they get
control of the money, they'll begin to strive after culture, and acquire
a smattering of education instead. It's astonishing, perhaps, but the
fact remains that a reputable, hard-working farmer like our friend the
miller, with his primitive little last century grist-mill, has probably
greater influence in the State to-day than you have, for all your two
thousand acres. He has intelligence enough to go to the Legislature and
make a fair showing, if he wants to, and I don't' believe that either of
us could stand in the race a minute against him."

"Well, he's welcome to the doubtful honour! But the thing that puzzles
me is why in thunder his brother Abner should have wanted to shoot my
uncle?"

"It seems--" the lawyer hesitated, coughed and glanced nervously at
the door as if he feared the intrusion of Kesiah--"it seems he was a
lover--was engaged in fact to Janet Merryweather before--before she
attracted your uncle's attention. Later the engagement was broken, and
he married a cousin in a fit of temper, it was said at the time. There
was always ill blood after this, it appeared, and on the morning of your
uncle's death Abner was seen crossing the pasture from Poplar Spring
with his gun on his shoulder."

"It's an ugly story all round," remarked Gay quietly, "and I wish to
heaven that I were out of it. How has my poor mother stood it?"

"She has known very little about it," Mr. Chamberlayne answered, while
his jutting eyebrows twitched nervously as he turned away. "Your mother,
my dear boy, is one of those particularly angelic characters from whose
presence even the thought of evil is banished. You have only to look
into her face to discern how pure and spotless she has kept her soul.
My old friend Jonathan was very devoted to her. She represented, indeed,
the spiritual influence in his life, and there was no one on earth whose
respect or affection he valued so highly. It was his consideration for
her alone that prevented him from making a most unfortunate marriage."

"The girl died insane, didn't she?"

"It was a distressing--a most distressing case; but we must remember,
in rendering our verdict, that if Janet Merryweather had upheld the
principles of her sex, it would never have happened."

"We'll rest it there, then--but what of her daughter? The child could
hardly have been accessory before the fact, I suppose?"

An expression of suffering patience came into the old gentleman's face,
and he averted his gaze as he had done before the looming countenance of
Kesiah.

"Your uncle rarely spoke to me of her," he answered, "but I have reason
to know that her existence was a constant source of distress to him. He
was most anxious both to protect your mother and to provide generously
for the future of Janet's daughter.

"Yet I understand that there was no mention of her in his will."

"This omission was entirely on your mother's account. The considerable
property--representing a third of his entire estate--which was left in
trust to me for a secret purpose, will go, of course, to the girl. In
the last ten years this property has practically doubled in value, and
Molly will take possession of the income from it when she reaches her
twenty-first birthday. The one condition is that at Reuben's death she
shall live with your aunt."

"Ah," said Jonathan, "I begin to see."

"At the time, of course, he believed that your mother would survive
him only a few months, and his efforts to shield her from any painful
discoveries extended even after his death. His wish was that the
girl should be well educated and prepared for any change in her
circumstances--but unfortunately she has proved to be rather a wilful
young person, and it has been impossible entirely to fulfil his
intentions with regard to her. Ah, he wasn't wise always, poor Jonathan,
but I never doubted that he meant well at bottom, however things
may have appeared. His anxiety in the case of your mother was very
beautiful, and if his plans seem to have miscarried, we must lay the
blame after all, on the quality of his judgment, not of his heart."

"And the girl will be twenty-one next April, I am told?"

"Her birthday is the seventeenth, exactly ten years from the date of
Jonathan's death."



CHAPTER VIII


SHOWS TWO SIDES OF A QUARREL


At dusk that evening the miller, who had spent the day in Applegate,
stopped at Bottom's Ordinary on his way home, and received a garbled
account of the quarrel from the farmers gathered about the hospitable
hearth in the public room. The genius of personality had enabled Betsey
Bottom to hold open doors to the traveller long after the wayside tavern
in Virginia had passed from the road and the one certain fact relating
to the chance comer was that he never came. By combining a store with a
public house, she managed still to defy the progress of time as well as
the absence of guests. "Thank the Lord, I've never been one to give in
to changes!" it was her habit to exclaim.

The room was full of tobacco smoke when Abel entered, and as he paused,
in order to distinguish the row of silhouettes nodding against the ruddy
square of the fireplace, Adam Doolittle's quavering voice floated to him
from a seat in the warmest corner. The old man was now turning ninety,
and he had had, on the whole, a fortunate life, though he would have
indignantly repudiated the idea. He was a fair type of the rustic of the
past generation--slow of movement, keen of wit, racy of speech.

"What's this here tale about Mr. Jonathan knockin' Archie down an'
settin' on him, Abel?" he inquired. "Ain't you got yo' hand in yet,
seein' as you've been spilin' for a fight for the last fortnight?"

"I hadn't heard of it," replied Abel, his face flushing. "What in hell
did he knock Archie down for?"

"Jest for shooting' a few birds that might as well have been flying
about on yo' land as on his, if thar minds had been set over toward
you."

"Do you mean Mr. Jonathan got into a quarrel with him for hunting on
his land? Why, we shot over those fields for a hundred years before the
first damned Gay ever came here."

"So we have--so we have, but it seems we ain't a-goin' to do so any
longer if Mr. Jonathan can find a way to prevent it. Archie was down
here jest a minute or two arter you went by this mornin', an' he was
swearin' like thunder, with a busted lip an' a black eye."

A smarting sensation passed over Abel, as though the change to the warm
room after the cold outside were stinging his flesh.

"Well, I wish I had been there," he retorted, "somebody else would have
been knocked down and sat on if that had happened."

"Ah, so I said--so I said," chuckled old Adam. "Thar ain't many men with
sech a hearty stomach for trouble, I was jest sayin' to Solomon."

Bending over the fire, he lifted a live ember between two small sticks,
and placing it in the callous palm of his hand, blew softly on it an
instant before he lighted his pipe.

"What goes against my way of thinkin'," remarked Betsey Bottom, wiping
a glass of cider on her checked apron before she handed it to Abel, "is
that so peaceable lookin' a gentleman as Mr. Jonathan should begin to
start a fuss jest as soon as he lands in the midst of us. Them plump,
soft-eyed males is generally inclined to mildness whether they be men or
cattle."

"'Taint nothin' on earth but those foreign whims he's brought back an'
is tryin' to set workin' down here," said Solomon Hatch. "If we don't
get our backs up agin 'em in time, we'll find presently we don't even
dare to walk straight along the turnpike when we see him a comin'. A few
birds, indeed!--did anybody ever hear tell of sech doin's? 'Warn't them
birds in the air?' I ax, 'an' don't the air belong to Archie the same as
to him?'"

"It's because he's rich an' we're po', that he's got a right to lay
claim to it," muttered William Ming, a weakly obstinate person, to whose
character a glass of cider contributed the only strength.

"You'd better hold yo' tongue, suh," retorted his wife, "it ain't yo'
air anyway, is it?"

"I reckon it's as much mine as it's Mr. Jonathan's," rejoined William,
who, having taken a double portion, had waxed argumentative. "An' what
I reason is that birds as is in the air ain't anybody's except the man's
that can bring 'em down with a gun."

"That's mo' than you could do," replied his wife, "an' be that whether
or no, it's time you were thinkin' about beddin' the grey mule, an' she
ain't in the air, anyhow. If I was you, Abel," she continued in a softer
tone, "I wouldn't let 'em make me so riled about Mr. Jonathan till I'd
looked deep in the matter. It may be that he ain't acquainted with the
custom of the neighbourhood, an' was actin' arter some foolish foreign
laws he was used to."

"I'll give him warning all the same," said Abel savagely, "that if I
ever catch him on my land I'll serve him in the fashion that he served
Archie."

"You don't lose nothin' by goin' slow," returned Solomon. "Old Adam
there is a born fire eater, too, but he knows how to set back when
thar's trouble brewin'."

"I ain't never set back mo' than was respectable in a man of ninety,"
croaked old Adam indignantly, while he prodded the ashes in his corncob
pipe with his stubby forefinger. "'Tis my j'ints, not my sperits that
have grown feeble."

"Oh, we all know that your were a gay dog an' a warnin' to the righteous
when you were young," rejoined Solomon, in an apologetic manner, "an'
it must be a deal of satisfaction to be able to look back on a sinful
past when you've grown old and repented. I've been a pious, God-fearing
soul from my birth, as you all know, friends, but sad to relate, I ain't
found the solid comfort in a life of virtue that I'd hoped for, an'
that's the truth."

"The trouble with it, Solomon," replied old Adam, pushing a log back on
the andirons with his rough, thick soled boot to which shreds of manure
were clinging, "the trouble with it is that good or bad porridge, it all
leaves the same taste in the mouth arter you've once swallowed it. I've
had my pleasant trespasses in the past, but when I look backward on 'em
now, to save my life, I can't remember anything about 'em but some small
painful mishap that al'ays went along with 'em an' sp'iled the pleasure.
Thar was the evening I dressed up in my best clothes an' ran off to
Applegate to take a yellow haired circus lady, in pink skirts, out to
supper. It ought to have been a fine, glorious bit of wickedness to
remember, but the truth was that I'd put on a new pair of boots, an' one
of 'em pinched so in the toes that I couldn't think of another thing
the whole blessed evening. 'Tis al'ays that way in my experience of
life--when you glance back or glance befo' 'tis pleasant enough to the
eye, but at the moment while you're linin' it thar's al'ays the damn
shoe that pinches."

"Ah, you're right, you're right, Mr. Doolittle," remarked William Ming,
who had lingered in the doorway to follow the conversation.

"It's life, that's what it is," commented Solomon, heaving a sigh that
burst a button hole in his blue shirt. "An' what's mo' than life, it's
marriage. When I see the way some men wear themselves out with wantin'
little specks of women, I say to myself over an' over agin, 'Ah, if they
only knew that thar ain't nothin' in it except the wantin'.'"

"Not another thing--not another blessed mite of a thing," agreed
William, who had imbibed secretly again behind the back of his wife.

"I've know a man to throw himself into the river from sheer love befo'
marriage," said Solomon, "an' two weeks arter the woman had taken
him, to fall out with her because she'd put too much shortenin' in his
pie-crust."

"It's all love befo' marriage an' all shortenin' arterwards," observed
Betsey Bottom, with scorn. "I've al'ays noticed in this world that the
less men folks have to say for themselves the better case they make of
it. When they've spent all thar time sence Adam tryin' to throw dust in
the eyes of women, it would be better manners if they'd stop twittin'
'em because they'd succeeded."

"True, true, you never spoke a truer word, ma'am, in my acquaintance
with you," responded Solomon, with what hasty gallantry he could summon.
"I was thinkin' them very things to myself when you mentioned 'em. Not
that anybody could throw dust in yo' eyes, even if he tried to."

"Well, it would take mo'n a man to do that, I reckon," she replied,
amiably enough, "I saw through 'em early, an' when you've once seen
through 'em it's surprisin' how soon the foolishness of men begins to
look like any other foolishness on earth."

She was listened to with respectful and flattering attention by her
guests, who leaned forward with pipes in hand and vacant, admiring eyes
on her still comely features. It was a matter of gossip that she had
refused half the county, and that her reason for marrying William had
been that he wasn't "set," and would be easy to manage. The event had
proved the prophecy, and to all appearance it was a perfectly successful
mating.

Abel was the first to move under her gaze, and rising from his chair by
the fire, he took up his hat, and made his way slowly through the group,
which parted grudgingly, and closed quickly together.

"Take a night to sleep on yo' temper Abel," called Solomon after him,
"and git a good breakfast inside of you befo' you start out to do
anything rash. Well, I must be gittin' along, folks, sad as it seems to
me. It's strange to think, now ain't it--that when Nannie was married
to Tom Middlesex an' livin' six miles over yonder at Piping Tree, I
couldn't have got over that road too fast on my way to her."

"You'd still feel like that, friend, if she were still married to Tom
Middlesex," quavered old Adam. "'Tis the woman we oughtn't to think on
that draws us with a hair."

"Now that's a case in p'int," replied Solomon, nodding after the
vanishing figure of Abel. "All his wits are in his eyes, as you can tell
jest to look at him--an' for sech a little hop-o'-my-thumb female that
don't reach nigh up to his shoulder."

"I can't see any particular good looks in the gal, myself," remarked
Mrs. Bottom, "but then, when it's b'iled down to the p'int, it ain't
her, but his own wishes he's chasin'."

"Did you mark the way she veered from him to Mr. Jonathan the other
day?" inquired William Ming, "she's the sort that would flirt with a
scarecrow if thar warn't anything else goin'."

"The truth is that her eyes are bigger than her morals, an' I said it
the first time I ever seed her," rejoined old Adam. "My taste, even when
I was young, never ran to women that was mo' eyes than figger."

Still discoursing, they stumbled out into the dusk, through which Abel's
large figure loomed ahead of them.

"A man that's born to trouble, an' that of the fightin' kind--as the
sparks fly upward," added the elder.

As the miller drove out of the wood, the rustle of the leaves under his
wheels changed from the soft murmurs in the moist hollows to the crisp
crackle in the open places. In the west Venus hung silver white over the
new moon, and below the star and the crescent a single pine tree stood
as clearly defined as if it were pasted on a grey background of sky.

Half a mile farther on, where his road narrowed abruptly, a voice
hallooed to him as he approached, and driving nearer he discerned dimly
a man's figure standing beside a horse that had gone lame.

"Halloo, there? Have you a light? My horse has got a stone or cast a
shoe, I can't make out which it is."

Reaching for the lantern under his seat, Abel alighted and after calling
"Whoa!" to his mare, walked a few steps forward to the stationary
horse and rider in the dusk ahead. As the light shone on the man and he
recognized Jonathan Gay, he hesitated an instant, as though uncertain
whether to advance or retreat.

"If I'd known 'twas you," he observed gruffly, "I shouldn't have been so
quick about getting down out of my gig."

"Thank you, all the same," replied Gay in his pleasant voice. "It
doesn't seem to be a stone, after all," he added. "I'm rather afraid he
got a sprain when he stumbled into a hole a yard or two back."

Kneeling in the road, Abel lifted the horse's foot, and felt for the
injury with a practised hand.

"Needs a bandage," he said at last curtly. "I happen to have a bottle of
liniment in the gig."

The light glided like a winged insect over the strip of corduroy road,
and a minute later the pungent odour of the liniment floated to Gay's
nostrils.

"Give me anything you have for a compress," remarked the miller,
dropping again on his knees. "Pick a few of those Jimson weeds by the
fence and lend me your handkerchief--or a couple of them would be still
better. There, now, that's the best I can do," he added after a moment.
"Lead him slowly and be sure to look where you're going."

"I will, thank you--but can you find your way without the lantern?"

"Hannah can travel the road in the dark and so can I for that matter.
You needn't thank me, by the way. I wouldn't have troubled about you,
but I've a liking for horses."

"A jolly good thing it was for me that you came up at the instant. I
say, Revercomb, I'm sorry it was your brother I got into a row with this
morning."

"Oh, that's another score. We haven't settled it yet," retorted the
Miller, as he stepped into his gig. "You've warned us off your land, so
I'll trouble you to keep to the turnpike and avoid the bridle path that
passes my pasture."

Before Gay could reply, the other had whistled to his mare and was
spinning over the flat road into the star-spangled distance.

When the miller reached home and entered the kitchen, his mother's first
words related to the plight of Archie, who sat sullenly nursing his
bruised mouth in one corner.

"If you've got any of the Hawtrey blood in yo' veins you'll take
sides with the po' boy," she said. "Thar's Abner settin' over thar so
everlastin' mealy mouthed that he won't say nothin' mo' to the p'int
than that he knew all the time it would happen."

"Well, that's enough, ain't it?" growled Abner; "I did know it would
happen sure enough from the outset."

"Thar ain't any rousin' him," observed Sarah, with scorn. "I declar,
I believe pa over thar has got mo' sperit in him even if he does live
mostly on cornmeal mush."

"Plenty of sperit in me--plenty of sperit," chirped grandfather, alert
as an aged sparrow that still contrives to hop stiffly in the sunshine.

"Oh, yes, he's sperit left in him, though he's three years older than
I am," remarked grandmother, with bitterness. "_He_ ain't wo' out with
work and with child bearin' befo' he was ninety. _He_ ain't bald,
_he_ ain't toothless," she concluded passionately, as if each of
grandfather's blessings were an additional insult to her. "He can still
eat hard food when he wants it."

"For pity's sake, be quiet, ma," commanded Sarah sternly, at which the
old woman broke into sobs.

"Yes, I must be quiet, but _he_ can still talk," she moaned.

"Tell me about it, Archie," said Abel, drawing off his overcoat and
sitting down to his supper. "I passed Jonathan Gay in the road and he
asked me to bind up his horse's sprain."

"He'd be damned befo' I'd bind up a sprain for him!" burst out Archie,
with violence. "Met me with a string of partridges this morning and
jumped on me, blast him, as if he'd caught me in the act of stealing.
I'd like to know if we hadn't hunted on that land before he or his
rotten old uncle were ever thought of?"

"Ah, those were merry days, those were!" piped grandfather. "Used to go
huntin' myself when I was young, with Mr. Jordan, an' brought home any
day as many fine birds as I could carry. Trained his dogs for him, too."

"Thar was al'ays time for him to go huntin'," whimpered grandmother.

"What are you goin' to do about it, Abel?" asked Sarah, turning upon him
with the smoking skillet in her hand.

At the question Blossom Revercomb, who was seated at work under the
lamp, raised her head and waited with an anxious, expectant look for the
answer. She was embroidering a pair of velvet slippers for Mr. Mullen--a
task begun with passion and now ending with weariness. While she
listened for Abel's response, her long embroidery needle remained
suspended over the toe of the slipper, where it gleamed in the lamp
light.

"I don't know," replied Abel, and Blossom drew a repressed sigh of
relief; "I've just ordered him to keep clear of our land, if that's what
you're hintin' at."

"If you had the sperit of yo' grandpa you'd have knocked him down in the
road," said Sarah angrily.

"Yes, yes, I'd have knocked him down in the road," chimed in the old
man, with the eagerness of a child.

"You can't knock a man down when he asks to borrow your lantern,"
returned Abel, doggedly, on the defensive.

"Oh, you can't, can't you?" jeered Sarah. "All you're good for, I
reckon, is to shuck corn or peel potatoes!"

For a minute Abel stared at her in silence. "I declare, mother, I don't
believe you're any better than a heathen," he remarked sadly at last.

"Well, I'm not the kind of Christian you are, anyway," retorted Sarah,
"I'd like to know whar you'll find anything in Scripture about not
knockin' a man down because he asks you for a lantern. I thought I knew
my Bible--but I reckon you are better acquainted with it--you an' yo'
Mr. Mullen."

"Of course, you know your Bible. I wasn't meanin' that."

"Then if readin' yo' Bible ain't bein' a Christian, I suppose it's
havin' curly hair, an' gittin' up in the pulpit an' mincin'. Who are
those slippers for, Keren-happuch?"

"Mr. Mullen, grandma."

"Well, if I was goin' to embroider slippers for a minister," taunted
Sarah, "I'd take care to choose one that could repeat his Scripture when
he was called on."

"Ah, 'tis the age, not the man," lamented grandfather, "'tis an age of
small larnin' an' weak-kneed an' mealy mouthed into the bargain. Why,
they're actually afeared to handle hell-fire in the pulpit any longer,
an' the texts they spout are that tame an' tasteless that 'tis like
dosin' you with flaxseed tea when you're needin' tar-water. 'Twas
different when I was young and in my vigour," he went on eagerly,
undisturbed by the fact that nobody paid the slightest attention to what
he was saying, "for sech was the power and logic of Parson Claymore's
sermons that he could convict you of the unpardonable sin against the
Holy Ghost even when you hadn't committed it. A mo' blameless soul never
lived than my father, yet I remember one Sunday when parson fixed his
eye upon him an' rolled out his stirrin' text 'Thou art the man,' he
was so taken by surprise an' suddenness that he just nodded back at the
pulpit 'an answered, 'Yes, parson, I am, if you'll excuse me.'"

"It's a pity ain't mo' like Parson Claymore now," remarked Sarah, who
had stopped to listen to the concluding words of the anecdote. "Thar
ain't vim enough in this generation of preachers to skeer a rabbit."

Her profile, with its sparse wave of hair from the forehead, was
repeated in grotesque exaggeration on the wall at her back. The iron
will in her lent a certain metallic hardness to her features, and her
shadow resembled in outline the head on some ancient coin that had lain
buried for centuries. Intrenched behind an impregnable self-esteem, she
had never conceded a point, never admitted a failure, never accepted a
compromise. "It ain't no wonder that a new comer thinks he can knock
you down an' set on you for shootin' a few birds," she added, after a
moment.

"He'll find out I ain't done with him yet," growled Archie, and rising
from his seat, he took down his gun and began polishing the barrel with
an old yarn stocking of Sarah's.

The long needle missed the hole at which Blossom had pointed it, and she
looked up with a sullen droop to her mouth.

"I reckon Mr. Gay has just as good a right to his things as we have to
ours," she said.

"Right! Who wants his right?" flared Archie, turning upon her. "You'll
say next, I reckon, that he had a right to split my upper lip open if he
wanted to."

"From the way grandma carries on anybody would think that was what
_she_ wanted," persisted Blossom, adhering stubbornly to the point, "she
sounds as if she were mad because people ain't everlastingly fighting."

"You needn't think I don't see what you're aimin' at, Keren-happuch,"
rejoined Sarah, who used this name only in moments of anger, "you're
tryin' to make me think a grown man can't do anything better than get up
in the pulpit and mouth texts so soft that a babe couldn't cut its teeth
on 'em. You've had notions in yo' head about Orlando Mullen ever since
he came here, an' you ain't fooled me about 'em."

"Thar, thar, don't you begin pesterin' Blossom," interposed Abner,
aroused at last from his apathy.

"Notions about Mr. Mullen!" repeated Blossom, and though there was a hot
flush in her face, her tone was almost one of relief.



CHAPTER IX


IN WHICH MOLLY FLIRTS


On a November morning several weeks later, when the boughs of trees
showed almost bare against the sky, Molly Merryweather walked down to
Bottom's store to buy a bottle of cough syrup for Reuben, who had a
cold. Over the counter Mrs. Bottom, as she was still called from an
hereditary respect for the house rather than for the husband, delivered
a coarse brown paper. The store, which smelt of dry-goods and ginger
snaps, was a small square room jutting abruptly out of the bar, from
which it derived both its warmth and its dignity.

"Even men folks have got the sperit of worms and will turn at last," she
remarked in her cheerful voice, which sounded as if it issued from the
feather bed she vaguely resembled.

"Let them turn--I can do without them very well," replied Molly, tossing
her head.

"Ah, you're young yet, my dear, an' thar's a long road ahead of you. But
wait till you've turned forty an' you'll find that the man you throwed
over at twenty will come handy, if for nothin' mo' than to fill a gap in
the chimney. I ain't standin' up for 'em, mind you, an' I can't remember
that I ever heard anything particular to thar credit as a sex--but po'
things as we allow 'em to be, thar don't seem but one way to git along
without 'em, an' that is to have 'em. It's sartain sure, however, that
they fill a good deal mo' of yo' thought when they ain't around than
when they are. Why, look at William, now--the first time he axed me to
marry him, I kept sayin' 'you're still slue-footed an' slack-kneed an'
addle-headed an' I'll marry you whether or no.' Twenty years may
not change a man for the better, but it does a powerful lot toward
persuadin' a woman to put up with the worst!"

"Well, best or worst, I've seen enough of marriage, Mrs. Bottom, to know
that I shouldn't like it."

"I ain't denyin' it might be improved on without hurtin' it--but a
single woman's a terrible lonesome body, Molly."

"I'm not lonely, while I have grandfather."

"He's old an' he ain't got many years ahead of him."

"If I lose him I'll go to Applegate and trim hats for a living."

"It's a shame, Molly, with the po' miller splittin' his heart over you."

"He'll mend it. They're like that, all of them."

"But Mr. Mullen? Ain't he different now, bein' a parson?"

"No, he's just the same, and besides he'd always think he'd stooped to
marry me."

"Then take Jim Halloween. With three good able-bodied lovers at yo'
beck an' call, it's a downright shame to die an old maid just from pure
contrariness. It's better arter all, to eat dough that don't rise than
to go hungry."

A step sounded on the platform outside and a lank, good-looking
countryman glanced cautiously in through the crack in the door.
Observing Molly, he spat a wad of tobacco over the hitching rail by the
steps, and stopped to smooth his straw-coloured hair with the palm of
his hand before crossing the threshold.

"Thar's Jim Halloween now jest as we were speakin' of him," whispered
Betsey Bottom, with a nudge at Molly's shoulder.

"Well, if that don't beat all," drawled the young man, in an embarrassed
rapture, as he entered. "I was gettin' my horse shod over thar at Tim
Mallory's, an' I thought to myself that I'd jest drop over an' say
'howdy' to Mrs. Bottom."

"Oh, I reckon you caught a glimpse of red through the door," chuckled
Betsey, who was possessed of the belief that it was her Christian duty
to further any match, good or bad, that came under her eye.

"I must be going, so don't hurry your visit," replied Molly, laughing.
"Mrs. Hatch has been in bed for a week and I'm on my way to see Judy."

"I'll walk a bit of the road with you if you ain't any serious
objection," remarked the lover, preparing to accompany her.

"Oh, no, none in the world," she replied demurely, "you may carry my
cough syrup."

"It ain't for yourself, I hope?" he inquired, with a look of alarm.

"No, for grandfather. He caught cold staying in the barn with the red
cow."

"Well, I'm glad 'taint for you--I don't like a weak-chested woman."

She looked up smiling as they passed the store into the sunken road
which led in the direction of Solomon Hatch's cottage.

"I did see a speck of red through the crack," he confessed after a
minute, as if he were unburdening his conscience of a crime.

"You mean you saw my cap or jacket--or maybe my gloves?"

"It was yo' cap, an' so I came in. I hope you have no particular
objection?" His face had flushed to a violent crimson and in his throat
his Adam's apple worked rapidly up and down between the high points of
his collar. "I mean," he stammered presently, "that I wouldn't have gone
in if I hadn't seen that bit of red through the do'. I suppose I had
better tell you, that I've been thinking a great deal about you in the
evening when my day's work is over."

"I'm glad I don't interfere with your farming."

"That would be a pity, wouldn't it? Do you ever think of me, I wonder,
at the same time?" he inquired sentimentally.

"I can't tell because I don't know just what that time is, you see."

"Well, along after supper generally--particularly if ma has made
buckwheat cakes an' I've eaten a hearty meal an' feel kind of cosy an'
comfortable when I set down by the fire an' there's nothin' special to
do."

"But you see I don't like buckwheat cakes, and I've always something
'special' to do at that hour."

"Ah, you don't mean it, do you--about not liking buckwheat cakes? As
for the rest, bein' a woman, I reckon you would have the washin' up to
attend to just at that time. I don't like a woman that sets around idle
after supper--an' I'm glad you're one to be brisk an' busy about the
house, though I'm sorry you ain't over partial to buckwheat. May I
inquire, if you don't object to tellin' me, what is yo' favourite food?"

"It's hard to say--I have so many--bread and jam, I believe."

"I hope you don't think I'm too pressin' on the subject, but ma has
always said that there wasn't any better bond for matrimony than the
same taste in food. Do you think she's right?"

"I shouldn't wonder. She's had experience anyway."

"Yes, that's jest what I tell her--she's had experience an' she ought
to know. Pa and she never had a word durin' the thirty years of their
marriage, an' she always said she ruled him not with the tongue, but
with the fryin' pan. I don't reckon there's a better cook than ma in
this part of the country, do you?"

"I'm quite sure there isn't. She has given up her life to it."

"To be sure she has--every minute of it, like the woman whose price
is above rubies that Mr. Mullen is so fond of preachin' about." For
a moment he considered the fact as though impressed anew by its
importance. "I'm glad you feel that way, because ma has always stuck out
that you had the makin' of a mighty fine cook in you."

"Has she? That was nice of her, wasn't it?"

"Well, she wouldn't have said so if she hadn't thought it. It ain't her
way to say pleasant things when she can help it. You must judge her by
her work not by her talk, pa used to say."

"She's the kind that doesn't mind taking trouble for you, I know that
about her," replied Molly, gravely.

"You're right about that, an' you're the same way, I am sure. I've
watched you pretty closely with your grandfather."

"Yes, I believe I am--with grandfather."

"'Twill be the same way when you marry, I was sayin' as much to ma only
yesterday. 'She'd be jest as savin' an' thrifty as you,'--I mean, of
course, if the right man got you to marry him,--but 'tis all the same
in the end." Again he paused, cleared his throat, and swallowed
convulsively, "I've sometimes felt that I might be the right man, Miss
Molly," he said.

"O Mr. Halloween!"

"Why, I thought you knew I felt so from the way you looked at me."

"But I can't help the way I look, can I?"

"Well, I've told you now, so it ain't a secret. I've thought about
askin' you for more than a year--ever since you smiled at me one Sunday
in church while Mr. Mullen was preachin'."

"Did I? I've quite forgotten it!"

"I suppose you have, seein' you smile so frequent. But that put the idea
in my head anyway an' I've cared a terrible lot about marryin' you ever
since."

"But I'm not the kind of person, at all. I'm not saving, I'm not
thrifty."

"I hope you're wrong--but even if you're not, well, I want you terrible
hard just the same. You see I can always keep an eye on the expenses,"
he hastened to add, and made a desperate clutch at her hand.

The red worsted mitten came off in his grasp, and he stood eyeing it
ruefully while he waited for her answer.

"I've determined never, never to marry," she replied.

His chest heaved. "I knew you felt that way about the other's but I
thought somehow I was different," he rejoined.

"No, it's not the man, but marriage that I don't like," she responded,
shaking her head. "It's all work an' no play wherever I've seen it."

"It's terrible for a woman to feel like that, an' goes against God an'
nature," he answered. "Have you ever tried prayin' over it?"

"No, I've never tried that, because you see, I don't really mind it very
much. Please give me my glove now, here is Judy's cottage."

"But promise me first that you'll try prayin' over your state of mind,
an' that I may go on hopin' that you will change it?"

Turning with her hand still outstretched for the glove, she glanced
roguishly from his face to the shuttered window of the Hatch cottage.

"Oh, I don't mind your hoping," she answered, composing her expression
to demureness, "if only you won't hope--very hard."

Then, leaving him overwhelmed by his emotions, she tripped up the
narrow walk, bordered by stunted rose-bushes, to the crumbling porch of
Solomon's house. At the door a bright new gig, with red wheels, caught
her eye, and before the mischievous dimples had fled from her cheek, she
ran into the arms of the Reverend Orlando Mullen.

Her confusion brought a beautiful colour into his cheeks, while, in a
chivalrous effort to shield her from further embarrassment, he turned
his eyes to the face of Judy Hatch, which was lifted at his side like
the rapt countenance of one of the wan-featured, adoring saints of a Fra
Angelico painting. No one--not even the nurse of his infancy--had ever
imputed a fault either to his character or to his deportment; for he
had come into the world endowed with an infallible instinct for the
commonplace. In any profession he would have won success as a shining
light of mediocrity, since the ruling motive of his conduct was less the
ambition to excel than the moral inability to be peculiar. His mind was
small and solemn, and he had worn three straight and unyielding wrinkles
across his forehead in his earnest endeavour to prevent people from
acting, and especially from thinking, lightly. This sedulous devotion to
the public morals kept him not only a trifle spare in figure, but lent
an habitual manner of divine authority to his most trivial utterance.
His head, seen from the rear, was a little flat, but this, fortunately,
did not show in the pulpit--where at the age of twenty-four his
eloquence enraptured his congregation.

"I postponed my visit to Applegate until to-morrow," he said, when
he had given her what he thought was sufficient time to recover her
composure. "If you are returning shortly, perhaps I may have the
pleasure of driving you in my gig. I have just come to inquire after
Mrs. Hatch."

"It would be kind of you, for I am a little tired," responded Molly.
"I came to speak to Judy, and then I am to stop at the mill to borrow a
pattern from Blossom Revercomb. Are you going that way, I wonder?"

"I shall make it my way," he replied gallantly, "as soon as you are
ready. Don't hurry, I beg of you. It is gratifying to me to find that
you have so soon taken my advice and devoted a portion of your days to
visiting the sick and the afflicted."

With her back discreetly turned upon Judy, she looked up at him for a
moment, and something in her eyes rendered unnecessary the words that
fell slowly and softly from her lips.

"You give such good advice, Mr. Mullen."

A boyish eagerness showed in his face, breaking through the professional
austerity of his manner.

"I hope you've advised Judy this morning," she added before he could
answer.

"To the best of my ability," he replied gravely. "And now, as I have
said before, there is no hurry, but if you are quite ready, I should
suggest our starting."

"Just a word or two with Judy," she answered, and when the words were
spoken in the doorway she laid her hand in the rector's and mounted,
with his scrupulous assistance, over the red wheel to the shining black
seat of the gig, which smelt of leather and varnish. After he had taken
his place beside her he tucked in the laprobe carefully at the corners,
rearranged the position of his overcoat at her back, and suggested that
she should put the bottle of cough syrup in the bottom of the vehicle.

Like all his attentions, this solicitude about the cough syrup had an
air that was at once amorous and ministerial, a manner of implying,
"Observe how I take possession of you always to your advantage."

"Are you quite comfortable?" he asked when they had rolled between the
stunted rose-bushes into the turnpike.

"Oh, perfectly, you are always so thoughtful, Mr. Mullen."

"I think I am right in ranking thoughtfulness--or consideration, I
should have said--among the virtues."

"Indeed you are; as soon as I found that you had not gone to Applegate
as you intended to, I said to myself that, of course, some act of
kindness had detained you."

His large, very round grey eyes grew soft as he looked at her.

"You have expressed it beautifully, as 'an act of kindness,'" he
returned, "since you yourself were the cause of my postponing my visit."

"I--oh, you can't mean it? What have I done?"

"Nothing. Don't alarm yourself--absolutely nothing. Three months ago
when I spoke to you of marriage, you entreated me to allow you a
little time in which to accustom yourself to my proposal. That time of
probation, which has been, I hope, equally trying to us both, has ended
to-day."

"But I don't think I really love you, Mr. Mullen."

"I trust your eyes rather than your words--and your eyes have told me,
all unconsciously to yourself, your secret."

"Well, I do love your sermons, but---"

"My sermons are myself. There is nothing in my life, I trust, that
belies my preaching."

"I know how good you are, but honestly and truly, I don't want to marry
anybody."

His smile hardened slowly on his face like an impression on metal that
cools into solidity. From the beginning he had conducted his courtship,
as he had conducted his sacred office, with the manner of a gentleman
and the infallibility of an apostle. Doubt of his perfect fitness for
either vocation had never entered his head. Had it done so he would
probably have dismissed it as one of the insidious suggestions of the
lower man--for the lower man was a creature who habitually disagreed
with his opinions and whom his soul abhorred.

As he sat beside her, clerical, well-groomed, with his look of small yet
solemn intelligence, she wondered seriously if he would, in spite of all
opposition, have his way with her at last and pattern her to his liking?

"I am not in the least what you think me, Mr. Mullen--I don't know just
how to say it---"

"There is but one thing you need know, dearest, and that is that you
love me. As our greatest poet has expressed it 'To know no more is
woman's happiest knowledge.'"

"But I can't feel that you really--really care for me. How can you?"

With a tender gesture, he laid his free hand on hers while he looked
into her downcast face.

"You allude, I suppose, to the sad fact of your birth," he replied
gently, "but after you have become my wife, you will, of course need no
name but mine."

"I'm so sorry, Mr. Mullen, but really I didn't mean you to think--Oh,
there's the mill and Abel looking out of the window. Please, please
don't sit so close to me, and look as if we were discussing your sick
parishioners."

He obeyed her instantly, quite as circumspect as she in his regard for
the proprieties.

"You are excited now, Molly dear, but you will not forbid my hoping that
you will accept my proposal," he remarked persuasively as the gig drew
up to the Revercombs' gate.

"Well, yes, if you'll let me get down now, you may hope, if you wish
to."

Alighting over the wheel before he could draw off his glove and assist
her, she hurried, under Abel's eyes, to the porch, where Blossom
Revercomb stood gazing happily in the direction of Jordan's Journey.



CHAPTER X


THE REVEREND ORLANDO MULLEN PREACHES A SERMON



On the following Sunday, a mild autumn morning, Mr. Mullen preached one
of his most impressive sermons from the text, "_She looketh well to the
ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness_."

Woman, he said in the course of it, was created to look after the ways
of her household in order that man might go out into the world and make
a career. No womanly woman cared to make a career. What the womanly
woman desired was to remain an Incentive, an Ideal, an Inspiration. If
the womanly woman possessed a talent, she did not use it--for this would
unsex her--she sacrificed it in herself in order that she might
return it to the race through her sons. Self-sacrifice--to use a worn
metaphor--self-sacrifice was the breath of the nostrils of the womanly
woman. It was for her power of self-sacrifice that men loved her and
made an Ideal of her. Whatever else woman gave up, she must always
retain her power of self-sacrifice if she expected the heart of her
husband to rejoice in her. The home was founded on sacrifice, and woman
was the pillar and the ornament of the home. There was her sphere, her
purpose, her mission. All things outside of that sphere belonged to man,
except the privilege of ministering to the sick and the afflicted in
other households.

He leaned forward in the old pulpit, his shapely, well-kept hand hanging
over the edge in one of his most characteristic gestures; and the autumn
sunlight, falling through the plain glass windows, shone on his temples.
Immediately below him, in a front pew, sat his mother, a dried little
old woman, with beady black eyes and a pointed chin, which jutted out
from between the stiff taffeta strings of her poke bonnet. She gazed
upward, clasping her Prayer-book in her black woollen gloves, which were
darned in the fingers; and though she appeared to listen attentively to
the sermon, she was wondering all the time if the coloured servant at
home would remember to baste the roast pig she had left in the oven.
To-day was the Reverend Orlando's birthday, and the speckled pig she had
fattened throughout the summer, lay now, with an apple in his mouth, on
the trencher. She had invited Molly to dine with them rather against
her wishes, for she harboured a secret fear that the girl was trying
to marry the rector. Besides, as she said to herself, with her eyes
on Orlando's hand, how on earth could he do full justice to the pig if
there was a pretty parishioner to distract his attention?

In the pew next to Mrs. Mullen sat old Adam Doolittle, his hand behind
his left ear, his withered old lips moving as if he were repeating the
words of the sermon. From time to time he shook his head as though he
disagreed with a sentence, and then his lips worked more rapidly, and
an obstinate, argumentative look appeared in his face. Mentally he was
conducting a theological dispute with the preacher in which the younger
man suffered always a crushing rhetorical defeat. Behind him sat the
miller and Blossom Revercomb, who threw an occasional anxious glance at
the empty seat beside Mrs. Gay and Kesiah; and behind them Judy Hatch
raised her plain, enraptured face to the pulpit, where the rector had
shaken out an immaculately ironed handkerchief and wiped his brow.
She knew who had ironed that handkerchief on Wednesday, which was Mrs.
Mullen's washing day, and her heart rejoiced as she remembered the care
with which she had folded the creases.

It made no difference, said Mr. Mullen, replacing the handkerchief
somewhere under his white surplice, whether a woman was ugly or
beautiful, since they possessed Scriptural authority for the statement
that beauty was vain, and no God-fearing man would rank loveliness of
face or form above the capacity for self-sacrifice and the unfailing
attendance upon the sick and the afflicted in any parish. Beauty,
indeed, was but too often a snare for the unwary--temptresses, he had
been told, were usually beautiful persons.

Molly's lips trembled into a smile, and her eyes were wide and bright as
she met those of the preacher. For an instant he looked at her, gentle,
admonishing, reproachful--then his gaze passed over Judy's seraphic
features to the face of an old grey horse that stared wonderingly in
through the south window. Along the whitewashed plank fence of the
church-yard, other horses were waiting patiently for the service to
end, and from several side saddles, of an ancient pattern, hung flopping
alpaca riding skirts, which the farmer's wives or daughters had worn
over their best gowns to church. A few locust trees shed their remaining
small yellow leaves on the sunken graves, which were surrounded by
crumbling wooden enclosures. Here and there, farther off, a flat
tombstone was still visible in the tall grass; and over the dust of old
Jonathan Gay a high marble cross, selected by his brother's widow, bore
the words, unstained by the dripping trees, and innocent of satire:
"Here lieth in the hope of a joyful resurrection---"

At the end of the service there was a rustle either of relief or
disappointment, and the congregation filed slowly through the south
doors, where the old grey horse stood resigned and expectant amid the
obliterated graves. Mrs. Gay, who had lingered in the walk to speak
to Mr. Mullen, raised her plaintive violet eyes to his face when he
appeared.

"You are always so comforting. I don't know how to thank you for helping
me," she murmured, and added impulsively to the little old woman at his
side, "Oh, what a blessing such a son must be to you!"

"Orlando's never given me a moment's worry in his life, ma'am--not even
when he was teething," replied Mrs. Mullen, who looked sharper and more
withered than ever in the broad daylight. "If you'll believe me, he
wasn't more than six months old when I said to his father that I
could tell by the look of him he was intended for the ministry. Such
sweetness, such self-control even as an infant."

"How happy he must make you! And then, to have the privilege of hearing
his beautiful sermons! But you'll lose him some day, as I was just
saying to Kesiah. It won't be long before some fortunate woman takes him
away from you. We can only hope she will be worthy of the ideal he has
for her."

"Ah, that's just it, Mrs. Gay, I sometimes tell myself there isn't a
woman in the world that's fit for him."

She spoke as fast as she could, eager to dilate on the subject of the
embarrassed Orlando's virtues, flattered in her motherly old heart by
the praise of his sermons, and yet, all the time, while her peaked chin
worked excitedly, thinking about the roasted young pig that waited for
her to attend to the garnishing.

The delay was short; Orlando silenced her at last by a gentle admonitory
pressure of her elbow, and the two ladies drove off in their carriage,
while Molly walked sedately out of the churchyard between the clergyman
and his mother. The girl was pleasantly aware that the eyes of the
miller and of Jim Halloween followed her disapprovingly as she went; and
she thought with complacency that she had never looked better than
she did in her white felt hat with its upturned brim held back by
cherry-coloured ribbon. It was all very well for the rector to say
that beauty was of less importance than visiting the sick, but the fact
remained that Judy Hatch visited the sick more zealously than she--and
yet he was very far, indeed, from falling in love with Judy Hatch! The
contradiction between man and his ideal of himself was embodied before
her under a clerical waistcoat.

"I believe," remarked the Reverend Orlando, thrusting his short chin as
far as possible over his collar, which buttoned at the back, "I believe
that the elder Doolittle nourishes some private grudge against me. He
has a most annoying habit of shaking his head at me during the sermon as
though he disagreed with my remarks."

"The man must be an infidel," observed Mrs. Mullen, with asperity, as
she moved on in front of him.

"He doesn't know half the time what he is doing," said Molly, "you know
he passed his ninetieth birthday last summer."

"But surely you cannot mean that you consider age an excuse for
either incivility or irreligion," rejoined her lover, pushing aside an
impertinent carrot flower that had shed its pollen on his long coat,
while he regarded his mother's back with the expression of indignant
suspicion he unconsciously assumed on the rare occasions when his
opinions were disputed. "Age should mellow, should soften, should
sweeten."

"I suppose it should, but very often it doesn't," retorted Molly, a
trifle tartly, for the sermon had bored her and she looked forward with
dread to the dinner.

At her words Mrs. Mullen, who was walking a little ahead, with her
skirts held up to avoid the yellow stain of the golden-rod, glanced
sharply back, as she had done in church when old Adam had coughed at the
wrong time and spoiled the full effect of a period.

"One reason that Orlando is so helpful to people is that he always sees
so clearly just what they ought to be," she observed. "I don't believe
there's a man in the ministry or out, who has a higher ideal of woman
and her duty."

"But do women ever live up to his ideal of them?"

"It isn't his fault if they don't. All he can do is to point it out to
them earnestly and without ceasing."

They had reached the rectory gate, where she hesitated an instant with
her hand on the latch, and her head bent toward the house in a surprised
and listening attitude. "I declare, Orlando, if I didn't go off and
leave that cat locked up in the parlour!" she exclaimed in horror as she
hurried away.

"Yes," observed Mr. Mullen in his tenderest and most ministerial manner,
"my ideal is a high one, and when I look into your face, I see reflected
all the virtues I would have you reach. I see you the perfect woman,
sharing my sorrows, easing my afflictions---"

Intoxicated by his imagination, he turned toward her as though he beheld
the living embodiment of his eloquence.

For a minute Molly smiled up at him; then, "I wonder if your mother
really locked the cat in the parlour," she rejoined demurely.

After the birthday dinner, at which Mrs. Mullen talked ceaselessly of
Orlando's excellencies, while she reserved the choicest piece of meat
and the fattest dumpling for his plate, Molly tied her cherry-coloured
strings under her chin, and started home, with a basket of apple tarts
for Reuben on her arm. At the crossroads Mr. Mullen left her to return
to an afternoon Sunday school, and she was about to stop at the ordinary
to ask William to see her safely over the pasture, when Abel Revercomb,
looking a trifle awkward in his Sunday clothes, came out of the house
and held out his hand for the basket.

"I thought you'd be coming home this way after dinner," he said, turning
his throat when he moved. His hair was brushed flat on his head as
was his habit on Sundays, and he wore a vivid purple tie, which he had
bought on his last journey to Applegate. He had never looked worse, nor
had he ever felt quite so confident of the entire correctness of his
appearance.

As Molly made no reply, but merely fell into step at his side, he
inquired, after a moment's pause, "How did you enjoy the sermon?"

"Oh, I don't like to be preached at, and I'm sorry for Mr. Mullen's wife
if he expects her to ease everybody's pains in the parish. He looked
very handsome in church," she added, "didn't you think so?"

"I didn't notice," he answered ruefully. "I never pay any attention to
the way a man looks, in church or out of it."

"Well, I do--and even Judy Hatch does. She asked me the other day whom
I thought the handsomest man in the neighbourhood, and I'm sure she
expected me to say Mr. Mullen."

She dimpled, and his arm went out impulsively toward her.

"But you didn't, Molly?" he returned.

"Why, of course not--did you imagine that I should? I said I thought Mr.
Jonathan Gay was the best looking."

His arm fell to his side, and for a minute or two he walked on in
silence.

"I wish I didn't love you, Molly," he burst out at last. "I sometimes
almost believe that you're one of the temptresses Mr. Mullen preached
against this morning. I've tried again and again to tear you out of my
heart, but it is useless."

"Yes, it's useless, Abel," she answered, melting to dimples.

"I tell myself," he went on passionately, "that you're not worth
it--that you're perfectly heartless--that you're only a flirt--that
other men have held your hands, kissed your lips even---"

"And after telling yourself those dreadful truths, what happens?" she
inquired with interest.

"What happens? Well, I go to work and don't think of you for at least
three hours. Then, when I am dead tired I stop for a minute to rest, and
as soon as my eyes fall on a bit of green grass, or a flower growing by
the road, or the blue sky, there you are again, popping in between them
with your big eyes and your mouth that was made for kisses. I forget how
heartless and light you are, and remember only the times you've crept up
to me and put your hand on my arm and said, 'Abel, I'm sorry.' Most of
all I remember the one time you kissed me, Molly."

"Don't, Abel," she said quickly, and her voice broke and died in her
throat.

As he drew close to her, she walked faster until her steps changed into
a run.

"If you only knew me as I am, you wouldn't care so, Abel," she threw
back at him.

"I don't believe you know yourself as you are, Molly," he answered.
"It's not you that leads men on to make love to you and then throws them
over--as you have thrown me--as you will throw Mr. Mullen." His tone
grew suddenly stern. "You don't love Mr. Mullen, and you know it," he
added. "If you love any man on earth to-day, you love me."

At his first change from tenderness to accusation, her face hardened and
her voice returned to her control.

"What right have you to judge me, Abel Revercomb?" she asked angrily.
"I've had one sermon preached at me to-day, and I'll not listen to
another."

"You know I'm not preaching at you, Molly, but I'm a man of flesh and
blood, not of straw. How can I have patience?"

"I never asked you to have patience, did I?"

"No, and I don't believe you want it. If I'd catch hold of you and shake
you, you'd probably like me better."

"It's just as well that you don't try it to see how I'll take it."

"Oh, I shan't try it. I'll go on still believing in you against
yourself, like the born fool I am."

"You may believe in me or not just as you please--but it isn't my fault
if you won't go off and marry Judy Hatch, as I have begged you to.
She's everything on earth that Mr. Mullen preached about to-day in his
sermon."

"Hang Judy Hatch! You are bent on starting a quarrel with me, that is
the trouble. As soon as you mentioned Jonathan Gay I knew what you were
in for."

"As if I couldn't say a man was good looking without putting you into a
rage."

"I'm not in a rage, but I hate a flirt. Every sensible man does."

"Judy Hatch isn't a flirt."

"Leave Judy Hatch out of it--though I've more than half a mind to walk
off and ask her to marry me."

"That's just what I've advised you to do for the last six months, isn't
it?"

"Ah, no, you haven't, Molly, no, you haven't--and you'd be just as
sorry as I the minute after I had done it. You've got some small foolish
childish notions in your head about hating men--but you're much nearer
loving me than hating me at this moment, and that's why you're afraid!"

"I'm not afraid--how dare you say so?"

"Oh, my pretty, how foolish we are, both of us! I'd work my fingers to
the bone for you, Molly, I'd lie down and let your little feet walk over
me if they wanted to--I'd shed my life's blood for you, day by day, if
it could help you."

"Every one of you say this in the beginning, but it isn't true in the
end," she answered.

"Not true--not true? Prove it. Why do you think I've struggled and
raised myself except to keep equal with you? Why did I go to school and
teach myself and make money enough to take classes in Applegate? Just
for you. All those winter afternoons when I drove over there to learn
things, I was thinking of you. Do you remember that when you were at
school in Applegate, you'd tell me the names of the books you read so
that I might get them?"

"Don't," she cried fiercely, "don't tell me those things, for I'll never
believe them! I'm hard and bitter inside, there's no softness in me. If
I went on my knees and prayed to love, I couldn't do it. Oh, Abel, there
isn't any love in my heart!"

"Do you remember when you kissed me?"

"No, I have forgotten."

"It was only three weeks ago."

"Yes, that was three weeks ago."

The light died slowly out of his eyes as he looked at her.

"When you speak like that I begin to wonder if any good can ever come
to us," he returned. "I've gone on breaking my heart over you ever since
you were a little girl in short dresses, and I can't remember that I've
ever had anything but misery from you in my life. It's damnable the
things I've stood and yet I've always forgotten them afterwards, and
remembered only the times you were soft and gentle and had ceased to be
shrewish. Nobody on earth can be softer than you, Molly, when you want
to, and it's your softness, after all, that has held me in spite of
your treatment. Why, your mouth was like a flower when I kissed you, and
parted and clung to me---"

"I wish you wouldn't talk about it. I hate to hear such things after
they are over."

"Such things!" He stood flicking hopelessly with a small branch he
carried at the carrot flowers in the field. "If you will tell me
honestly that you were playing with me, Molly, I'll give you up this
minute," he said.

The colour was high in her face and she did not look at him.

"I was playing with you, and I told you so the day afterwards," she
replied.

"Yes, but you didn't mean it. I can't go any further because this is Mr.
Jonathan's land."

His eyes had in them the hurt reproachful look of a wounded dog's, and
his voice trembled a little.

"I meant always--always to lead you on until I could hurt you--as I did
the others--and then throw you over."

"And now that you can hurt me, you throw me over?" he asked.

Without speaking, she held out her hand for the basket, which he was
about to fling from him.

"Then I'll never forgive you, Molly, so help me God," he added harshly;
and turning away from her, struck out across the pasture in the
direction of the mill.

For a moment she stood looking after him, her lips parted, her eyes wide
and bright as if she were asking a question.

"I am hard--hard and cruel," she thought as she went slowly up the
witch-hazel path that led by the Poplar Spring, "but I wonder--oh, I
wonder if I treat Abel worst because I like him best?"



CHAPTER XI


A FLIGHT AND AN ENCOUNTER


When Abel had flung himself over the fence, he snatched the collar from
his neck and threw it away from him into the high grass of the meadow.
The act was symbolical not only of his revolt from the power of love,
but, in a larger measure, of his rebellion against the tyranny of
convention. Henceforth his Sunday clothes might hang in the closet,
for he would never again bend his neck to the starched yoke of custom.
Everything had been for Molly forever. Her smiles or her frowns,
her softness or her cruelty, would make no difference to him in the
future--for had not Molly openly implied that she preferred Mr. Mullen?
So this was the end of it all--the end of his ambition, of his struggle
to raise himself, of his battle for a little learning that she might not
be ashamed. Lifting his head he could see dimly the one great pine that
towered on the hill over its fellows, and he resolved, in the bitterness
of his defeat, that he would sell the whole wood to-morrow in Applegate.
He tried to think clearly--to tell himself that he had never believed in
her--that he had always known she would throw him over at the last--but
the agony in his heart rose in his throat, and he felt that he was
stifling in the open air of the pasture. His nature, large, impulsive,
scornful of small complexities, was stripped bare of the veneer of
culture by which its simplicity had been overlaid. At the instant he was
closer to the soil beneath his feet than the civilization of his race.

As he neared the brook, which divided his pasture from the fields
belonging to Jordan's Journey, the sound of angry voices came to his
ears, and through the bared twigs of the willows, he saw Archie and
Jonathan Gay standing a little apart, while the boy made threatening
gestures with a small switch he carried.

"I've told him he was not to come on our land and he's laughed in my
face!" cried Archie, turning to his brother.

"I'm not laughing, I merely said that the restriction was absurd,"
replied Jonathan in a friendly tone. "Why this pasture of yours juts in
between my field and the road, and I'm obliged to cross it. I told you
before I was awfully sorry about the quarrel when I first came, but as
long as you leave my birds alone, you may walk over my land all day if
you like and I shan't care a copper."

"Damn your birds! I don't take a blow from any man without paying him
back," retorted Archie.

"Hold your tongue, Archie," said Abel sternly. "It's my farm, I reckon,
and I manage it. I'm sorry, Mr. Jonathan," he added, "that you started
the trouble, but we aren't people to sit down tamely and take a
thrashing from you just because you happen to own Jordan's Journey. I'll
stand by Archie because he's right, though if he were not right, I'd
still stand by him because he's my brother. The best we can do is to
keep clear of each other. We don't go on your place and you'd just as
well take care to keep off ours."

A frown contracted Gay's brow, while he glanced anxiously over his
shoulder at the crooked path which led in the direction of the mill.

"Do you mean to say that you object to my taking a stroll through your
meadows?" he asked.

"Why on earth do you want to stroll over here when you've got two
thousand acres on every other blessed side of you?"

When the other's reply came there was a curious hesitation about it.

"Well, a man has his fancies, you know. I've taken a liking to this path
through the willows."

"All the same I warn you that if you keep it up, you'll very likely run
into trouble. If Archie sets the dogs on you, I'll be obliged to stand
by him."

Without waiting for a response, he put his hand on the boy's shoulder,
and pushed him over the brook into the path on the opposite side. To his
surprise Blossom, dressed as though for church, appeared there at the
instant.

"Why, where in thunder are you going?" he demanded, releasing Archie,
who staggered back at the sudden withdrawal of the powerful grasp. He
had always known that his niece was a handsome girl, but the bloom, the
softness of her beauty came to him while he stood there, as vividly as
if for the first time.

"I--I--have you seen grandma's cat?" she returned after the breathless
suspense of a minute.

"No, I don't think you'll find her down there. Archie and Mr. Jonathan
have quarreled loud enough to frighten her away."

"Quarreled again!" she said. "Oh, why have they quarreled again?"

"He must keep off our place," replied Archie, angrily. "I warned him
I'll set the dogs on him the next time I find him on this side the
fence!"

"How--how can you be so uncivilized?" she returned, and there were tears
in her eyes.

"Uncivilized or not, he'll find he can't split my lip open for nothing,"
growled Archie, like a sullen child.

"You'd as well come back with us," said Abel, "the cat isn't down
there--I'd take a look in the mill."

She turned her face away, stooping to pluck the withered frond of a fern
that grew in the path. When she looked up at him again all the bloom and
radiance had flown.

"Yes, I'll come back with you," she answered, and falling into step
between them, walked languidly up the hill to the kitchen garden at the
top. In his own misery Abel was hardly aware of her, and he heard as
from a distance, Archie's muttered threats against Gay, and Blossom's
palpitating responses. When they reached the house, Sarah's yellow and
white cat squeezed herself through the door and came purring toward
them.

"Why, the cat's got back!" exclaimed Archie.

"It must have been in the store-room all the time," returned Blossom
quickly. "I forgot to look there. Now, I must go and pour out the butter
milk for dinner before grandma scolds me."

She turned away, glanced back an instant later to make sure that they
had entered the house, and then gathering up her Sunday skirt of blue
Henrietta cloth, started in a rapid run back along the path to the
willows. When she reached a sheltered nook, formed by a lattice of
boughs, she found Gay walking impatiently back and forth, with his hands
in his pockets and the anxious frown still on his forehead. At sight of
her, his face cleared and he held out his arms.

"My beauty!--I'd just given you up. Five minutes more by my watch, and I
should have gone."

"I met Abel and Archie as I was coming and they made me go back with
them," she answered, placing her hand on her bosom, which rose and fell
with her fluttering breath. It was characteristic of their different
temperaments that, although he had seen her every day for three weeks,
he still met her with outstretched arms, which she still evaded.
Since that first stolen kiss, she had held off from him, alluring yet
unapproachable, and this gentle, but obstinate, resistance had inflamed
him to a point which he admitted, in the cold grey morning before he had
breakfasted, to have become positively dangerous. Ardently susceptible
to beauty, the freedom of his life had bred in him an almost equal
worship of the unattainable. If that first kiss had stirred his fancy,
her subsequent repulse had established her influence. The stubborn
virtue, which was a part of the inherited fibre of her race, had
achieved a result not unworthy of the most finished coquette. Against
his desire for possession there battled the instinctive chastity that
was woven into the structure of Sarah Revercomb's granddaughter. Hardly
less violent than the natural impulse against which it warred, it gave
Blossom an advantage, which the obvious weakness of her heart had
helped to increase. It was as though she yearned toward him while she
resisted--as though she feared him most in the moment that she repulsed
him.

"Good God! how beautiful you are and how cold!" he exclaimed.

"I am not cold. How can you say so when you know it isn't true?"

"I've been waiting here an hour, half dead with impatience, and you
won't so much as let me touch you for a reward."

"I can't--you oughtn't to ask me, Mr. Jonathan."

"Could a single kiss hurt you? I kissed you once."

"It's--it's because you kissed me once that you mustn't kiss me again."

"You mean you didn't like it?"

"What makes you so unkind? You know it isn't that."

"Then why do you refuse?" He was in an irritable humour, and this
irritation showed in his face, in his movements, in the short, abrupt
sound of his words.

"I can't let you do it because--because I didn't know what it was like
until that first time," she protested, while two large tears rolled from
her eyes.

Softened by her confusion, his genial smile shone on her for an instant
before the gloom returned to his features. The last few weeks had preyed
on his nerves until he told himself that he could no longer control the
working of his emotions. The solitude, the emptiness of his days, the
restraint put upon him by his invalid mother--all these engendered a
condition of mind in which any transient fancy might develop into a
winged fury of impulse. There were times when his desire for Blossom's
beauty appeared to fill the desolate space, and he hungered and thirsted
for her actual presence at his side. In the excitement of a great
city, he would probably have forgotten her in a month after their first
meeting. Here, in this monotonous country, there was nothing for him
but to brood over each trivial detail until her figure stood out in his
imagination edged by the artificial light he had created around it.
Her beauty, which would have been noticeable even in a crowd, became
goddess-like against the low horizon in the midst of the November
colours.

"If you only knew how I suffer from you, darling," he said, "I haven't
slept for nights because you refused to kiss me."

"I--I haven't slept either," she faltered.

"Because of me, Blossom?"

"I begin to think and it makes me so unhappy."

"Oh, damn it! Do you love me, Blossom?"

"What difference does it make whether I do or not?"

"It makes all the difference under Heaven! Would you like to love me,
Blossom?"

"I oughtn't to let myself think of it, and I don't when I can help it."

"But can you help it? Tell me, can you help it?"

Turning away from him, she cast a startled glance under the willows in
the direction of the house.

"I must be going back. They will miss me."

"Don't you think I shall miss you, Beauty?"

"I don't know. I haven't thought."

"If you knew how miserable I'll be after you have left me, you'd kiss me
once before you go."

"Don't ask me, I can't--I really can't, Mr. Jonathan."

"Hang Mr. Jonathan and all that appertains to him! What's to become of
me, condemned to this solitude, if you refuse to become kind to me? By
Jove, if it wasn't for my mother, I'd ask you to marry me!"

"I don't want to marry you," she responded haughtily, and completed her
triumph. Something stronger than passion--that _something_ compounded
partly of moral fibre, partly of a phlegmatic temperament, guided her
at the critical moment. His words had been casual, but her reception of
them charged them with seriousness almost before he was aware. A passing
impulse was crystallized by the coldness of her manner into a permanent
desire.

"If I were free to do it, I'd make you want to," he said.

She moved from him, walking rapidly into the deeper shelter of the
willows. The autumn sunlight, shining through the leafless boughs, cast
a delicate netting of shadows over the brilliant fairness of her body.
He saw the rose of her cheek melting into the warm whiteness of her
throat, which was encircled by two deliciously infantile creases of
flesh. To look at her led almost inevitably to the desire to touch her.

"Are you going without a word to me, Blossom?"

"I don't know what to say--you never seem to believe me."

"You know well enough what I want you to say--but you're frozen all
through, that's what's the matter."

"Good-bye, Mr. Jonathan."

"At what hour to-morrow, Blossom?"

She shook her head, softly obstinate.

"I mustn't meet you again. If grandma--or any of the others found out
they would never forgive me--they are so stern and straight. I've gone
too far already, and besides---"

"Besides what?"

"You make me feel wicked and underhand."

"Do you mean that you can walk off like this and never see me again?"

Tears came to her eyes. "You oughtn't to put it like that!"

"But that's just what it means. Now, darling, do you think you can do
it?"

"I won't think--but I'll have to do it."

His nervous irritability became suddenly violent, and the muscles of his
face contracted as if from a spasm of physical pain.

"Confound it all! Why shouldn't I marry you, Blossom?" he burst out.
"You're the most beautiful woman I've ever seen and you look every inch
a lady. If it wasn't for my mother I'd pick you up to-day and carry you
off to Washington."

"Your mother would never give in. There's no use talking about it."

"It isn't her giving in, but her health. You see, she has heart disease,
and any sudden shock brings on one of these terrible attacks that may
kill her. She bears everything like an angel--I never heard a complaint
from her in my life--not even when she was suffering tortures--but the
doctors say now that another failure of her heart would be fatal."

"I know," she admitted softly, "they said that twenty years ago, didn't
they?"

"Well, she's been on her back almost all the time during those twenty
years. It's wonderful what she's borne--her angelic patience. And, of
course her hopes all hang on me now. She's got nobody else."

"But I thought Miss Kesiah was so devoted to her."

"Oh, she is--she is, but Aunt Kesiah has never really understood her.
Just to look at them, you can tell how different they are. That's how it
is Blossom--I'm tied, you see--tied hand and foot."

"Yes, I see," she rejoined. "Your uncle was tied, too. I've heard that
he used to say--tied with a silk string, he called it."

"You wouldn't have me murder my mother, would you?" he demanded
irritably, kicking at the twisted root of a willow.

"Good-bye, Mr. Jonathan," she responded quietly, and started toward the
house.

"Wait a minute,--oh, Blossom, come back!" he entreated--but without
pausing she ran quickly up the crooked path under the netting of
shadows.

"So that's the end," said Gay angrily. "By Jove, I'm well out of it,"
and went home to dinner. "I won't see her again," he thought as he
entered the house, and the next instant, when he ascended the staircase,
"I never saw such a mouth in my life. It looks as if it would melt if
you kissed it---"

The dinner, which was pompously served by Abednego and a younger butler,
seemed to him tasteless and stale, and he complained querulously of
a bit of cork he found in his wine glass. His mother, supported by
cushions in her chair at the head of the table, to which he had brought
her in his arms, lamented his lack of appetite, and inquired tenderly if
he were suffering? For the first time in his life he discovered that
he was extinguishing, with difficulty, a smouldering resentment against
her. Kesiah's ugliness became a positive affront to him, and he felt as
bitterly toward her as though she had purposely designed her appearance
in order to annoy him. The wine she drank showed immediately in her
face, and he determined to tell his mother privately that she must
forbid her sister to drink anything but water. By the dim gilt framed
mirror above the mantel he discovered that his own features were
flushed, also, but a red face was not, he felt, a cause of compunction
to one of his sex.

"You haven't eaten your mutton, dear," said Mrs. Gay anxiously. "I
ordered it especially because you like it. Are you feeling unwell?"

"I'm not hungry," he replied, rather crossly. "This place gets on my
nerves, and will end by driving me mad."

"I suppose you'd better go away," she returned, plaintively wounded. "I
wouldn't be so selfish as to want to keep you by me if you are unhappy."

"I don't want to leave you, mother--but, I ought to get back to the
stock market. It's no good idling around--I don't think I was cut out
for a farmer."

"Try this sherry. Your uncle brought if from Spain, and it was buried
during the war."

He filled his glass, drained it quickly, and with an effort recovered
his temper.

"Yes, I'd better go," he repeated, and knew while he spoke that he could
not leave as long as the thought of Blossom tormented him. Swift half
visions of her loveliness--of certain delectable details of her face
or figure flitted always before him. He saw her eyes, like frosted
periwinkles under their warm white lids, which appeared too heavy
to open wide; the little brown mole that played up and down when she
laughed; and the soft, babyish creases that encircled her throat. Each
of these memories set his heart to a quicker beating and caused a warm
sensation, like the caress of a burning sun, to pass over his body.

"The Revercombs over at the mill are kicking up a row, mother," he said
suddenly, again filling his wine glass and again putting it down empty,
"have they any sort of standing in the county, do you suppose?"

"I've heard they call themselves connections of the Revercombs higher in
the State, dear--but I don't know and I've never come into contact with
any of the country people about here. Kesiah may be able to tell you."

Until then neither of them had alluded to Kesiah, whom they accepted
by ignoring much as if she had been one of the familiar pieces of
furniture, at which they never glanced because they were so firmly
convinced that it stood in its place. She had eaten her dinner with the
relish of a person to whom food, taken at regular hours three times a
day, has become the prime consolation in life; and when the question
was put to her, she was obliged to ask them to repeat it because she had
been thoughtfully regarding a dish of baked tomatoes and wondering if a
single yielding to temptation would increase a tendency to the gout that
had lately developed.

"What do you know of the Revercombs, Kesiah? Are they in any degree
above the common people about here?"

"The miller is a rather extraordinary character, I believe," she
answered, lifting the spoon out of the dish of tomatoes as it was handed
to her, and then shaking her head with a sigh and letting it fall. "Mr.
Chamberlayne says he is quite well educated, but the rest of them, of
course, are very primitive and plain. They have always been strait-laced
and honest and I hear that the mother--she came from Piping Tree and
was one of the Hawtreys--is violently opposed to her son's marriage
with Molly Merryweather. There is a daughter, also, who is said to be
beautiful though rather dull."

"Yes, I've seen the girl," observed Mrs. Gay, "heavy and blond, isn't
she? The mother, I should say, is decidedly the character of the family.
She has rather terrible convictions, and once a great many years ago,
she came over here--forced her way into my sick-room to rebuke me about
the behaviour of the servants or something. Your Uncle Jonathan was
obliged to lead her out and pacify her--she was quite upset, I remember.
By the way, Kesiah," she pursued, "haven't I heard that Mr. Mullen is
attentive to the daughter? It seems a pity, for he is quite a superior
young man--his sermons are really remarkable, and he might easily have
done better."

"Oh, that was when he first came here, Angela, before he met Molly
Merryweather. It's singular the fascination that girl possesses for the
men around here."

Gay laughed shortly. "Well, it's a primitive folk, isn't it?" he said,
"and gets on my nerves after a while."

Through the afternoon he was restless and out of humour, tormented less
by the memory of Blossom's face than by the little brown mole on her
cheek. He resolved a dozen times a day that he would not see her, and in
the very act of resolving, he would begin to devise means of waylaying
her as she went down to the store or passed to and from the pasture. A
certain sex hatred, which is closely allied to the mere physical fact of
love, asserted itself at times, and he raged hotly against her coldness,
her indifference, against the very remoteness that attracted him. Then
he would soften to her, and with the softening there came always the
longing not only to see, but to touch her--to breathe her breath, to lay
his hand on her throat.

The next day he went to the willow copse, but she did not come. On the
one following, he took down his gun and started out to shoot partridges,
but when the hour of the meeting came, he found himself wandering over
the fields near the Revercombs' pasture with his eye on the little path
down which she had come that rimy October morning. The third afternoon,
when he had watched for her in a fury of disappointment, he ordered his
horse and went for a gallop down the sunken road to the mill. At the
first turn, where the woods opened into a burned out clearing, he came
suddenly upon her, and the hunger at his heart gave place to a delicious
sense of fulfilment.

"Blossom, how can you torture me so?" he exclaimed when he had
dismounted at her side and flung his arm about her.

She drew slowly away, submissive even in her avoidance.

"I did not mean to torture you--I'm sorry," she answered humbly.

"It's come to this!" he burst out, "that I can't stand it another week
without losing my senses. I've thought till I'm distracted. Blossom,
will you marry me?"

"O Mr. Jonathan!" she gasped while her breast fluttered like a bird's.

"Not openly, of course--there's my mother to think of--but I'll take
you to Washington--we'll find a way somehow. Can't you arrange to go to
Applegate for a day or two, or let your people think you have?"

"I can--yes--" she responded in the same troubled tone. "I've a school
friend living there, and I sometimes spend several days with her."

"Then go on Saturday--no, let's see--this is Tuesday. Can you go on
Friday, darling?"

"Perhaps. I can't tell--I think so--I must see."

As he drew her forward, she bent toward him, still softly, still humbly,
and an instant later, his arms were about her and his lips pressed hers.



CHAPTER XII


THE DREAM AND THE REAL


The following Friday Abel drove Blossom in his gig to the house of her
school friend in Applegate, where she was to remain for a week. On
his way home he stopped at the store for a bottle of harness oil, and
catching the red glow of the fire beyond the threshold of the public
room, he went in for a moment to ask old Adam Doolittle about a supply
of hominy meal he had ready for him at the mill. As the ancient man
crouched over the fire, with his bent hands outstretched and his
few silvery hairs rising in the warmth, his profile showed with the
exaggeration of a twelfth century grotesque, the features so distorted
by the quivering shadows that his beaked nose appeared to rest in the
crescent-shaped silhouette of his chin. His mouth was open, and
from time to time he shook his head and muttered to himself in an
undertone--a habit he had fallen into during the monotonous stretches
of Mr. Mullen's sermons. Across from him sat Jim Halloween, and in the
middle of the hearth, Solomon Hatch stood wiping the frost from his face
with a red cotton handkerchief.

"It's time you were thinkin' about goin' home, I reckon, old Adam,"
remarked Mrs. Bottom. "You've had yo' two glasses of cider an' it ain't
proper for a man of yo' years to be knockin' around arter dark. This
or'nary is goin' to be kept decent as long as I keep it."

"To be sure, to be sure," replied old Adam, nodding cheerfully at the
fire, "I ain't all I once was except in the matter or corn-shuckin'--an'
a cold-snap like this goes clean to the bones when they ain't covered."

"Did you carry any of yo' winesaps into Applegate, Abel?" inquired Jim
Halloween. "I'm savin' mine till Christmas, when the prices will take a
jump."

"No, I only drove Blossom over. She's to spend a few days in town."

"Mr. Jonathan's gone off, too, I see," observed Solomon. "He went by at
the top of his speed while I was haulin' timber this mornin'. Thar's bad
blood still betwixt you an' him, aint' thar, Abel?"

"Oh, I'm not seekin' a quarrel. The trouble is in Archie's hands an'
he'll have to keep it there."

"Well, he's a fine shape of a man," declared Betsey Bottom. "Some women
try to make out that they ain't got an eye for the shape as long as the
sense is all square and solid--but I ain't never been one of 'em. Sense
is all right in its place, no doubt, but thar're times when a fine
figger is mo' convincin' than any argyment that ever was uttered."

"It's a thing that beats me," pondered Solomon Hatch, "why a sensible
woman should care how a man is made on the outside so long as the proper
stuffin' is inside of him. With a man now, of course, it is different,
seein' as natur made 'em with a sharp eye for the beauty in the opposite
sex, an' they're all for natur an' al'ays have been. But I'll be blest
if I can understand it in women."

"Well, I've noticed that they have a particular likin' for the worthless
over the hardworkin' sort," remarked old Adam, "an' when it comes to
that, I've known a woman to git clear set against a man on o'count of
nothin' bigger than a chaw of tobaccy."

"It's the way of the sex," said Solomon Hatch. "When I was courtin' my
wife I was obleeged to promise her I'd give up the habit befo' she'd
keep company with me."

"An' you began agin, I low, after the ceremony was spoken."

"To be sure--'twas a courtin' promise, not a real one."

"It happened the same in my case, some sixty years or mo' ago," said old
Adam. "Thar was two of us arter Minnie--for the matter of that, it
never entered my head to court her till I saw that Jacob Halloween--yo'
grandpa, Jim--had begun to git soft on her. It's safer to trust another
man's jedgment than yo' own I said to myself, an' I started into the
race. Well, Jacob was the pious, churchgoin' sort that she liked--but he
would chaw in season an' out of it--thar was some as said he chawed even
when he was sleepin'--an' a woman so out an' out with tobaccy you never
set eyes on. Sez she to me, 'Adam, you will give up the weed for me,
won't you?' An' sez I, 'Why, to be sartin sure, I will,' meanin' of
course, while I was courtin'. Then she answered, 'Well, he's a Christian
an' a churchgoer an' you ain't, but if he was the Angel Gabriel himself,
Adam, an' was a chawer, I wouldn't marry him. The men may make their
habits, Adam,' she said, 'but it takes the women to break 'em.' Lord!
Lord! durin' that courtin' season my mouth would water so for a wad of
tobaccy that I'd think my tongue was goin' to ketch fire."

"I shouldn't like to have stood in yo' shoes when you began agin,"
remarked Betsey Bottom.

"Oh, she larned, she larned," chuckled the elder, knocking the ashes out
of his pipe on the hearth and then treading them under his boot. "'Tis
amazin' what a deal of larnin' women have to do arter they're married."

"If they'd done it befo' thar's precious few of 'em that would ever set
foot into the estate!" retorted Betsey. "Thar ain't many men that are
worth the havin' when you git close up to 'em. Every inch of distance
betwixt 'em is an inch added to thar attractions."

"Now, I've noticed that in my own case," observed Jim Halloween sadly,
"no woman yet has ever let me come with kissin' distance--the nearer I
git, the further an' further they edges away. It's the curse of my luck,
I reckon, for it seems as if I never open my mouth to propose that I
don't put my foot in it."

"You may comfort yo'self with the thought that it runs in yo' family,"
rejoined old Adam. "'Tis a contrariness of natur for which you're not to
be held accountable. I remember yo' grandpa, that same Jacob, tellin'
me once that he never sot out to make love that his tongue didn't take a
twist unbeknownst to him, an' to his surprise, thar'd roll off 'turnips'
an' 'carrots' instid of terms of endearment. Now, with me 'twas quite
opposite, for my tongue was al'ays quicker than my heart in the matter
of courtin'. It used to go click! click! click! quite without my willin'
it whenever my eyes lit on a pretty woman."

"Ah, you were a gay young bird, but it's over now," commented Solomon.

"I ain't regrettin' it since I've lived long enough to repent of it,"
responded the ancient sinner.

"What worries me," said young Adam, pursuing his habitual train of
despondency, "is that my life is just one long repentance with naught in
it worth repentin' of. 'Tain't for lack of ch'ice I've never tasted, but
for lack of opportunity."

"Well, thar's some that even sinners can't suffer," commented his
father. "You are short of words, miller."

"I was thinkin'," replied Abel roughly, draining his glass, and rising
to his feet while he drew on his sheepskin gloves, "that when the
thought of a woman once gets into the brain it's worse than a maggot."

"The best way is to get her," retorted Solomon, "but that ain't so easy
a matter as it looks, unless you are a parson. Was thar ever a parson,
Mr. Doolittle, that couldn't get married as often as he'd take the
notion?"

"Thar may be sech, but I've never seed him an' never heard on him,"
responded old Adam. "'Tis kind of professional work with 'em an' they've
got the advantage of the rest of us bein' so used to pulpit speakin'."

"I suppose our Mr. Mullen might have whomsoever he'd set his eyes on,"
pursued Solomon.

"Without a doubt he might. If all else failed him he'd but to ax her in
his pulpit gown an' his prayin' voice, an' thar'd be no gainsayin' him
for a female. Let him boom out 'Dearly Beloved,' as he does in church
an' ten chances to one she'd answer 'Amen' just out of the habit. I'm a
bold man, suh, an' I've al'ays been, but I ain't one to stand up ag'inst
a preacher when thar's a woman in the race."

Wrapping his blue knitted comforter about his throat, Abel nodded,
good-humoredly to the group, and went out to his gig, which he had left
under a shed in the yard. As he removed the blanket from his mare, his
mind dwelt stubbornly on the remarks old Adam had let fall concerning
clergymen and women. He had already convinced himself that the Reverend
Mr. Mullen was the object of Molly's preference, and his nature was big
enough to rejoice that she should have chosen so good a man. At least,
if this were true, Jonathan Gay would not be his rival.

It was the season of the year when the sunny days gave place to frosty
nights, and all the changes of the autumn--the reddening of the fruit,
the ripening of the nuts, the falling of the leaves--appeared to occur
in the hours between sunset and sunrise. A thin and watery moon shed a
spectral light over the meadows, which seemed to float midway between
the ashen band of the road and the jagged tops of the pines on the
horizon. There was no wind, and the few remaining leaves on the trees
looked as if they were cut out of velvet. The promise of a hoar-frost
was in the air--and a silver veil lay already over the distance.

When he had turned into the branch road that led from the turnpike to
the mill, a gig passed him, driven rapidly, and Reuben Merryweather
called "good-night," in his friendly voice. An instant later a spot of
white in the road caught Abel's glance, and alighting, he picked up a
knitted scarf, which he recognized even in the moonlight as one that
Molly had worn. Looking back he saw that the other gig had stopped at
the turnpike, and as he hastened toward it with the scarf in his hand,
he was rewarded by a flash of bright eyes from the muffled figure at
Reuben's side.

"I found this in the road," he said, "you must have dropped it."

"Yes, it fell out--thank you," she answered, and it seemed to him that
her hand lingered an instant in his before it was withdrawn and buried
beneath the rugs.

The pressure remained with him, and a little later as he drove over the
frosted roads, he could still feel, as in a dream, the soft clinging
touch of her fingers. Essentially an idealist, his character was the
result of a veneering of insufficient culture on a groundwork of raw
impulse. People and objects appeared to him less through forms of
thought than through colours of the emotions; and he saw them out of
relation because he saw them under different conditions from those that
hold sway over this planet. The world he moved in was peopled by a race
of beings that acted under ideal laws and measured up to an impossible
standard; and this mixture of rustic ignorance and religious fervor
had endowed him with a power of sacrifice in large matters, while it
rendered him intolerant of smaller weaknesses. It was characteristic of
the man that he should have arranged for Molly in his thoughts, and at
the cost of great suffering to himself, a happiness that was suited to
the ideal figure rather than to the living woman.

When he entered the kitchen, after putting the mare into her stall,
the familiar room, with its comfortable warmth, dragged him back into
a reality in which the dominating spirit was Sarah Revercomb. Even his
aching heart seemed to recognize her authority, and to obtrude itself
with a sense of embarrassment into surroundings where all mental
maladies were outlawed. She was on her knees busily sorting a pile of
sweet potatoes, which she suspected of having been frost-bitten; and by
sheer force of character, she managed to convince the despairing lover
that a frost-bitten potato was a more substantial fact than a broken
heart.

"I declar' if the last one of 'em ain't specked! I knew 'twould be so
when they was left out thar in the smoke-house that cold spell. Abel,
all those sweet potatoes you left out in the smoke-house have been
nipped."

"Well, I don't care a hang!" retorted Abel, as he unwrapped his muffler.
"If it isn't one thing, it's another. You're enough to drive a sober man
to drink."

"If you don't care, I'd like to know who ought to," responded Sarah,
whose principal weapon in an argument was the fact that she was always
the injured person. "It seems that 'twas all yo' fault since you put 'em
thar."

"You'd better give him some supper--he looks almost played out,"
observed Abner from a corner of the hearth, where he sat smoking with
his head hanging on his chest.

Though she might harrow her son's soul, Sarah was incapable of denying
him food, so rising from her knees, she unpinned her skirt, and brought
him coffee and broiled herring from the stove where they had been
keeping hot.

"Where's Archie?" asked Abel, while she plied him with corn muffins.

"Courtin', I reckon, though he'd best be down yonder in the swamp
settin' old hare traps. I never saw sech courtin' as you all's anyhow,"
she concluded. "It don't seem to lead nowhar, nor to end in nothin'
except itself. That's what this here ever-lastin' education has done for
you, Abel--if you hadn't had those books to give you something to think
about, you'd have been married an' settled a long time befo' now. Yo'
grandpa over thar was steddyin' about raisin' a family before he was
twenty."

On either side of the stove, grandfather and grandmother nodded like
an ancient Punch and Judy who were at peace only when they slept.
Grandfather's pipe had gone out in his hand, and from grandmother's lap
a ball of crimson yarn had rolled on the rag carpet before the fire.
Twenty years ago she had begun knitting an enormous coverlet in bright
coloured squares, and it was still unfinished, though the strips, packed
away in camphor, filled a chest in Sarah's store closet.

"You wouldn't like any girl I'd marry," he retorted with a feeble
attempt at mirth. "If I tried to put your advice into practice there'd
be trouble as sure as shot."

"No, thar wouldn't--not if I picked her out," she returned.

"Great Scott! Won't you let me choose my own wife even?" he exclaimed,
with a laugh in which there was an ironic humour. The soft pressure of
Molly's fingers was still on his hand, and he saw her face looking up at
him, gentle and beseeching, as she had looked when she offered her lips
to his kiss. Above the yearning of his heart there rose now the decision
of his judgment--and this had surrendered her to Mr. Mullen! Some rigid
strain of morality, inherited from Sarah and therefore continually at
war with her, caused him to torture himself into a mental recognition
that her choice was for the best.

"That man never walked that had sense enough to pick out a wife,"
rejoined Sarah. "To think of a great hulkin' fellow like you losin' yo'
sense over a half mad will-o'-the-wisp that don't even come of decent
people. If she hadn't had eyes as big as saucers, do you reckon you'd
ever have turned twice to look at her?"

"For God's sake don't talk about her--she's not going to marry me," he
responded, and the admission of the truth he had so often repeated in
his own mind caused a pang of disbelief.

"I'd like to know why she ain't?" snorted Sarah indignantly, "does she
think she's goin' to get a better catch in this neighbourhood?"

"Oh, it's all one. She doesn't want to, that is enough."

"Well, she's a fool if she doesn't want to, an' I'll say it to her face.
If thar's a better lookin' man around here, I'd like to see him, or a
better worker. What have the Merryweathers to be so set up about, I'd
like to know? And that gal without even a father to her name that she
can call her own!"

"You mustn't--I won't stand it any longer."

"Well, it's for yo' good, I reckon. If yo' own mother can't take yo'
side, I'd like to know who's goin' to do it?"

"I don't want anybody to take my side. She's got a right not to marry
me."

"I ain't saying' she ain't, an' it's a mighty good thing for you that
she's sech a plum fool as not to want to. 'Twould be the worst news I'd
ever heard if she'd been minded to have you. I'd move heaven an' earth
to keep you from marryin' her, an' if the good Lord has done it instead
of me, I'm thankful enough to Him for His trouble."

Rising from the table, Abel pushed his untasted food aside with a
gesture of loathing. A week ago he had been interested in the minor
details of life; to-night he felt that they bored him profoundly.

"If you knew what you were saying you'd hold your tongue," he retorted
angrily.

"Ain't you goin' to eat yo' supper?" inquired Sarah anxiously, "that
herrin' is real nice and brown."

"I don't want anything. I'm not hungry."

"Mebbe you'd like one of the brandied peaches I'm savin' for Christmas?"

"No, I'm dead beat. I'll go up to sleep pretty soon."

"Do you want a fire? I can lay one in a minute."

He shook his head, not impatiently, but as one to whom brandied peaches
and wood fires are matters of complete indifference.

"I've got to see about something in the stable first. Then I'll go to
bed."

Taking down a lantern from a nail by the door, he went out, as was his
nightly habit, to look at his grey mare Hannah. When he came in again
and stumbled up the narrow staircase to his room, he found that Sarah
had been before him and kindled a blaze from resinous pine on the two
bricks in the fireplace. At the sound of his step, she entered with an
armful of pine boughs, which she tossed to the flames.

"I reckon the cracklin' will make you feel mo' comfortable," she
observed. "Thar ain't anything like a lightwood fire to drive away the
misery."

"It does sound friendly," he responded.

For a moment she hesitated, groping apparently for some topic of
conversation which would divert his mind from one subject that engrossed
him.

"Archie's just come in," she remarked at last, "an' he walked up with
old Uncle Toby, who said he'd seen a ha'nt in the dusk over at Poplar
Spring. I don't see how Mrs. Gay an' Miss Kesiah can endure to live
thar."

"Oh, they're just darkies' tales--nobody believes in them any more than
in conjuring and witches."

"That's true, I reckon, but I shouldn't like to live over thar all
the same. They say old Mr. Jonathan comes out of his grave and walks
whenever one of 'em is to be buried or married."

"Nobody's dead that I've heard of, and I don't suppose either Mr.
Jonathan or Miss Kesiah are thinking of getting married."

"Well, I s'pose so--but I'm might glad he ain't taken the notion to walk
around here. I don't believe in ha'nts, but I ain't got no use for 'em."

She went out, closing the door after her; and dropping into a chair by
the fire, he buried his face in his hands, while he vowed in his heart
that he would stop thinking of Molly.



CHAPTER XIII


BY THE MILL-RACE


A warm, though hazy, sun followed the sharp night, and only the
blackened and damaged plants in the yard bore witness to the frost,
which had melted to the semblance of rain on the grass. On the dappled
boughs of the sycamore by the mill-race several bronze leaves hung limp
and motionless, as if they were attached by silken threads to the stems,
and the coating of moss on the revolving wheel shone like green
enamel on a groundwork of ebony. The white mist, which had wrapped the
landscape at dawn, still lay in the hollows of the pasture, from which
it floated up as the day advanced to dissolve in shining moisture upon
the hillside. There was a keen autumn tang in the air--a mingling of
rotting leaves, of crushed winesaps, of drying sassafras. As Abel passed
from the house to the mill, his gaze rested on a golden hickory tree
near the road, where a grey squirrel sported merrily under the branches.
Like most of his neighbours, he had drawn his weather predictions from
the habits of the wild creatures, and had decided that it would be an
open winter because the squirrels had left the larger part of the nuts
ungarnered.

At the door of the mill, as he turned the big rusty key in the lock,
he told himself doggedly that since he was not to have Molly, the only
sensible thing was to surrender the thought of her. While he started
a blaze in the stove, and swept the floor with the broomsedge broom he
kept for the purpose, he forced his mind to dwell on the sacks of grist
that stood ready for grinding. The fox-hound puppy, Moses, had followed
him from the house, and sat now over the threshold watching a robin that
hopped warily in the band of sunlight. The robin was in search of a few
grains of buckwheat which had dropped from a measure, and the puppy had
determined that, although he was unable to eat the buckwheat himself, he
would endeavor to prevent the robin from doing so. So intent was he
upon this resolve, that he forgot to bark at an old negro, who drove up
presently in an ancient gig, the harness of which was tied on a decrepit
mule with pieces of rope. The negro had left some corn to be ground,
and as he took his sack of meal from the miller, he let fall a few
lamentations on the general forlorn state of human nature.

"Dish yer livin' is moughty hard, marster, but I reckon we'se all got
ter come ter hit."

"Well, you manage to raise a little good corn anyway, so you ought to be
thankful instead of complaining."

"Dar ain' nuttin' 'tall ter be thankful fur in dat, suh, case de Lawd
He ain' had no mo' ter do wid dat ar co'n den ole Marse Hawtrey way over
yonder at Pipin' Tree. I jes' ris dat ar con' wid my own han' right down
de road at my f'ont do', an' po'd de water on hit outer de pump at my
back un. I'se monst'ous glad ter praise de Lawd fur what He done done,
but I ain' gwine ter gin 'im credit fur de wuk er my own fis' en foot."

"Are you going by Jordan's Journey, uncle? I'd like to send Reuben
Merryweather's buckwheat to him."

"Naw, boss, I ain't a-gwine by dar, caze dat ar Jerdan's Jerney ain got
a good name ter my years. I ain't a-feard er ha'nts by daylight, but
I'se monst'ous feared er badness day er nightime, en hit sutney do pear
ter me like de badness er ole Marse Jonathan done got in de a'r er dat
ar Jerdan's Jerney. Hit's ha'nted by badness, dat's what 'tis, en dar
ain nobody cep'n Gawd A'mought Hisse'f dat kin lay badness."

He went out, stooping under the weight of his bag, and picking up a grey
turkey's wing from the ledge, Abel began brushing out the valve of the
mill, in which the meal had grown heavy from dampness.

"The truth is, Moses," he remarked, "you are a fool to want what you
can't have in life." The puppy looked up at him inquiringly, its long
ears flapping about its soft foolish face. "But I reckon we're all
fools, when it comes to that."

When the grinding was over for the day, he shut down the mill, and
calling Moses to heel, went out on the old mill-race, where the upper
gate was locked by a crude wooden spar known as the "key." He was
standing under the sycamore, with this implement in his hand, when he
discerned the figure of Molly approaching slowly amid the feathery white
pollen which lay in patches of delicate bloom over the sorrel waste of
the broomsedge. Without moving he waited until she had crossed the log
and stood looking up at him from the near side of the stream.

"Abel, are you still angry with me?" she asked, smiling.

Dropping the key into the lock, he walked slowly to the end of the
mill-race, and descended the short steps to the hillside.

"No, I'm not angry--at least I don't think I am--but I've taken your
advice and given you up."

"But, Abel---"

"I suppose you meant to take Mr. Mullen all the time that you were
making a fool of me. He's a better man for you, probably, than I am."

"Do you really think that?" she asked in a tone of surprise. "Would you
like to see me married to him?"

He hesitated an instant and then answered: "I honestly believe that it
is the best thing for you to do."

Instead of producing the effect he had foreseen his advice brought a
luminous moisture to her eyes.

"I suppose you think it would do me good to be preached to three times a
day?" she rejoined.

"Well, I believe it wouldn't hurt you, Molly," he responded with a
smile.

His attitude of renouncement drew her suddenly nearer.

"It wasn't about Mr. Mullen that I came to talk to you--there is
something else."

"Surely you aren't thinking of Jim Halloween?"

"No, no, it isn't a man. Why do you seem to think that the beginning
and middle and end of my existence is a man? There are times when I find
even a turkey more interesting."

"It is about a turkey, then, that you have come to see me?"

"Oh, no, it's a man, after all, but not a lover--he's Mr. Chamberlayne,
the lawyer, from Applegate. Yesterday when he was spending the day at
the big house, he came over to see me."

"Had he never seen you before?"

"Of course, when I was little--and later he took me to school in
Applegate. I was to stay there until I was twenty-one you know, but I
ran away the second year because grandfather fell ill with pneumonia and
there was no one to look after him. You remember that, don't you?"

"Yes, I remember. I picked you up on the road and brought you home in my
gig. There was a heavy snow storm."

"It seems that I was meant to be educated as a lady. Old Mr. Jonathan
left a letter about it."

"He did?--damn him! Why didn't he save himself the trouble by acting
decently in the beginning?"

"That was because of Mrs. Gay--he had promised her, when he thought she
was dying, some dreadful thing. And after that he was afraid--afraid of
her all his life. Isn't it terrible that such a saintly person should
have caused so much sin?"

"But what was she to him that he should have been such a coward about
her?"

"Oh, he loved her more than anything on earth--for he loved my mother
only a little while. When Mrs. Gay first came to live with him, she was
so beautiful and so delicate, that she looked as if a wind would
blow her away--so soft that she could smother a person like a mass of
feathers. He felt after that that he had entangled himself, and it was
only at the last when he was dying that he had any remorse. With all
his wickedness there was a terrible kind of religion in him--like a rock
that is buried under the earth--and he wanted to save his soul alive
before he passed on to judgment. As if _that_ did any good--or he
_could_ make amends either to me or to God."

"I rather hope he was as unsuccessful in the last case as in the first.
But, tell me, Molly, how does it affect you?"

"Not at all--not at all--if he has left me money, I shall not touch it.
He wasn't thinking of mother, but of his own soul at the end, and can
you tell me that God would wipe out all his dreadful past just because
of one instant's fear?"

Her passion, so unlike the meekness of Janet Merryweather, made him look
at her wonderingly, and yet with a sympathy that kept him dumb. It took
the spirit of a Gay to match a Gay, he thought, not without bitterness.

"But why does Mr. Chamberlayne come to you now?" he asked, when he had
regained his voice.

"It is Mrs. Gay--it has always been Mrs. Gay ever since Mr. Jonathan
first saw her. She smothered his soul with her softness, and wound him
about her little finger when she appeared all the time too weak to
lift her hand. That's just the kind Mr. Mullen preaches about in his
sermons--the kind that rules without your knowing it. But if she'd been
bold and bad instead of soft and good, she couldn't have done half the
harm!"

"And Miss Kesiah?" he asked, "had she nothing to do with it?"

"She? Oh, her sister has drained her--there isn't an ounce of red blood
left in her veins. Mr. Jonathan never liked her because she is homely,
and she had no influence over him. Mrs. Gay ruled him."

"I always thought her so lovely and gentle," he said regretfully, "she
seems to me so much more womanly than Miss Kesiah."

"I suppose she is as far as her face goes, and that's what people judge
by. If you part your hair and look a certain way nothing that you can do
will keep them from thinking you an angel. When I smile at Mr. Mullen in
church it convinces him that I like visiting the sick."

"How can you laugh at him, Molly, if you are going to marry him?"

"Have you positively decided," she inquired, "that I am going to marry
him?"

"Wasn't that what you meant when you threw me over?"

She shook her head, "No, it wasn't what I meant--but since you've made
up your mind, I suppose there's no use for me to say a word?"

"On the whole I don't think there is--for your words are not honest
ones."

"Then why do you judge me by them, Abel?" she asked very softly.

"Because a man must judge by something and I can't look into your heart.
But if I'm not to be your lover," he added, "I'll not be your plaything.
It's now or never."

"Why, Abel!" she exclaimed in mock astonishment.

"It's the last time I shall ever ask you--Molly, will you marry me?"

"You've forgotten poor Mr. Mullen."

"Hang Mr. Mullen! I shall ask you just three times, and the third time
will be the last--Now, Molly will you marry me? That's the second."

"But it's so sudden, Abel."

"If ten years can't prepare you, ten minutes will be no better. Here
goes the third and last, Molly---"

"Abel, how _can_ you be so silly?"

"That's not an answer--will you---"

"Do you mean if I don't promise now, I'll never have the chance again?"

"I've told you--listen---"

"Oh, wait a minute. Please, go slowly."

"--Marry me?"

"Abel, I don't believe you love me!" she said, and began to sob.

"Answer me and I'll show you."

"I didn't think you'd be so cruel--when---"

"When? Remember I've stopped playing, Molly."

"When you know I'm simply dying for you," she responded.

He smiled at her without moving. "Then answer my question, and there's
no drawing back this time remember."

"The question you asked me? Repeat it, please."

"I've said it three times already, and that's enough."

"Must I put it into words? Oh Abel, can't you see it?"

Lifting her chin, he laughed softly as he stooped and kissed her.
"I've seen it several times before, darling. Now I want it put into
words--just plain ones."

"Then, Mr. Abel Revercomb," she returned demurely, "I should like very
much to marry you, if you have no objection."

The next instant her mockery fled, and in one of those spells of
sadness, which seemed so alien to her, and yet so much a part of her,
she clung to him, sobbing.

"Abel, I love you so, be good to me," she entreated.

"Good to you!" he exclaimed, crushing her to him.

"Oh, those dreadful days since we quarrelled!"

"Why did you do it, darling, since you suffered as well as I?"

"I can't tell--there's something in me like that, I don't know what it
is--but we'll quarrel again after this, I suppose."

"Then we deserve to be punished and I hope we shall be."

"How will that help? It's just life and we can't make it different."
She drew gently away from him, while a clairvoyance wiser than her years
saddened her features. "I wonder if love ever lasts?" she whispered half
to herself.

But there was no room in his more practical mind for the question. "Ours
will, sweetheart--how can you doubt it? Haven't I loved you for the last
ten years, not counting the odd days?"

"And in all those years you kissed me once, while in the last five
minutes you've kissed me--how many times? You are wasteful, Abel."

"And you're a dreadful little witch--not a woman."

"I suppose I am, and a nice girl wouldn't talk like this. I'm not the
wife you're wanting, Abel."

"The first and last and only one, my darling."

"Judy Hatch would suit you better if she wasn't in love with the
rector."

"Confound Judy Hatch! I'll stop your mouth with kisses if you mention
her again."

At this she clung to him, laughing and crying in a sudden passion of
fear.

"Hold me fast, Abel, and don't let me go, whatever happens," she said.

When he had parted from her at the fence which divided his land from
Gay's near the Poplar Spring, he watched her little figure climb the
Haunt's Walk and then disappear into the leafless shrubbery at the back
of the house. While he looked after her it seemed to him that the
wan November day grew radiant with colour, and that spring blossomed
suddenly, out of season, upon the landscape. His hour was upon him
when he turned and retraced his steps over the silver brook and up the
gradual slope, where the sun shone on the bare soil and revealed each
separate clod of earth as if it were seen under a microscope. All nature
was at one with him. He felt the flowing of his blood so joyously that
he wondered why the sap did not rise and mount upward in the trees.

In the yard Sarah was directing a negro boy, who was spreading a second
layer of manure over her more delicate plants. As Abel closed the gate,
she looked up, and the expression of his face held her eyes while he
came toward her.

"What has happened, Abel? You look like Moses when he came down from the
mountain."

"It was all wrong--what I told you last night, mother. Molly is going to
marry me."

"You mean she's gone an' changed her mind jest as you'd begun to git
along without her. I declar', I don't know what has got into you to show
so little sperit. If you were the man I took you to be, you'd up an' let
her see quick enough that you don't ax twice in the same quarter."

"Oh, all that's over now--she's going to marry me."

"You needn't shout so. I ain't deaf. Samson, sprinkle another spadeful
of manure on that bridal-wreath bush over thar by the porch."

"Won't you say you're pleased?"

"I ain't pleased, Abel, an' I ain't going to lie about it. When I git
down on my knees to-night, I'll pray harder than I ever prayed in my
life that you'll come to yo' senses an' see what a laughing-stock that
gal has made of you."

"Then I wish I hadn't told you."

"Well, I'd have knowed it anyhow--it's burstin' out of you. Where're you
goin' now? The time's gittin' on toward dinner."

"For my axe. I want to cut a little timber."

"What on earth are you goin' to cut timber at this hour for?"

"Oh, I feel like it, that's all. I want to try my strength."

Going into the kitchen, he came out a minute later with his axe on
his shoulder. As he crossed the log over the mill-stream, the spotted
fox-hound puppy waddled after him, and several startled rabbits peered
out from a clump of sassafras by the "worm" fence. Over the fence went
Abel, and under it, on his fat little belly, went Moses, the puppy. In
the meadow the life-everlasting shed a fragrant pollen in the sunshine,
and a few crippled grasshoppers deluded themselves into the belief that
the summer still lingered. Once the puppy tripped over a love-vine,
and getting his front paws painfully entangled yelped sharply for
assistance. Picking him up, Abel carried him in his arms to the pine
wood, where he place him on a bed of needles in a hollow.

Through the slender boles of the trees, the sunlight fell in bars on
the carpet of pine-cones. The scent of the living forest was in his
nostrils, and when he threw back his head, it seemed to him that the
blue sky was resting upon the tree-tops. Taking off his coat, he felt
the edge of his blade, while he leaned against the great pine he had
marked out for sacrifice. In the midst of the wood he saw the walls of
his house rising--saw the sun on the threshold--the smoke mount from
the chimney. The dream in his brain was the dream of the race in its
beginning--for he saw the home and in the centre of the home he saw a
woman and in the arms of the woman he saw a child. Though the man would
change, the dream was indestructible, and would flow on from the future
into the future. The end it served was not individual, but racial--for
it belonged not to the soul of the lover, but to the integral structure
of life.

Moving suddenly, as if in response to a joyous impulse, he drew away
from the tree, and lifting his axe swung it out into the sunlight. For
an instant there was silence. Then a shiver shook the pine from its
roots upward, the boughs rocked in the blue sky, and a bird flying out
of them sailed slowly into the west.



CHAPTER XIV


SHOWS THE WEAKNESS IN STRENGTH


When Abel had gone, Sarah folded her grey woollen shawl over her bosom,
and ordered the boy with the wheelbarrow to return to the barnyard. Left
alone her eyes followed her son's figure as it divided the broomsedge in
the meadow, but from the indifference of her look she might have gazed
on the pine tree toward which he was moving. A little later, when her
glance passed to the roof of the mill there was no perceptible change in
her expression; and she observed dispassionately that the shingles which
caught the drippings from the sycamore were beginning to rot. While she
stood there she was in the throes of one of the bitterest sorrows of
her life; yet there was no hint of it either in her quiet face or in the
rigid spareness of her figure. Her sons had resisted her at times, but
until to-day not one of them had rebelled openly against her authority
in the matter of marriage. Years ago, in the period of Abner's reaction
from a blighted romance, she had chosen, without compunction, a
mild-mannered, tame-spirited maiden for his wife. Without compunction,
when the wedding was over, she had proceeded, from the best possible
motives, to torment the tame-spirited maiden into her grave.

"He's layin' up misery for himself and for all concerned," she said
aloud, after a moment, "a girl like that with no name and precious
little religion--an idle, vain, silly hussy, with a cropped head!"

A small coloured servant, in a girl's pinafore and a boy's breeches,
came to the door, and whispered that the old people were demanding a
snack of bread and molasses.

"Tell 'em it ain't the day for sweets an' they ain't goin' to have meat
an' molasses the same day," she remarked as she entered the kitchen.
"If I didn't watch you every minute, you'd make yo'selves sick with
overeatin'."

"I reckon you're right, Sary," piped grandfather in angry tones, "but
I ain't so sure I wouldn't rather have the sickness than the watchin'.
It's hard on a man of my years an' experience that he shouldn't be
allowed to project with his own stomach."

"You'd have been dead long ago but for me, an' you ought to be ashamed
of yo'self for talkin' such foolishness. As if I hadn't wo' myself out
with waitin' on you, an' no blood relation."

"No blood relation!" chimed in grandmother maliciously, "no blood
relation!"

"Well, you hurry up an' get ready for dinner, for I'm goin' out
afterwards."

"Whar on earth are you goin', Sary? It ain't Sunday."

"It don't matter to you whar I'm goin'--you jest set right up an' eat
yo' soup."

When she had poured the contents of the pot into the two earthenware
bowls, she crumbled a piece of bread into each, and gave the dinner into
the trembling hands which were stretched out eagerly to receive it. Then
taking the red-and-white cloth from the cupboard, she set the table for
five, and brought the dish of turnips and boiled beef from the stove.
Every detail was carefully attended to as if her thoughts were not
on the hillside with Abel, but she herself could not eat so much as a
mouthful. A hard lump rose in her throat and prevented her swallowing.

The men did not appear, so leaving their dinner in the stove, she went
upstairs and put on the black poke bonnet and the alpaca mantle trimmed
with bugles which she wore on Sundays and on the occasional visits
to her neighbours. As it was her custom never to call without bearing
tribute in the form of fruit or preserves, she placed a jar of red
currant jelly into a little basket, and started for her walk, holding it
tightly in her black worsted gloves. She knew that if Molly divined her
purpose she would hardly accept the gift, but the force of habit was
too strong for her, and she felt that she could not start out to make a
visit with empty hands.

Her chief anxiety was to be gone before Abel should return, and for
this reason she left the house by the back door, and chose the small,
descending path that led through the willows to Jordan's Journey. As
she neared the brook a bow of blue ribbon hanging on a branch caught
her eye, and she recognized a bit of the trimming from Blossom's Sunday
dress. Releasing it she put it into her pocket, with the resolve that
she would reprove her granddaughter for wearing her best clothes in such
unsuitable places. Then her thoughts returned to the immediate object
of her visit, and she told herself sternly that she would let Molly
Merryweather know her opinion of her while there was yet time for the
girl to withdraw from the marriage. That she was wronging her son by
exerting such despotic authority was the last thought that would have
occurred to her. A higher morality than that of ordinary mortals had
guided her in the past, and she followed it now.

When she reached the rail fence, she found some difficulty in climbing
it, since her legs had grown rheumatic with the cold weather; but by
letting the basket down first on a forked stick, she managed to ease
herself gently over to the opposite side. Here she rested, while she
carefully brushed away the dried pollen from the golden-rod, which was
staining her dress. Then regaining her strength after a minute, she
pushed on under the oak trees, where the moist, dead leaves made a soft,
velvety sound, to the apple orchard and the sunken flagged walk that led
to the overseer's cottage.

In the sunshine on the porch Reuben Merryweather was sitting; and at
sight of his visitor, he rose, with a look of humble surprise, and
invited her into the house. His manner toward her was but a smaller
expression of his mental attitude to the universe. That he possessed
any natural rights as an individual had never occurred to him; and the
humility with which he existed gave place only to the mild astonishment
which filled him at any recognition of that existence by man or
Providence.

"Walk in an' sit down, ma'am," he said hospitably leading the way into
the little sitting-room, where the old hound dozed on the rug. "Molly's
jest gone down to the spring-house, but she'll be back in a minute."

"Reuben Merryweather--" began Sarah, and then she stopped, "you ain't
lookin' over sprightly," she said after a pause.

"I've got a weak chest, an' the cold settles on it."

"Did you ever try mutton suet laid over it on a piece of red flannel?
'Tis the best cure I know of."

"Molly makes me a plaster for it at night." The feeling that he had
engrossed the conversation for his selfish ends led him to remark after
a minute, "You have changed but little, Sarah, a brave woman you are."

"Not so brave, Reuben, but I'm a believer an' that helps me. I'd have
broken down under the burden often enough if my faith hadn't supported
me. You've had yo' troubles, too, Reuben, an' worse ones."

"It's true, it's true," said the old man, coughing behind his hand, "to
see my po' gal suffer so was worst--but however bad things seemed to us
on top, I've al'ays believed thar was a hidden meanin' in em' that our
eyes couldn't see."

"Ah, you were al'ays a soft natured man, Reuben, too soft natured for
yo' own good, I used to think."

"'Twas that that stood against me with you, Sarah, when we were young.
Do you remember the time you refused to drive back with me from that
picnic at Falling Creek because I wouldn't give Jacob Bumpass a hiding
about something? That was a bitter pill to me, an' I've never forgot
it."

Sarah had flushed a little, and her stern face appeared to have
grown ten years younger. "To think that you ain't forgot all that old
foolishness, Reuben!"

"Well, thar's been time enough an' trouble enough, no doubt," he
answered, "but seein' you lookin' so like yo' old self put me in mind of
it."

"Lord, Reuben, I ain't thought of all that for forty years!"

"No mo' have I, Sarah except when I see you on Sundays sittin' across
the church from me. You were a beauty in yo' day, though some folks use
to think that that little fair thing, Mary Hilliard, was better lookin'.
To me 'twas like settin' a dairy maid beside a queen."

"Even my husband thought Mary Hilliard, was prettier," said Sarah, and
her tone showed that this tribute to her youthful vanity had touched her
heart.

"Well, I never did. You were al'ays too good for me an' I never
begrudged you to Abner. He was a better man."

For an instant she looked at him steadily, while living honesty
struggled in her bosom against loyalty to the dead.

"No, Reuben, Abner was not a better man," she said presently, as if the
words were thrust out of her by a chastening conscience. "My pride kept
me up after I had married him; but he was born shiftless an' he died
shiftless. He never did a day's work in his life that I didn't drive him
to. His children have never known how it was, for I've al'ays made 'em
think he was a hard worker an' painstakin' to keep back his laziness
from croppin' out in 'em, if I could."

"You've brought 'em up well. That's a fine son of yours that comes
courtin' my gal, Sarah. I've hoped she'd fancy him for the sake of old
times."

"I never thought of yo' recollectin' that feelin', Reuben. It makes me
feel almost young again, an' I that old an' wo' out. I've had a hard
life--thar's no disputin' it, marriage is mostly puttin' up with things,
I reckon, when it ain't makin' believe."

"Thar's mighty few that gits the one that's meant for 'em," said Reuben,
"that's sure enough. If we did we'd stop movin' forward, I suppose, an'
begin to balk. I haven't much life now, except in Molly, an' it's the
things that pleases or hurt her that I feel the most. She's got a warm
heart an' a hot temper like you used to have, Sarah, an' the world ain't
easy generally to yo' sort."

For a time Sarah was silent, her hands in their black woolen gloves
gripping the handle of the basket.

"Well, I must be goin', Reuben," she said presently, rising from her
chair. "I'm sorry about yo' chest, an' I jest stepped over to bring you
this glass of currant jelly I made last summer. It goes well with meat
when yo' appetite ain't hearty."

She held out her hand, shook his with a hurried and awkward movement,
and went out of the front door and down the flagged walk as Molly's
steps were heard in the kitchen at the back.

"Sarah Revercomb has been here, honey," said Reuben. "She brought me
over this glass of currant jelly, and said she was sorry to miss you."

"Why, what could she have meant?" asked Molly. "She hates me and she
knows I've never liked her."

"Like most folks it ain't Sarah but the way you take her that matters.
We've all got the split somewhar in our shell if you jest know how to
find it. I reckon she's given in about Abel an' came over to show it."

"I'm glad she brought you the jelly, and perhaps she is getting softer
with age," rejoined Molly, still puzzled.

"Don't worry, honey, she's a good woman at bottom, but mortal slow of
larnin', and thar's a lot of Sarah in that boy of hers."

"I suppose there is, grandfather, for all their fierce quarrelling. They
have the kind of love that will die for you and yet will not so much as
suffer you to live. That's the way Mrs. Revercomb loves, and it's the
way Abel is loving me now."

"Let him larn, pretty, let him larn. He'll be worth twice as much at
fifty as he is to-day, an' so will you for that matter. They're fools
that say love is for the young, Molly, don't you believe 'em."

Sarah, meanwhile, passed slowly down the flagged walk under the gnarled
old apple trees in the orchard. A few heavy-winged insects, awaking from
the frost of the night, droned over the piles of crushed winesaps, and
she heard the sound as though it came to her across a distance of
forty years. They were not easy years; she was worn by their hardness,
crippled by their poverty, embittered by their sorrows. "I've had a hard
life," she thought. "I've had a hard life, an' it warn't fair." For the
first time it occurred to her that the Providence she had served had
not used her honourably in return. "Even Abner al'ays thought that Mary
Hilliard was the prettiest," she added, after a minute.

As she crossed the lawn at Jordan's Journey, Uncle Abednego, the butler,
appeared at the back door, and detained her with an excited wave of the
hand.

"Lawd A'mighty, dar's bad times yer, Miss Sary!" he cried, "Miss Angela
she's been mos' dead fur goin' on two hours, en we all's done sont
Cephus on de bay horse arter Marse Jonathan!"



CHAPTER XV


SHOWS THE TYRANNY OF WEAKNESS


Three days later the bay horse returned at a gallop with Jonathan Gay
in the saddle. At the head of the steps Kesiah was standing, and she
answered the young man's anxious questions with a manner which she tried
to make as sympathetic as the occasion required. This effort to adjust
her features into harmony with her feelings had brought her brows
together in a forbidding scowl and exaggerated the harsh lines between
mouth and chin.

"Am I in time?" he asked in a trembling voice, and his hand reached out
to her for support.

"The immediate danger is over, Jonathan," she answered, while she led
him into the library and closed the door softly behind them. "For hours
we despaired of her recovery, but the doctors say now that if there is
no other shock, she may live on for months."

"I got your note last night in Washington," he returned. "It was
forwarded by mail from Applegate. Is the doctor still with her?"

"No, he has just gone. The rector is there now. She finds him a great
comfort."

"It was so sudden, Aunt Kesiah--she appeared well when I left her. What
caused the attack?"

"A talk she had had with Mr. Chamberlayne. It seems he thought it best
to prepare her for the fact that your Uncle Jonathan left a good deal
of his property--it amounts to an income of about ten thousand a year,
I believe, to Reuben Merryweather's granddaughter when she comes of age.
Of course it wasn't the money--Angela never gave that a thought--but
the admission that the girl was his illegitimate daughter that struck so
heavy a blow."

"But surely she must have suspected---"

"She has never suspected anything in her life. It is a part of her
sweetness, you know, that she never faces an unpleasant fact until it is
literally thrust on her notice. As long as your uncle was so devoted to
her and so considerate, she thought it a kind of disloyalty to inquire
as to the rest of his life. Once I remember, twenty years ago, when that
poor distraught creature came to me--I went straight to Angela and tried
to get her to use her influence with her uncle for the girl's sake. But
at the first hint, she locked herself in her room and refused to let
me come near her. Then it was that I had that terrible quarrel with Mr.
Gay, and he hardly spoke to me again as long as he lived. I believe,
though, he would have married Janet after my talk with him except for
Angela's illness, which was brought on by the shock of hearing him speak
of his intention." She sighed wonderingly, her anxious frown deepening
between her eyebrows. "They both seemed to think that in some way I was
to blame for the whole thing," she added, "and your uncle never forgave
me. It's the same way now. Mr. Chamberlayne spoke quite angrily to me
when he saw the effect of his interview. He appeared to think that I
ought to have prevented it."

"Could it have been kept from her, do you suppose?"

"That looked impossible, and of course, he broke it to her very gently.
He also, you know, has all his life had a sentiment about Angela, and
that, I think is why he never married. He told me once that she came
nearer than any woman he had ever seen to representing every man's
ideal."

"What I can't understand is why she should have been so upset by the
discovery?"

"Well, she was very fond of your uncle, and she has cherished quite
romantically the memory of his affection for her. I think--for that
is Angela's way--that he means much more to her dead than he did
living--and this, she says, has blackened the image."

"But even then it seems incomprehensible that it should have made her
really so ill."

"Oh, you don't know her yet, Jonathan. I remember your uncle used to say
that she was more like a flower than a woman, and he was always starting
alarms about her health. We lived in a continual panic about her for
several years, and it was her weakness, as much as her beauty, that gave
her her tremendous power over him. He was like wax in her hands, though
of course he never suspected it."

The tread of Mr. Mullen was heard softly on the staircase, and he
entered with his hand outstretched from the starched cuff that showed
beneath the sleeve of his black broadcloth coat. Pausing on the rug, he
glanced from Kesiah to Jonathan with a grave and capable look, as
though he wished them to understand that, having settled everything
with perfect satisfaction in the mind of Mrs. Gay, he was now ready to
perform a similar office for the rest of the household.

"I am thankful to say that I left your dear mother resting peacefully,"
he observed in a whisper. "You must have had a distressing journey, Mr.
Gay?"

"I was very much alarmed," replied Gay, with a nervous gesture as if he
were pushing aside a disagreeable responsibility. "The note took three
days to find me, and I didn't know until I got here whether she was
alive or dead."

"It is easy to understand your feelings," returned the rector, still
whispering though Gay had spoken in his natural voice. "Such a mother
as yours deserves the most careful cherishing that you can give her. To
know her has been an inspiration, and I am never tired of repeating that
her presence in the parish, and occasional attendance at church, are
privileges for which we should not forget to be thankful. It is not
possible, I believe, for any woman to approach more closely the perfect
example of her sex."

"Perhaps I had better go up to her at once. We are deeply grateful to
you, Mr. Mullen, for your sympathy."

"Who would not have felt?" rejoined the other, and taking up his hat
from the table, he went out, still treading softly as though he were
walking upon something he feared to hurt.

"Poor mother! It's wonderful the way she has with people!" exclaimed
Gay, turning to Kesiah.

"She's always had it with men--there's something so appealing about her.
You'll be very careful what you say to her, Jonathan."

"Oh, I'll not confess my sins, if that's what you mean," he responded as
he ascended the staircase.

The room was fragrant with burning cedar, and from the dormer-windows,
latticed by boughs, a band of sunlight stretched over the carpet to the
high white bed in which his mother was lying. Her plaintive blue eyes,
which clung to him when he entered, appeared to say; "Yes, see how they
have hurt me--a poor frail creature." Above her forehead her hair, which
was going grey, broke into a mist, and spread in soft, pale strands over
the pillow. Never had her helpless sweetness appealed so strongly to his
emotions, as when she laid her hand on his arm and said in an apologetic
whisper:

"Dear boy, how I hated to bring you back."

"As if I wouldn't have come from the end of the world, dearest mother,"
he answered.

He had fallen on his knees by her bed, but when Kesiah brought him a
chair, he rose and settled himself more comfortably.

"I wanted you, dear, but if you knew how I dreaded to become a drag
on you. Men must be free, I know--never let me interfere with your
freedom--I feel such a helpless, burdensome creature."

"If you could only see how young and lovely you look even when you
are ill, you would never fear becoming a burden. In spite of your grey
hairs, you might pass for a girl at this minute."

"You wicked flatterer!--but, oh, Jonathan, I've had a blow!"

"I understand. It must have been rough."

"And to think how I always idealized him!--how I had believed in his
love for me and cherished his memory! To discover that even at the
last--on his deathbed--he was thinking of that woman!"

She wept gently, wiping her eyes with a resigned and suffering gesture
on the handkerchief Kesiah had handed her. "I feel as if my whole
universe had crumbled," she said.

"But it was no affront to you, mother--it all happened before he saw
you, and was only an episode. Those things don't bite into a man's life,
you know."

"Of course, I knew there had been something, but I thought he had
forgotten it--that he was faithful to his love for me--his spirit
worship, he called it. Then to find out so long after his death--when
his memory had become a part of my religion--that he had turned back at
the end."

"It wasn't turning away from you, it was merely an atonement. Your
influence was visible even there."

"I am sorry for the child, of course," she said sadly, after weeping a
little--"who knows but she may have inherited her mother's character?"

"The doctor said you were to be quiet, Angela," remarked Kesiah, who had
stood at the foot of the bed in the attitude of a Spartan. "Jonathan, if
you begin to excite her, you'd better go."

"Oh, my boy, my darling boy," sobbed Mrs. Gay, with her head on his
shoulder, "I have but one comfort and that is the thought that you are
so different--that you will never shatter my faith in you. If you only
knew how thankful I am to feel that you are free from these dreadful
weaknesses of men."

Cowed by her helplessness, he looked down on her with shining eyes.

"Remember the poor devil loved you, mother, and be merciful to his
memory," he replied, touched, for the first time, by the thought of his
uncle.

"I shall try, Jonathan, I shall try, though the very thought of evil is
a distress to me," she replied, with a saintly look. "As for the girl, I
have only the tenderest pity for the unfortunate creature."

"That's like you, mother."

"Kesiah says that she has behaved very well. Didn't you say so, Kesiah?"

"Yes, Mr. Chamberlayne told me that she appeared perfectly indifferent
when he spoke to her. She even remarked, I believe, that she didn't see
that it concerned her."

"Well, she's spirit enough. Now stop talking, mother, I am going."

"God bless you, my darling boy--you have never failed me."

Instead of appeasing his conscience, the remark completed his descent
into the state of disenchantment he had been approaching for hours. The
shock of his mother's illness, coming after three days of marriage, had
been too much for his unstable equilibrium, and he felt smothered by
an oppression which, in some strange way, seemed closing upon him from
without. It was in the air--in the faded cretonne of the room, in
the grey flashes of the swallows from the eaves of the house, in the
leafless boughs etched delicately against the orange light of the
sky. Like most adventurers of the emotions, he was given to swift
despondencies as well as to vivid elations, and the tyranny of a mood
was usually as absolute as it was brief. The fact was there while it
lasted like the physical sensation of hunger or gratification. When it
departed he seldom spurred his imagination to the pursuit of it.

"So it's over," he said under his breath, as he looked through the
lacework of ivy on the small greenish panes to the desolate November
fields, "and I've been a damn fool for the asking!"

At the end of the week Blossom returned to the mill, and on the
afternoon of her arrival, Gay met her in the willow copse by the brook.
To the casual observer there would have appeared no perceptible change
in his manner, but a closer student of the hearts of lovers might
have drawn an inference from the fact that he allowed her to wait
five minutes for him at the place of meeting. True, as he explained
passionately, his mother had asked for him just as he was leaving the
house, and it was clearly impossible that he should refuse his mother!
That he was still ardent for Blossom's embraces was evident to her
glance, but the affair was settled, the mystery solved, and there was no
longer need that he should torment himself. That the love of his kind is
usually a torment or nothing had not, at this stage, occurred to either
of the lovers. He was feeling strongly that, having conducted himself
in so honourable a manner there was nothing more to be expected of him;
while she assured her heart that when his love had proved capable of so
gallant a sacrifice, it had established the fact of its immortality. The
truth was that the fire still burned, though the obstacles, which had
supplied fuel to the flames, were consumed, and a pleasant warmth rather
than a destroying blaze was the result. Had Gay sounded the depths of
his nature, which he seldom did, he would have discovered that for him
passion was a kind of restlessness translated into emotion. When the
restlessness was appeased, the desire in which it had revealed itself
slowly evaporated.

"How is your mother?" was Blossom's first eager question, "oh, I do hope
she is better!"

"Better, yes, but we're still awfully anxious, the least shock may kill
her--Aunt Kesiah and I are walking on pins and needles. How are you,
Beauty? Did you enjoy your visit?"

He kissed her lips, and she clung to him with the first expression of
weakness she had ever shown.

"How could I when it ended like that?"

"Well, you're married anyway--that ought to satisfy you. What does it
feel like?"

"I can't believe it--and I haven't even any ring."

"Oh, the ring! If you'd had it, you'd have dropped it about somewhere
and let out the secret."

"I wish it had been in church and before a clergyman."

"Are you trying to make me jealous again of the Reverend Orlando? I'm an
old married man now, and it is hopeless."

"Do you really feel married, Jonathan?"

"The deuce I don't! If I did I'd be galloping down the turnpike."

"I wonder why you did it?" she questioned a little wistfully, "you take
it so lightly."

"I could only take it lightly after I'd done it--that's why, darling."

"If I could believe in it I shouldn't mind the secrecy," she said, "but
I feel so wicked and underhand that I hardly dare hold up my head before
the folks at home. Jonathan, when do you think we may come out and
confess?"

For a moment he did not answer, and she watched the frown gather slowly
between his eyebrows.

"There, there, Blossom, don't begin that already," he responded
irritably, "we can't make it public as long as my mother lives--that's
out of the question. Do you think I could love you if I felt you had
forced me to murder her? Heaven knows I've done enough--I've married you
fair and square, and you ought to be satisfied."

"I am satisfied," she replied on the point of tears, "but, oh, Jonathan,
I'm not happy."

"Then it's your own fault," he answered, still annoyed with her. "You've
had everything your own way, and just because I get in trouble and come
to you for sympathy, you begin to nag. For God's sake, don't become a
nagging woman, Blossom. A man hates her worse than poison."

"O Jonathan!" she cried out sharply, placing her hand on her breast as
though he had stabbed her.

"Of course, I'm only warning you. Your great charm is poise--I never saw
a woman who had so much of it. That's what a man wants in a wife,
too. Vagaries are all right in a girl, but when he marries, he wants
something solid and sensible."

"Then you do love me, Jonathan?"

"Don't be a goose," he rejoined--for it was a question to which he had
never in his life returned a direct answer.

"Of course, I know you do or you wouldn't have married me--but I wish
you'd tell me so--just in words--sometimes."

"If I told you so, you'd have no curiosity left, and that would be bad
for you. Come, kiss me, sweetheart, that's better than talking."

She kissed him obediently, as mildly complaisant as she had once been
coldly aloof. Though the allurement of the remote had deserted her, she
still possessed, in his eyes, the attraction of the beautiful. If the
excitement of the chase was ended, the pleasure of the capture was still
amply sufficient to make up the difference. He laughed softly as he
kissed her, enjoying her freshness, her surrender, her adoration, which
she no longer attempted to hide.

When he parted from her several hours afterwards, he had almost
recovered the casual gaiety which had become his habit of mind. Life
was too short either to wonder or to regret, he had once remarked, and
a certain easy fatalism had softened so far the pricks of a disturbing
conscience.

The walk from the pasture to the house led through a tangle of shrubbery
called by the negroes, the Haunt's Walk, and as he pushed the leafless
boughs out of his way, a flitting glimpse of red caught his eye beyond
a turn in the path. An instant later, Molly passed him on her way to the
spring or to the meadows beyond.

"Good day, Mr. Jonathan," she said, while her lips curved and she looked
up at him with her arch and brilliant smile.

"Good day to yourself, cousin," he responded gaily, "what is your
hurry?"

As he made a movement to detain her, she slipped past him, and a minute
afterwards her laugh floated back.

"Oh, there's a reason!" she called over her shoulder.

A sudden thought appeared to strike him at her words, and turning
quickly in the path, he looked after her until she disappeared down the
winding path amid the tangle of shrubbery.

"Jove, she is amazingly pretty!" he said at last under his breath.



CHAPTER XVI


THE COMING OF SPRING


The winter began in a long rain and ended in a heavy snow which lay for
a week over the country. In the chill mornings while she dressed, Molly
watched the blue-black shadows of the crows skimming over the white
ground, and there was always a dumb anxiety at her heart as she looked
after them.

On Christmas Eve there had been a dance at Piping Tree, and because she
had danced twice with Gay (who had ridden over in obedience to a whim),
Abel had parted from her in anger. For the first time she had felt
the white heat of his jealousy, and it had aroused rebellion, not
acquiescence, in her heart. Jonathan Gay was nothing to her (though
he called her his cousin)--he had openly shown his preference for
Blossom--but she insisted passionately that she was free and would dance
with whomsoever she pleased. To Abel's demand that she should give up
"round dances" entirely, she had returned a defiant and mocking laugh.
They had parted in an outburst of temper, to rush wildly together a few
days later when they met by chance in the turnpike.

"You love him, but you don't love him enough, honey," said Reuben,
patting her head. "You love yourself still better than him."

"Three months ago he hardly dared hope for me--he would have kissed the
dust under my feet--and now he flies into fits of jealousy because I
dance with another man."

"'Tis human natur to go by leaps an' starts in love, Molly."

"It's a foolish way, grandfather."

"Well, I ain't claimin' that we're over-wise, but thar's al'ays life
ready to teach us."

When the snow thawed, spring appeared so suddenly that it looked as
if it had lain there all winter in a green and gold powder over the
meadows. Flashes of blue, like bits of fallen sky, showed from the
rail fences; and the notes of robins fluted up from the budding willows
beside the brook. On the hill behind Reuben Merryweather's cottage the
peach-trees bloomed, and red-bud and dogwood filled the grey woods with
clouds of delicate colour. Spring, which germinated in the earth, moved
also, with a strange restlessness, in the hearts of men and women. As
the weeks passed, that inextinguishable hope, which mounts always with
the rising sap, looked from their faces.

On the morning of her birthday, a warm April day, Molly smiled at
herself in the mirror, and because the dimples became her, wondered how
she could manage to keep on smiling forever. Blushing and paling she
tried a ribbon on her hair, threw it aside, and picked up another.

"I am thankful for many things," she was thinking, "and most of all I
am thankful that I am pretty. I suppose it's better to be good like Judy
Hatch, but I'd rather be pretty."

She was at the age when the forces of character still lie dormant, and
an accident may determine the direction of their future development.
It is the age when it is possible for fortune to make a dare-devil of a
philosopher, a sceptic of a worshipper, a cynic of a sentimentalist.

When she went down the flagged walk a little later to meet Abel by the
blazed pine as she had promised, she was still smiling to herself and
to the blue birds that sang joyously in the blossoming trees in the
orchard. At the end of the walk her smile vanished for she came face to
face with Jim Halloween, who carried a new-born lamb in his arms.

"Many happy returns of the day," he began with emotion. "I thought a
present like this would be the most acceptable thing I could bring to
you--an' ma agreed with me when I asked her advice."

"It's very good of you--and how darling it is! I'll take it back and
make it comfortable before I start out."

Taking the lamb into her arms, she hid her face in its wool while they
returned to the house.

"It ain't so young as it looks, an will begin to be peart enough befo'
long," he remarked. "Something useful as well as ornamental, was what I
had in mind to bring you. 'Thar's nothin' mo' suitable all round for the
purpose than a lamb,' was what I said to ma. 'She can make a pet of it
at first, an' then when it gets too big to pet, she can turn it into
mutton.'"

"But I wouldn't--I'd never let it be killed--the little darling!"

"Now, that's foolishness, I reckon," he returned admiringly, "but thar's
something downright takin' in foolishness as long as a woman is pretty.
I don't mind it, an' I don't reckon ma would unless it turned to
wastefulness. Is thar' any hope you've changed yo' mind since the last
time I spoke about marriage?"

"No, I haven't changed, Mr. Halloween."

He sighed not passionately, but with a resigned and sentimental regret.

"Well, in that case, it's a pity I've wasted so much time wantin' you, I
reckon," he rejoined. "It ain't sensible to want what you can't have, an
I've always tried to be sensible, seein' I'm a farmer. If I hadn't set
my fancy on you I'd have waited on Blossom Revercomb as likely as not."

They had reached the house, and she did not reply until she had entered
the living-room and placed the lamb in a basket. Coming out again, she
took up the thread of the conversation as she closed the door behind
her.

"I wonder all of you don't turn your eyes on Blossom," she observed.

"Yes, she's handsome enough, but stiff-mouthed and set like all the rest
of the Revercombs. I shouldn't like to marry a Revercomb, when it comes
to that."

"Shouldn't you?" she asked and laughed merrily.

"They say down at Bottoms," he went on, "that she's gone moonstruck
about Mr. Jonathan, an' young Adam Doolittle swears he saw them walkin'
together on the other side of old orchard hill."

"I thought she was too sensible a girl for that."

"They're none of 'em too sensible. I'm the only man I ever saw who never
had a woman moonstruck about him--an' it makes me feel kind of lonesome
to hear the others talk. It's a painful experience, I reckon, but it
must be a fruitful source of conversation with a man's wife, if he ever
marries. Has it ever struck you," he inquired, "that the chief thing
lackin' in marriage is conversation?"

"I don't know--I've never thought about it."

"Now, I have often an' over again, ma bein' sech a silent person to live
with. It's the silence that stands between Blossom Revercomb an' me--an'
her brother Abel is another glum one of the same sort, isn't he?"

"Do you think so? I hadn't noticed it."

"An' you seein' so much of him! Well, all folks don't observe things as
sharply as I do--'twas a way I was born with. But I passed him at the
fork as I came up, an' he was standin' just as solemn an' silent while
Mr. Chamberlayne, over from Applegate, was askin' him questions."

"What questions? Did you hear them?"

"Oh, about his mother an' prospects of the grist-mill. The lawyer went
on afterward to the big house to do business with Mr. Jonathan."

They had reached the point in the road where a bridle path from the mill
ran into it; and in the centre of the field, which was woven in faint
spring colours like an unfinished tapestry, Molly descried the figure
of Abel moving rapidly toward her. Dismissing her companion, she ran
forward with her warm blood suffusing her face.

"Abel," she said, "tell me that you are happy," and lifted her mouth to
his kiss.

"Something in the spring makes me wild for you, Molly. I can't live
without you another year, and hear the blue birds and see the green
burst out so sudden. There is a terrible loneliness in the spring,
darling."

"But I'm here, Abel."

"Yes, you're here, but you aren't near enough, for I'm never sure of
you. That's the cause of it--shall I ever be sure of you even after
we are married? You've got different blood in you, Molly--blood that
doesn't run quiet,--and it makes me afraid. Do you know I've been to
look at the pines this morning, and I am all one big ache to begin on
the house."

"But you're happy--say you're happy."

"How can I be happy, when I'm wanting you with every drop of my blood
and yet never certain that I shall have you. The devil has a lot to
do with it, I reckon--for there are times when I am half blind with
jealousy and doubt of you. Did you ever kiss a man before me, Molly?"

She laughed, moved by an instinct to torment him. "You wouldn't have
asked me that three months ago, and you wouldn't have cared."

"It's different now. I've got a right to know."

"You'll never know anything because you have the 'right' to," she
returned impatiently. "I hate the word--how silly you are, Abel."

"If you'd call me mad you'd come nearer to it, I reckon. It's the way
of the Hawtreys--we've always gone neck and crop over the fences without
giving a thought to the damage we've done by the way. My mother went
like that at religion--she's gone over so hard to religion that she
hasn't left a piece of her for common humanity. All the world is divided
for her between religion and damnation. I believe she thinks the very
eggs in the hen-house are predestined to be saved or damned. And with
me it's the same, only it isn't religion, but you. It's all you to me,
Molly, even the spring."

"You're so wholehearted, and I'm so lightminded. You ought to have loved
a staid, sober woman. I was born passionate and changeful just as you
were born passionate and steady."

"Don't, Molly, if you only knew how you hurt me when you talk like that.
You've flown into my heart like a little blue bird into a cage, and
there you'll beat and flutter, but you can't get out. Some day you'll
rest there quiet, sweetheart."

"Don't call it a cage, and never, never try to hold me or I'll fly
away."

"Yet you love me, Molly?"

She threw her arms about his neck, rising on tiptoe while she kissed his
mouth. "I love you--and yet in my heart I don't really believe in love,"
she answered. "I shouldn't be surprised to wake up any morning and find
that I had dreamed it."

"It makes me want to curse those that put your mind out of joint when
you were little and innocent."

"I don't believe I was ever little and innocent--I was born out of
bitterness."

"Then I'll cure you, darling. I'll love you so hard that you'll forget
all the terrible things you knew as a child."

She shook her head, gaily and yet with a touch of scorn for his
assurance. "You may try with all your strength, but when a sapling has
been bent crooked you can't pull it straight."

"But you aren't crooked, Molly," he answered, kissing her throat above
her open blouse.

She glowed at his kiss, and for one instant, it seemed to them that
their spirits touched as closely as their bodies, while the longing and
the rapture of spring drew them together.

"You're mine now, Molly--I've got you close," he said as he held her.

At his words the rosy waves upon which they had floated broke suddenly
on the earth, and turning slowly they walked hand in hand out of the
field into the turnpike. A strange shyness had fallen over them, for
when Molly tried to meet his eyes, she found that her lashes trembled
and fell;--yet this shyness was as delicious as the ecstasy from which
it had come.

But Nature seldom suffers such high moments to pass before they
have been paid for in physical values. As the lovers passed into the
turnpike, there came the sound of a horse at a trot, and a minute later
Jonathan Gay rode toward them, leaning slightly over the neck of his
bay. Seeing them, he lifted his hat and brought down his horse to a
walk, as if prompted by a sudden desire to look closer in Molly's face.
Her rapture evidently became her, for after his first casual glance, he
turned again quickly and smiled into her eyes. Her look met his with the
frankness of a child's and taken unawares--pleased, too, that he should
so openly admire her--she smiled back again with the glow of her secret
happiness enriching her beauty.

In a moment Gay had passed on, and turning to Abel, she saw that a frown
darkened his features.

"He had no right to look at you like that, and you oughtn't to have
smiled back, Molly," he said sternly.

Her nature leaped instantly to arms. "I suppose I've a right to my
smiles," she retorted defiantly.

"No you haven't--not now. An engaged woman ought to be proper and
sober--anybody will tell you so--ask Mr. Mullen. A girl may flirt a
little and nobody thinks any harm of it, but it's different afterwards,
and you know it."

"I know nothing of the kind, and I refuse to be preached to. I might as
well marry Mr. Mullen."

The taunt, though it was uttered half in jest, appeared to torment him
beyond endurance.

"How can you talk to me like this, after what you said five minutes
ago?" he demanded.

His tone approached, unfortunately, the ministerial, and as he spoke,
her anger flamed over her as hotly as her happiness had done a few
minutes earlier.

"That was five minutes ago," she retorted with passion.

Stopping in the road, he caught her arms and held them to her sides,
while the thunder cloud blackened his forehead. Two playthings of
Nature, swept alternately by the calm and the storm of elemental forces,
they faced each other in the midst of mating birds and insects that were
as free as they.

"Do you mean that you've changed, and in five minutes?" he asked.

"I've always told you I could change in three," she retorted.

"I don't believe it--you are behaving foolishly."

"And you are wise, I suppose--preaching and prating to me as if you
stood in the pulpit. When you were begging me so humbly for a kind word,
I might have known that as soon as you got the kind word, you'd begin to
want to manage me body and soul--that's a man all over."

"I merely said that an engaged woman ought not to smile too free at
other men--and that you ought not to even more than others, because
there is something so inviting about you. Mr. Mullen would say the same
thing from the pulpit--and what one man can say in the pulpit, I reckon,
another may repeat in the road."

"No, he mayn't--not if he wants to marry me."

"If I promise not to say a word more about it, will you get over your
temper?"

"If you keep your promise, but how am I to know that you won't burst out
again the next time I look at a man?"

"Only try to look at them a little differently, Molly, not quite so
wide-eyed and red-lipped--but primmer and with lowered lashes, just a
bit contemptuous, as if your were thinking 'you might as well be a stick
or a stone for all the thought I am giving you.'" The mental picture
appeared to afford him satisfaction, for he resumed after a moment.
"I believe if you'd practise it a while before the glass you could do
it--you are so clever."

"Why on earth should I make myself ugly just to please you?"

"It wouldn't be making yourself ugly--I can't endure an ugly woman. All
I want you to be is sober."

"Then what made you fall in love with me? It certainly was not for
soberness."

He shook his head hopelessly, puzzled for the first time by the too
obvious contradiction between the ideal and the actual--between the
phantom of a man's imagination and the woman who enthralls his heart.

"To save my life I couldn't tell you why I did," he replied. "It does
seem, a bit foolish to fall in love with a woman as she is and then try
to make her over into something different."

"Judy Hatch was the person God intended for you, I'm sure of it."

"Well, I'm not, and if I were I'd go ahead and defeat his intentions
as I'm doubtless doing this minute. Let's make up now, so you'd as well
stop talking silliness."

"It's you that talks silliness, not I--as if I were going through life
lowering my lashes and looking contemptuous! But you're your mother all
over again. I've heard her say a dozen times that a girl who is born
homely ought to get down on her knees and thank the Lord for protecting
her from temptation."

"You never heard me say it, did you?"

"No, but I shall yet if I live long enough--and all because of your
ridiculous jealousy."

The humour of this struck him, and he remarked rather grimly:

"Good God, Molly, what a vixen you are!" Then he broke into a laugh, and
catching her to him, stopped her mouth with kisses.

"Well, we're in it," he said, "and we can't get out, so there's no use
fighting about it."



CHAPTER XVII


THE SHADE OF MR. JONATHAN


Old Reuben, seated in his chair on the porch, watched Molly come up the
flagged walk over the bright green edgings of moss. Her eyes, which
were like wells of happiness, smiled at him beneath the blossoming apple
boughs. Already she had forgotten the quarrel and remembered only the
bliss of the reconciliation.

"I've had visitors while you were out, honey," said the old man as she
bent to kiss him. "Mr. Chamberlayne and Mr. Jonathan came up and sat a
bit with me."

"Was it on business, grandfather?"

"'Twas on yo' business, Molly, an' it eased my mind considerable
about what's to become of you when I'm dead an' gone. It seems old Mr.
Jonathan arranged it all befo' he died, an' they've only been waitin'
till you came of age to let you into the secret. He left enough money in
the lawyer's hands to make you a rich woman if you follow his wishes."

"Did they tell you his wishes?" she asked, turning from Reuben to Spot
as the blind dog fawned toward her.

"He wants you to live with Miss Kesiah and Mr. Jonathan when I'm taken
away from you, honey, an' you're to lose all but a few hundred if you
ever marry and leave 'em. Old Mr. Jonathan had sharp eyes, an' he saw
I had begun to fail fast befo' he died. It's an amazin' thing to think
that even after all the morality is wrung out of human natur thar'll
still be a few drops of goodness left sometimes at the bottom of it."

"And if I don't do as he wished? What will come of it, then,
grandfather?"

"Then the bulk goes to help some po' heathens over yonder in China to
the Gospel. He was a strange man, was old Mr. Jonathan. Thar warn't
never any seein' through him, livin' or dead."

"Why did he ever come here in the beginning? He wasn't one of our
people."

"The wind blew him this way, pretty, an' he was never one to keep goin'
against the wind. When the last Jordan died childless an' the place was
put up to be sold, Mr. Jonathan read about it somewhar, an' it looked to
him as if all he had to do was to come down here an' bury himself alive
to git rid of temptation. But the only way to win against temptation is
to stand square an' grapple with it in the spot whar it finds you, an'
he came to know this, po' sinner, befo' he was done with it."

"He was a good soldier, wasn't he?" asked Molly.

"So good a soldier that he could fight as well on one side as on
t'other, an' 'twas only an accident that sent him into the army with
me instead of against me. I remember his telling me once when I met him
after a battle that 'twas the smell of blood, not the cause, that made
him a fighter. Thar's many a man like that on both sides in every war, I
reckon."

"I wonder how you can be so patient when you think of him!" she said
passionately as he stopped.

"You'll understand better when you're past seventy," he answered gently.
"Thar's a softness like a sort of green grass that springs up an' covers
you when you begin to git old an' worn out. I've got it an' Spot's
got it--you can tell by the way he won't trouble to git mad with the
chickens that come peckin' around him. As soon as it's safely spread
over you, you begin to see that the last thing to jedge anybody by is
what you've known of the outside of 'em."

"I can't feel about him as you do, but I don't mind takin' his money as
long as you share it," returned the girl in a softer voice.

"It's a pile of money such as you've never heard of, Molly. Mr.
Chamberlayne says thar'll be an income of goin' on ten thousand dollars
a year by the time you're a little older."

"Ten thousand dollars a year just for you an' me!" she exclaimed,
startled.

"Thar warn't so much when 'twas left, but it's been doublin' on itself
all the while you were waitin'."

"We could go everywhere an' see everything, grandfather."

"It ain't for me, pretty. Mr. Jonathan knew you wouldn't come into it
till I was well on my way to the end of things."

Kneeling at his side, she caught his hands and clung to him sobbing.

"Don't talk of dying! I can't bear to think of your leaving me!"

His trembling and knotted hands gathered her to him. "The young an' the
old see two different sides of death, darlin'. When you're young an'
full of spirit, it looks powerful dark an' lonely to yo' eyes, but when
you're gittin' along an' yo' bones ain't quite so steady as they once
were, an' thar seem to be mo' faces you're acquainted with on the other
side than on this one--then what you've been so terrible afeared of
don't look much harder to you than settlin' down to a comfortable rest.
I've liked life well enough, but I reckon I'll like death even better
as soon as I've gotten used to the feel of it. The Lord always appears
a heap nearer to the dead, somehow, than He does to the livin', and
I shouldn't be amazed to find it less lonely than life after I'm once
safely settled."

"You've seen so many die that you've grown used to it," said Molly
through her tears.

For a moment he gazed wistfully at the apple boughs, while his face
darkened, as if he were watching a procession of shadows. In his seventy
years he had gained a spiritual insight which penetrated the visible
body of things in search of the truth beneath the ever-changing
appearance. There are a few blameless yet suffering beings on whom
nature has conferred a simple wisdom of the heart which contains
a profounder understanding of life than the wisdom of the mind can
grasp--and Reuben was one of these. Sorrow had sweetened in his soul
until it had turned at last into sympathy.

"I've seen 'em come an' go like the flakes of light out yonder in the
orchard," he answered almost in a whisper. "Young an' old, glad an'
sorry, I've seen 'em go--an' never one among 'em but showed in thar face
when 'twas over that 'twas the best thing had ever happened. It's hard
for me now to separate the livin' from the dead, unless it be that the
dead are gittin' closer all the time an' the livin' further away."

"And you're never afraid, grandfather?"

"Well, when it comes to that, honey, I reckon if I can trust the Lord in
the light, I can trust him in the darkness. I ain't as good a Christian
as my ma was--she could beat Sarah Revercomb when it came to sayin' the
Bible backwards--but I've yet to see the spot of natur, either human
or clay, whar we couldn't find the Lord at work if we was to dig deep
enough."

He stopped at sight of a small figure running under the apple trees,
and a minute later Patsey, the Gay's maid, reached the flagged walk
and panted out a request that Miss Molly should come to the house for a
birthday present which awaited her there.

"Won't you go with me, grandfather?" asked the girl, turning to Reuben.

"I ain't at home thar, Molly," answered the old man. "It's well enough
to preach equality an' what not when you're walking on the opposite side
of the road, as Abel would say, but it don't ring true while yo' feet
are slippin' an' slidin' over a parlour floor."

"Then I shan't go without you. Where you aren't welcome is a place I can
stay away from."

"Thar, thar, honey, don't be runnin' arter Abel's notions till you find
out whar they're leadin' you. Things are better as they are or the Lord
wouldn't have made 'em so, an' He ain't goin' to step a bit faster or
slower on o' count of our ragin'. Some folks were meant to be on top an'
some at bottom, for t'otherwise God Almighty wouldn't have put 'em thar.
Abel is like Sarah, only his generation is different."

"Do you really think he's like his mother?" asked Molly a little
wistfully.

"As haw is like haw. They're both bent on doin' the Lord's job over
again an' doin' it better, an' thar manner of goin' to work would be
to melt up human natur an' pour it all into the same pattern. It ain't
never entered Sarah's head that you can't fit the same religion to every
man any mo' than you can the same pair of breeches. The big man takes
the big breeches an' the little man takes the small ones, an' it's jest
the same with religion. It may be cut after one pattern, but it's mighty
apt to get its shape from the wearer inside. Why, thar ain't any text so
peaceable that it ain't drawn blood from somebody."

"All the same I shan't go a step without you," persisted the girl.

"Then find my stick an' straighten my collar. Or had I better put on my
Sunday black?"

"No, I like you as you are--only let me smooth your hair a little. Run
ahead, Patsey, and say we're both coming."

Slipping her arm in his, she led him through the orchard, where the
bluebirds were fluting blissfully in the apple-trees. To the heart of
each spring was calling--but to Molly it meant promise and to Reuben
remembrance. Though the bluebirds sang only one song, they brought to
the old man and to the girl a different music.

"I've sometimes thought Mr. Mullen better suited to you than Abel,
Molly," said Reuben presently, uttering an idea that had come to him
more than once. "If you'd been inclined to fancy him, I don't believe
either Mrs. Gay or Miss Kesiah could have found any fault with him."

"But you know I couldn't care for him, grandfather," protested Molly
impatiently. "He is like one of Mrs. Bottom's air plants that grow
without any roots."

"Well, he's young yet an' his soul struts a trifle, but wait till
he's turned fifty an' he'll begin to be as good a Christian as he is a
parson. It's a good mould, but he congealed a bit too stiff when he was
poured into it."

They reached the grape arbour as he finished, and a minute later
Abednego lead them into the library, where Kesiah placed Reuben in a
comfortable chair and hastened to bring him a glass of wine from the
sideboard. At Molly's entrance, Gay and Mr. Chamberlayne came forward to
shake hands with her, while Mrs. Gay looked up from her invalid's couch
and murmured her name in a gentle, reproachful voice. The pale blue
circles around the little lady's eyes and faintly smiling mouth were the
only signs of the blighting experience through which she had passed. As
she turned her angelic gaze on old Jonathan's daughter there was not an
instant's doubt in the minds of those about her that she would accept
the blow with the suffering sweetness that enhanced her beauty.

"We wanted to give you a little reminder of us on your birthday, Molly,"
she said, taking up an amethyst cross on a slender chain from the table
beside her, "and Jonathan thought you would like a trinket to wear with
your white dresses."

"I was right, wasn't I, cousin?" asked Gay, with his genial smile.

Mrs. Gay flushed slightly at the word, while Reuben cast a grateful
glance at him over the untasted glass of wine in his hand.

Without drawing a step nearer, Molly stood there in the centre of the
room, nervously twisting her handkerchief in and out of her fingers.
She was physically cramped by her surroundings, and the reproachful
gentleness in Mrs. Gay's face embarrassed her only less than did the
intimate pleasantry of Jonathan's tone. Every detail of the library--the
richness and heaviness of the furniture, the insipid fixed smiles in the
family portrait, the costly fragility of the china ornaments--all these
seemed to unite in some occult power which overthrew her self-possession
and paralyzed her emotions.

Pitying her shyness, Gay took the chain from his mother's hand, and,
slipping it around Molly's neck, fastened it under the bunch of curls
at the back. Then he patted her encouragingly on the shoulder, while he
spoke directly to Reuben.

"It looks well on her don't you think, Mr. Merryweather," he inquired.

"Yes, it's a pretty gift an' she's much obliged to all of you," replied
Reuben, with the natural dignity which never deserted him. "She's a good
girl, Molly is," he added simply. "For all her quick words an' ways
thar ain't a better girl livin'."

"We are very sure of that," said Mr. Chamberlayne, speaking in Gay's
place. "She is a kinswoman any of us may be proud of owning." And going
a step nearer to her, he began explaining her father's wishes in the
shortest words at his command.

They were all kind--all honestly anxious to do their duty in aiding the
atonement of old Jonathan. Their faces, their voices, their gestures,
revealed an almost painful effort to make her appear at ease. Yet in
spite of their irreproachable intentions, each one of them was perfectly
aware that the visit was very far from being a success. They admired her
sincerely, but with the exception of Gay, who was bothered by few moral
prejudices, they were one and all nervously constrained in manner. To
Mr. Chamberlayne she represented merely an attractive object of charity;
to Kesiah she appeared as an encroaching member of the inferior order;
to Mrs. Gay she embodied the tragic disillusionment of her life. In time
they would either forget these first impressions or grow accustomed to
them; but while she stood there, awkward and blushing, in the middle of
the library, where old Jonathan had worked out his repentance, even the
lawyer found his legal eloquence tripping confusedly on his tongue, and
turned at last in sheer desperation to stare with a sensation of relief
at the frowning countenance of Kesiah. When, after a hesitating word of
thanks, the girl held out her hand to Reuben, and they went away arm in
arm, as they had come, a helpless glance passed from Jonathan to Mrs.
Gay and from Mrs. Gay into vacancy.

"Like most eccentric bequests made in moments of great moral purpose,
it was, of course, a mistake," said the lawyer. "Had Jonathan known the
character of the miller, he would certainly have had no objection to
Molly's choice--if she has, indeed, a serious fancy for the young man,
which I doubt. But in his day, we must remember, the Revercombs had
given little promise of either intelligence or industry except in the
mother. Granting this," he added thoughtfully, "it might be possible
to have the conditions set aside, but not without laying bare a scandal
which would cause great pain to sensitive natures---"

He glanced sympathetically at Mrs. Gay, who responded almost
unconsciously to the emotional suggestion of his ideal of her.

"Oh, never that! I could not bear that!" she exclaimed.

"The whole trouble comes of the insane way people arrange the future,"
remarked Jonathan with irritation. "He actually believed, I dare say,
that he was assuring the girl's happiness by that ridiculous document.
But for mother I'd fight the thing in the courts and then give Molly her
share outright and let her marry the miller."

The lawyer shook his head slowly, with his eyes on Mrs. Gay. "Before all
else we must consider your mother," he answered.

For the first time Kesiah spoke. "I am quite willing to take the girl
when Reuben dies," she said, "but why in the world did he put in that
foolish clause about her living with Jonathan and myself?"

Without looking at her Mr. Chamberlayne answered almost sharply. "The
whole truth of the matter is that there was a still more absurd idea
in his mind, dear lady," he replied. "I may as well let you know it
now since I combated it uselessly in my last interview with him. At the
bottom of his heart Jonathan remained incorrigibly romantic until his
death, and he clung desperately to the hope that if Molly received
the education he intended her to have, her beauty and her charm, which
seemed to him very remarkable, might win his nephew's affections, if
she were thrown in his way. That in short, is the secret meaning of this
extraordinary document."

The uncomfortable silence was broken by a laugh as Gay rose to his feet.
"Well, of all the ridiculous ideas!" he exclaimed in the sincerity of
his amusement.



CHAPTER XVIII


THE SHADE OF REUBEN


Arm in arm Reuben and Molly walked slowly home through the orchard.
Neither spoke until the old man called to Spot at his doorstep, and
then Molly noticed that his breath came with a whistling sound that was
unlike his natural voice.

"Are you tired, grandfather? What is the matter?"

"It's my chest, daughter. Let me sit down a while an' it will pass. Who
is that yonder on the bench?"

"Old Mr. Doolittle. Wait here a minute before you speak to him."

It was a perfect spring afternoon, and the air was filled with vague,
roving scents, as if the earth exhaled the sweetness of hidden flowers.
In the apple orchard the young grass was powdered with gold, and the
long grey shadows of the trees barred the ground like the sketchy
outlines in a impressionist painting.

On a bench at one end of the porch old Adam was sitting, and at sight of
them, he rose, and stood waiting with his pipe in his hand.

"As 'twas sech a fine day an' thar warn't any work on hand for a man of
my years, I thought I'd walk over an' pay my respects to you," he said.
"I've heard that 'twas yo' granddaughter's birthday an' that she's like
to change her name befo' it's time for another."

"Well, I'm glad to see you, old Adam," replied Reuben, sinking into a
chair while he invited his visitor to another. "I've gone kind of faint,
honey," he added, "an' I reckon we'd both like a sip of blackberry wine
if you've got it handy. Miss Kesiah gave me something to drink, but my
throat was so stiff I couldn't swallow it."

The blackberry wine was kept in a large stone crock in the cellar, and
while she filled the glasses, Molly heard the voice of old Adam droning
on above the chirping of the birds in the orchard.

"I've been settin' here steddyin' them weeds out thar over-runnin'
everything," he was saying, "an' it does appear to a considerin' body
that the Lord might have made 'em good grass an' grain with precious
little trouble to Himself an' a mortal lot of satisfaction to the po'
farmers."

"He knows best. He knows best," responded Reuben.

"Well, I used to think that way befo' I'd looked into the matter,"
rejoined the other, "but the deeper I get, the less reason I see to be
sartain sure. 'Tis the fashion for parsons, an' for some people outside
of the pulpit, to jump to conclusions, an' the one they've jumped the
farthest to get at, is that things are all as they ought to be. If you
ain't possessed of the gift of logic it takes with you, but if you are
possessed of it, it don't. Now, I tell you that if a farmer was to try
to run his farm on the wasteful scale on which this world is conducted,
thar wouldn't be one among us as would trust him with next season's
crops. 'Tis sech a terrible waste that it makes a frugal mind sick to
see it."

"Let's be thankful that it isn't any worse. He might have made it so,"
replied Reuben, shocked by his neighbour's irreverence, yet too modest
to dispute it with authority.

"Now, if that's logic I don't know what logic is, though I was born with
the gift of it," retorted old Adam. "When twenty seeds rot in the ground
an' one happens up, thar're some folks as would praise the Lord for
the one and say nothin' about the twenty. These same folks are forever
drawin' picturs of wild things hoppin' an' skippin' in the woods, as if
they ever had time to hop an' skip when they're obleeged to keep one
eye on the fox an' the hawk an' t'other on the gun of the hunter. Yet
to hear Mr. Mullen talk in the pulpit, you'd think that natur was all
hoppin' an' skippin'."

"You're a wicked unbeliever," said Reuben, mildly sorrowful, "an' you
ought to go home and pray over your thankless doubts."

"I'm as I was made," rejoined the other. "I didn't ax to be born
an' I've had to work powerful hard for my keep." Taking the glass of
blackberry wine from Molly's hand, he smacked his lips over it with
lingering enjoyment.

"Do you feel better, grandfather?" inquired the girl, in the pause.

"The wine does me good, honey, but thar's a queer gone feelin' inside
of me. I'm twenty years younger than you, old Adam, but you've got mo'
youth left in you than I have."

"'Tis my powerful belief in the Lord," chuckled the elder, wiping his
mouth with the back of his hand and placing the glass on the end of the
bench. "No, no, Reuben, when it comes to that I ain't any quarrel with
folks for lookin' al'ays at the pleasant side, but what staggers me is
why they should take it as a merit to themselves when 'tis nothin' less
than a weakness of natur. A man might jest as well pride himself that he
can't see out of but one eye or hear out of but one ear as that he can't
see nothin' but good when evil is so mixed up into it. Thar ain't all
of us born with the gift of logic, but even when we ain't we might set
silent an' listen to them that is."

A south wind, rising beyond the river, blew over the orchard, and the
barred shadows swung back and forth on the grass.

"'Tis the eye of sense we see with," remarked Reuben quietly.

"Eh, an' 'tis the eye of sense you're weak in," responded old Adam. "I
knew a blind man once that had a pictur of the world in his mind jest as
smooth an' pretty as the views you see on the backs of calendars--with
all the stink-weeds an' the barren places left out of it--an' he used to
talk to us seein' ones for all the earth as if he were better acquainted
with natur than we were."

"I ain't larned an' I never pretended to be," said Reuben, piously, "but
the Lord has used me well in His time an' I'm thankful to Him."

"Now that's monstrous odd," commented the ancient cynic, "for lookin' at
it from the outside, I'd say He'd used you about as bad as is His habit
in general."

He rose from the bench, and dusted the seat of his blue overalls,
while he gazed sentimentally over the blossoming orchard. "'Tis the
seventeenth of April, so we may git ahead with plantin'," he remarked.
"Ah, well, it's a fine early spring an' puts me in mind of seventy years
ago when I was courtin'. Thar ain't many men, I reckon, that can
enjoy lookin' back on a courtin' seventy years after it is over. 'Tis
surprisin' how some things sweeten with age, an' memory is one of 'em."

Reuben merely nodded after him as he went, for he had grown too tired
to answer. A curious stillness--half happiness, half indifference--was
stealing over him, and he watched as in a dream, the blue figure of old
Adam hobble over the sun-flecked path through the orchard. A few minutes
later Molly flitted after the elder, and Reuben's eyes followed her with
the cheerful look with which he had faced seventy years of life. On a
rush mat in the sunshine the old hound flicked his long black ear at a
fly of which he was dreaming, and from a bower of ivy in the eaves there
came the twitter of sparrows. Beyond the orchard, the wind, blowing from
the marshes, chased the thin, sketchy shadows over the lawn at Jordan's
Journey.

While he sat there Reuben began to think, and as always, his thoughts
were humble and without self-consciousness. As he looked under
the gnarled boughs of the orchard, he seemed to see his whole life
stretching before him--seventy years--all just the same except that
with each he appeared a little older, a little humbler, a little less
expectant that some miracle might happen and change the future. At the
end of that long vista, he saw himself young and strong, and filled with
a great hope for something--he hardly knew what--that would make things
different. He had gone on, still hoping, year by year, and now at
the end, he was an old, bent, crippled man, and the miracle had never
happened. Nothing had ever made things different, and the great hope had
died in him at last as the twenty seeds of which old Adam had spoken had
died in the earth. He remembered all the things he had wanted that he
had never had--all the other things he had not wanted that had made up
his life. Never had a hope of his been fulfilled, never had an event
fallen out as he had planned it, never had a prayer brought him the
blessing for which he had prayed. Nothing in all his seventy years had
been just what he had wanted--not just what he would have chosen if the
choice had been granted him--yet the sight of the birds in the apple
trees stirred something in his heart to-day that was less an individual
note of rejoicing than a share in the undivided movement of life which
was pulsing around him. Nothing that had ever happened to him as Reuben
Merryweather would he care to live over; but he was glad at the end that
he had been a part of the spring and had not missed seeing the little
green leaves break out in the orchard.

And then while he sat there, half dreaming and half awake, the stillness
grew suddenly full of the singing of blue birds. Spring blossomed
radiantly beneath his eyes, and the faint green and gold of the meadows
blazed forth in a pageant of colour.

"I'm glad I didn't miss it," he thought. "That's the most that can be
said, I reckon--I'm glad I didn't miss it."

The old hound, dreaming of flies, flapped his long ears in the sunshine,
and a robin, hopping warily toward a plate of seed-cakes on the arm of
Reuben's chair, winged back for a minute before he alighted suspiciously
on the railing. Then, being an old and a wise bird, he advanced again,
holding his head slightly sideways and regarding the sleeping man with
a pair of bright, inquisitive eyes. Reassured at last by the silence, he
uttered a soft, throaty note, and flew straight to the arm of the chair
in which Reuben was sitting. With his glance roving from the quiet man
to the quiet dog, he made a few tentative flutters toward the plate of
cake. Then, gathering courage from the adventure, he hopped deliberately
into the centre of the plate and began pecking greedily at the scattered
crumbs.



CHAPTER XIX


TREATS OF CONTRADICTIONS


As Molly passed down the Haunt's Walk, it seemed to her, also, that the
spring had suddenly blossomed. A moment before she had not known
that the path she trod was changing to emerald, that the meadows were
spangled with wild-flowers, that the old oaks on the lawn were blushing
in rose and silver. For weeks these miracles had happened around her,
and she had not noticed. As oblivious to them as old Adam Doolittle was,
she had remembered only that her birthday came on the seventeenth of
April, when, except for some luckless mishap, the promise of the spring
was assured.

A red-winged blackbird darted like a flame across the path in front of
her, and following it into the open, she found Kesiah gathering wild
azalea on the edge of the thicket.

At the girl's approach, the elder woman rose from her stooping posture,
and came forward, wearing a frown, which, after the first minute, Molly
saw was directed at the sunlight, not at herself. Kesiah's long, sallow
face under the hard little curls of her false front, had never
appeared more grotesque than it did in the midst of the delicate spring
landscape. Every fragile blossom, every young leaf, every blade of
grass, flung an insult at her as she stood there frowning fiercely at
the sunbeams. Yet only five minutes before she had suffered a sharp
recrudescence of soul--of that longing for happiness which is a part
of the resurrection of the spring, and which may survive not only the
knowledge of its own fruitlessness, but a belief in the existence of the
very happiness for which it longs. All the unlived romance in her heart
had come to life with the young green around her. Middle-age had not
deadened, it had merely dulled her. For the pang of desire is not,
after all, the divine prerogative of youth, nor has it even a conscious
relation to the possibility of fulfilment. Her soul looked out of her
eyes while she gazed over the azalea in her hand--yet, in spite of the
songs of the poets, the soul in her eyes did not make them beautiful.

"I came down with Jonathan, Molly," she said. "You will doubtless find
him at the brook." For an instant she hesitated in confusion and then
added hurriedly, "We were speaking about you."

"Were you?" asked Molly a little awkwardly, for Kesiah always
embarrassed her.

"We were both saying how much we admired your devotion to your
grandfather. One rarely finds such attachment in the young to the old."

"I have always loved him better than anybody except mother."

"I am sure you have, and it speaks very well for both of you. We are all
much interested in you, Molly."

"It's kind of you to think about me," answered Molly, and her voice was
constrained as it had been when she spoke in the library at Jordan's
Journey.

"We feel a great concern for your future," said Kesiah. "Whatever we can
do to help you, we shall do very gladly. I always felt a peculiar pity
and sympathy for your mother." Her voice choked, for it was, perhaps,
as spontaneous an expression of her emotions as she had ever permitted
herself.

"Thank you, ma'am," replied Molly simply, and the title of respect to
which Reuben had trained her dropped unconsciously from her lips. She
honestly liked Kesiah, though, in common with the rest of her little
world, she had fallen into the habit of regarding her as a person whom
it was hardly worth one's while to consider. Mrs. Gay had so completely
effaced her sister that the rough edges of Kesiah's character were
hardly visible beneath the little lady's enveloping charm.

"It is natural that you should have felt bitterly toward your father,"
began the older woman again in a trembling voice, "but I hope you
realize that the thought of his wrong to you and your mother saddened
his last hours."

To her surprise Molly received the remark almost passionately.

"How could that give me back my mother's ruined life?" she demanded.

"I know, dear, but the fact remains that he was your father---"

"Oh, I don't care in the least about the fact," retorted Molly, with her
pretty rustic attempt at a shrug, which implied, in this case, that the
government of nature, like that of society, rested solely on the consent
of the governed. What was clear to Kesiah was that this rebellion
against the injustice of the universe, as well as against the expiation
of Mr. Jonathan, was the outcome of a strong, though undisciplined,
moral passion within her. In her way, Molly was as stern a moralist as
Sarah Revercomb, but she derived her convictions from no academic system
of ethics. Kesiah had heard of her as a coquette; now she realized that
beneath the coqueteries there was a will of iron.

"You must come to us, some day, dear, and let us do what we can to make
you happy," she said. "It would be a pity for all that money to go to
the conversion of the Chinese, who are doubtless quite happy as they
are."

"I wonder why he chose the Chinese?" replied the girl. "They seem so
far away, and there's poor little Mrs. Meadows at Piping Tree who is
starving for bread."

"He was always like that--and so is my sister Angela--the thing that
wasn't in sight was the thing he agonized over." She did not confess
that she had detected a similar weakness in herself, and that, seen the
world over, it is the indubitable mark of the sentimentalist.

Analysis of Mr. Jonathan's character, however, failed to interest his
daughter. She smiled sweetly, but indifferently, and made a movement to
pass on into the meadow. Then, looking into Kesiah's face, she said in
a warmer voice: "If ever you want my help about your store room, Miss
Kesiah, just send for me. When you're ready to change the brine on your
pickles, I'll come down and do it."

"Thank you, Molly," answered the other; "you're a nice light hand for
such things."

In some almost imperceptible manner she felt that the girl had rebuffed
her. The conversation had been pleasant enough, yet Kesiah had meant
to show in it that she considered Molly's position changed since the
evening before; and it was this very suggestion that the girl had tossed
lightly aside--tossed without rudeness or malice, but with a firmness,
a finality, which appeared to settle the question forever. The
acknowledged daughter of Mr. Jonathan Gay was determined that she
should continue to be known merely as the granddaughter of his overseer.
Kesiah's overtures, had been--well, not exactly repulsed, but certainly
ignored; her advice had melted to thin air as soon as it was spoken.
As Molly flitted from her over the young weeds in the meadow, the older
woman stood looking after her with a heaviness, like the weight of
unshed tears, in her eyes. Not the girl's future, but her own, appeared
to her barren of interest, robbed even of hope. The spirit that combats,
she saw, had never been hers--nor had the courage that prevails. For
this reason fate had been hard to her--because she had never yielded to
pressure--because she had stepped by habit rather than choice into the
vacant place. She was a good woman--her heart assured her of this--she
had done her duty no matter what it cost her--and she had possessed,
moreover, a fund of common sense which had aided her not a little in
doing it. It was this common sense that told her now that facts were,
after all, more important than dreams--that the putting up of
pickles was a more useful work in the world than the regretting of
possibilities--that the sordid realities were not less closely woven
into the structure of existence than were the romantic illusions. She
told herself these things, yet in spite of her words she saw her future
stretching away, like her past, amid a multitude of small duties for
which she had neither inclination nor talent. One thing after another,
all just alike, day after day, month after month, year after year.
Nothing ahead of her, and, looking back, nothing behind her that she
would care to stop and remember. "That's life," she said softly to
herself and went on her way, while Molly, glancing back, beheld her only
as a blot on the sunshine.

"Poor Miss Kesiah," the girl thought before she forgot her. "I wonder if
she's ever really lived?"

Then the wonder fled from her mind, for, as a shadow fell over her path,
she looked up, startled, into the eyes of Gay, who had burst suddenly
out of the willows. His face was flushed and he appeared a trifle
annoyed. As he stopped before her, he cut sharply at the weeds with a
small whip he carried.

"Don't, please," she said; "I hate to see people cut off the heads of
innocent things."

"It is rather beastly," her returned, his face clearing. "Did you come
out to find me, cousin?"

"Why should I, Mr. Jonathan?"

"You don't soften the blow--but why 'Mr. Jonathan'?"

"I thought it was your name."

"It's not my name to you--I say, Molly, do you mind my telling you that
you're a brick?"

"Oh, no, not if you feel like it."

"I do feel like it tremendously."

"Then I don't mind in the least," and to prove it she smiled radiantly
into his face. Her smile was the one really beautiful thing about Molly,
but as far as her immediate purpose went it served her as successfully
as a host.

"By George, I like your devotion to the old chap!" he exclaimed. "I hope
a girl will stick by me as squarely when I am beginning to totter."

"Have you ever been as good to one?" she asked quite seriously, and
wondered why he laughed.

"Well, I doubt if I ever have, but I'd like very much to begin."

"You're not a grandfather, Mr. Jonathan."

"No, I'm not a grandfather--but, when I come to think of it, I'm a
cousin."

She accepted this with composure. "Are you?" she inquired indifferently
after a minute.

While she spoke he asked himself if she were really dull, or if she
had already learned to fence with her exrustic weapons? Her face was
brimming with expression, but, as he reminded himself, one never could
tell.

"I haven't any cousin but you, Molly. Don't you think you can agree to
take me?"

She shook her head, and he saw, or imagined he saw, the shadow of her
indignant surprise darken her features.

"I've never thought of you as my cousin," she answered.

"But I am, Molly."

"I don't think of you so," she retorted. Again, as in the case
of Kesiah's advances, she was refusing to constitute a law by her
acknowledgment.

"Don't you think if you tried very hard you might begin to?"

"Why should I try?"

"Well, suppose we say just because I want you to."

"That wouldn't help me. I can't feel that it would make any difference."

"What I want, you mean?"

"Yes, what you want."

"Aren't you a shade more tolerant of my existence than you were at
first?"

"I suppose so, but I've never thought about it--any more than I've
thought of this ten thousand a year. It's all outside of my life, but
grandfather's in it."

"Don't you ever feel that you'd like to get outside of it yourself? The
world's a big place."

For the first time she appeared attentive to his words.

"I've often wondered what it was like--especially the cities--New York,
Paris, London. Paris is the best, isn't it?"

"Yes, Paris is the best to me. Have you ever thought that you'd like to
wear pretty gowns and drive through a green park in the spring--filled
with other carriages in which are wonderful women?"

"But I'd feel so miserable and countrified," she answered. "Are they any
happier than I am--those wonderful women?"

"Perhaps not so happy--there's a green-eyed dragon gnawing at the hearts
of most of them, and you, my nut-brown beauty, have never felt his
fangs."

"I'd like to see them," she said after a minute, and moved slowly
onward.

"Some day you may. Look here, Molly," he burst out impulsively, "I'm not
going to be sentimental about you. I haven't the least idea of making
love to you--I've had enough of that sort of rot, God knows--but I do
like you tremendously, and I want to stand to you as a big brother. I
never had a sister, you know," he added.

Something earnest and tender in his voice touched her generosity, which
overflowed so easily.

"And I never had a brother," she rejoined.

"Then, that's where I'll come in, little cousin," he answered gently,
and drawing her to him, kissed her cheek with a caress which surprised
him by its unlikeness to the ordinary manifestations of love.

His hand was still on her shoulder, when he felt her start back from his
grasp, and, turning quickly in the direction of her glance, he saw the
miller looking at them from the thicket on the opposite side of the
brook. The anger in Abel's face had distorted his handsome features
until they appeared swollen as if from drink, and for a single instant
Gay imagined that it was indeed whisky and not passion that had wrought
so brutal a change in him.

"So you've made a fool of me, too, Molly?" he said when he had swung
over the stream and stood facing her.

"You're all wrong, Revercomb," began Gay, and stopped the next instant,
because Molly's hand had shot out to silence him.

"Will you be quiet?" she flung at him impatiently; and then fixing her
eyes on Abel, she waited silently for him to finish his speech. That
her lover's fiery temper had aroused her own, Gay realized as soon as he
turned to her. Her face was pale, but her eyes blazed and never had he
felt so strongly the tie of blood that united them as he did while she
stood there waiting for Abel's accusations with a gesture which appeared
to fling them back in disdain.

"I might have known 'twas all fool's play with you--I might have known
you had flirted too much to settle down to an honest love," said Abel,
breathing hard between his word as if each one were torn from him with a
physical wrench at his heart. In losing his self-possession he had
lost his judgment as well, and, grasping something of his love from the
sincerity of his emotion, Gay made another ineffectual effort to present
the situation in a fairer light.

"If you would only listen, my good fellow--if you would only let me
explain things---" he began.

"Will you be quiet?" said Molly a second time, and then facing him
passionately she threw him a gesture of dismissal. "If you want to
please me, you will go."

"And leave you alone with him?"

She laughed. "Do you think I'm afraid of an angry man, or that I've
never seen one before?"

With that he obeyed her, turning from time to time on his way over the
meadow to make sure that she did not need his support. In spite of the
utter unreasonableness of the affair, in some unaccountable way his
sympathies were on the side of the miller. The fellow was a boor, of
course, but, by Jove! he was a magnificent boor. It had been long since
Gay had seen such an outburst of primitive feeling--long since he had
come so close to the good red earth on which we walk and of which we are
made.

"You're out of your head, Abel," said Molly--Gay turned away from
them--and the tone in which she spoke was hardly calculated to bring him
back to the place he had deserted. "You will say things you'll regret,
but I'll never forgive."

"I'm sick of your eternal forgiveness," he retorted. "I've been forgiven
every time you got into a temper, and I suppose I'll be forgiven next
every time you are kissed." The "rousing" which had threatened every
Revercomb was upon him at last.

"Well, as a matter of fact it is time enough for you to forgive me when
I ask you to," she returned.

"You needn't ask. It's too much this time, and I'll be damned before I
will do it."

Bending over a grey skeleton of last year's golden-rod, she caressed it
gently, without breaking its ghostly bloom. Years afterward, when she
had forgotten every word he uttered, she could still see that dried
spray of golden-rod growing against the April sky--she could still hear
a bluebird that sang three short notes and stopped in the willows. In
the quiet air their anger seemed to rush together as she had sometimes
thought their love had rushed to a meeting.

"You have neither the right to forgive me nor to judge me," she said.
"Do you think I care what a man imagines of me who believes a thing
against me as easily as you do. If you went on your knees to me now I
should never explain--and if I chose to kiss every man in the county,"
she concluded in an outburst of passion, "you have nothing to do with
it!"

"Explain? How can a girl explain a man's kissing her, except by saying
she let him do it?"

"I did let him do it," she gasped.

For an instant they gazed at each other in an anger more violent in its
manifestation than their love had been. An observer, noticing them for
the first time, would have concluded that they had hated each other for
years, not that they had been lovers only a few minutes before. Nature,
having wearied of her play, was destroying her playthings.

"I would marry no man on earth who wouldn't believe me in spite of
that--and everything else," she said.

"Do you expect a man to believe you in spite of his eyes?"

"Eyes, ears--everything! Do you think I'd have turned on you like that
before I had heard you?"

A sob, not of pity, but of rage, burst from her lips, and the sound
sobered him more completely than her accusations had done. Her temper he
could withstand, but that little childish sob, bitten back almost before
it escaped, brought him again on his knees to her.

"I can't understand--oh, Molly, don't you see I am in torment?" he
cried.

But the veil of softness was gone now, and the cruelty that is bound up
in some inexplicable way in all violent emotion--even in the emotion of
love--showed itself on the surface.

"Then stay there, for you've made it for yourself," she answered, and
turned away from him. As his voice called her again, she broke into a
run, flying before him over the green meadow until she reached the lawn
of Jordan's Journey, and his pursuit ended. Then, hurrying through the
orchard and up the flagged walk, she ascended the steps, and bent over
Reuben in his chair.

"Grandfather, I am back. Are you asleep?"

The robin that had flown from the railing at her approach swung on the
bough of an apple-tree and regarded her with attention.

"Grandfather," she said again, touching him, "oh, grandfather, wake up!"



CHAPTER XX


LIFE'S IRONIES


When he came down to breakfast next morning, Abel heard of Reuben's
death from his mother.

"Well, you can't tell who's goin' to be the next," she concluded grimly,
as she poured the coffee.

In spite of her austere manner and her philosophical platitude, Sarah
was more moved in her heart than she had dared to confess. From the
moment that she had heard of Reuben's death--when she had gone over with
some of her mourning to offer Molly--she had ceased to think of him
as an old man, and her mind had dwelt upon him as one who had been
ruthlessly cut off in his prime--as he might have been had the end come
some thirty or forty years before. Memory, that great miracle worker,
had contrived to produce this illusion; and all Sarah's hard common
sense could not prevent her feeling an indignant pity because Reuben's
possibilities of happiness had been unfulfilled. Trouble after trouble
and never anything to make up for them, and then to go this way while he
was resting! "It's like that," she thought bitterly to herself, alluding
to life. "It's like that!" And it seemed to her suddenly that the whole
of existence was but a continual demonstration of the strong religious
dogmas on which her house of faith had been reared. When you looked
around you, she thought, with triumph, there wasn't any explanation of
the seeming injustice except original sin. There was a strange comfort
in this conviction, as though it represented the single reality to which
she could cling amid the mutable deceptions of life. "Thar wouldn't
be any sense in it if 'twarn't for that," she would sometimes say to
herself, as one who draws strength from a secret source of refreshment.

In Abel the news of Reuben's death awoke a different emotion, and his
first thought was of Molly. He longed to comfort her in his arms, and
the memory of the quarrel of yesterday and even of the kiss that led to
it seemed to increase rather than diminish this longing.

Rising from his untasted breakfast, he hurriedly swallowed a cup of
coffee and took up his hat.

"I am going to see Molly, mother; would you like to send a message?"

Blossom, who was gazing out of the window with her eyes full of dreams,
turned at his words.

"Give her my love, Abel," she said.

"Tell her he was a good man and had fewer sins to his account than most
of us," added Sarah.

"Did you know, Abel, that old Mr. Jonathan left her ten thousand dollars
a year as long as she lives with the Gays?" asked Blossom, coming over
to where he stood.

He stared at her in amazement. "Where on earth did you hear that?" he
asked.

A flush reddened her face.

"Somebody told me. I forget just who it was," she replied.

"When did it happen? How long have you known it?"

But she was on her guard now, wrapped in that soft, pale reticence which
was the spiritual aspect of her beauty.

"It may have been only one of the darkies' stories. I didn't pay much
attention to it," she answered, and busied herself about the geraniums
in the window.

"Oh, you can't put any faith in the darkies' tales," rejoined Abel, and
after leaving a message with his mother for a farmer with whom he had
an appointment, he hastened out of the house and over the fields in the
direction of Reuben Merryweather's cottage. Here, where he had expected
to find Molly, Kesiah met him, with some long black things over her arm,
and a frown of anxious sympathy on her face.

"The child is broken-hearted," she said with dignity, for a funeral
was one of the few occasions upon which she felt that she appeared to
advantage. "I don't think she can see you--but I'll go in and ask, if
you wish it."

She went in, returning a minute later, with the black things still over
her arm, and a deeper frown on her forehead.

"No--I'm sorry, but she doesn't wish to see any one. You know, the old
hound died the same night, and that has added to her sorrow."

"Perhaps if I come back later?"

"Perhaps; I am not sure. As soon as the funeral is over she will come to
us. You have heard, I suppose, of the change in--in her circumstances?"

"Then it is true? I heard it, but I didn't believe it."

Molly had fled suddenly into remoteness--not Reuben's death, but Mr.
Jonathan's "provision," had swept her away from him. Like other
mortals in other crises of experience, she was aware of a helpless,
a rebellious, realization of the power, not of fate, but of money. No
other accident of fortune could have detached her so completely from the
surroundings in which he had known her. Though he told himself that
to think of wealth as a thing to separate them was to show a sordid
brutality of soul, he revolted the next instant from the idea that his
love should demand so great a sacrifice. Like the majority of men who
have risen to comparative comfort out of bitter poverty, he had at the
same time a profound contempt and an inordinate respect for the tangible
fact of money--a contempt for the mere value of the dollar and a respect
for the ability to take stands of which that mystic figure was the
symbol. Sarah's hard common sense, overlaid as it was by an embroidery
of sentiments and emotions, still constituted the basic quality in his
character, and Sarah would have been the last woman in the world to
think lightly of renouncing--or of inviting another to renounce--an
income of ten thousand dollars a year. _He_ might dream that love would
bring happiness, but she was reasonably assured that money would bring
comfort. Between the dream and the assurance there would have been,
in Sarah's mind at least, small room left for choice. He had known few
women, and for one dreadful minute he asked himself, passionately, if
Molly and his mother could be alike?

Unconsciously to himself his voice when he spoke again had lost its ring
of conviction.

"Perhaps I may see her later?" he repeated.

"The funeral will be to-morrow. You will be there?"

"Yes, I'll be there," he replied; and then because there was nothing
further for him to say, he bowed over his hat, and went down the flagged
walk to the orchard, where the bluebirds were still singing. His misery
appeared to him colossal--of a size that overshadowed not only the
spring landscape, but life itself. He tried to remember a time when he
was happy, but this was beyond the stretch of his imagination at the
moment, and it seemed to him that he had plodded on year after year with
a leaden weight oppressing his heart.

"I might have known it would be like this," he was thinking. "First, I
wanted the mill, so I'd lie awake at night about it, and then when I got
it all the machinery was worn out. It's always that way and always
will be, I reckon." And it appeared to him that this terrible law of
incompleteness lay like a blight over the over the whole field of human
endeavour. He saw Molly, fair and fitting as she had been yesterday
after the quarrel, and he told himself passionately that he wanted her
too much ever to win her. On the ground by the brook he saw the spray
of last year's golden-rod, and the sight brought her back to him with
a vividness that set his pulses drumming. In his heart he cursed Mr.
Jonathan's atonement more fervently than he had ever cursed his sin.

The next day he went to Reuben's funeral, with his mother and Blossom
at his side, walking slowly across the moist fields, in which the vivid
green of the spring showed like patches of velvet on a garment of dingy
cloth. In front of him his mother moved stiffly in her widow's weeds,
which she still wore on occasions of ceremony, and in spite of her
sincere sorrow for Reuben she cast a sharp eye more than once on the hem
of her alpaca skirt, which showed a brown stain where she had allowed
it to drag in a forgetful moment. Only Archie was absent, but that was
merely because he had driven over to bring one of the Halloween girls in
Abel's gig. Sarah had heard him whistling in the stable at daybreak,
and looking out of the window a little later she had seen him oiling the
wheels of the vehicle. It had been decided at supper the evening before
that the family as a unit should pay its respects to Reuben. From
Sarah, comforting herself behind her widow's weeds with the doctrine of
original sin, to Archie, eager to give his sweetheart a drive, one and
all had been moved by a genuine impulse to dignify as far as lay
in their power the ceremonial of decay. Even Abner, the silent, had
remarked that he'd "never heard a word said against Reuben Merryweather
in his life." And now at the end of that life the neighbours had
gathered amid the ridges of green graves in the churchyard to bear
witness to the removal of a good man from a place in which he had been
honoured.

During the service Abel kept his eyes on Molly, who came leaning
on Gay's arm, and wearing what appeared to him a stifling amount of
fashionable mourning. He was too ignorant in such matters to discern
that the fashion was one of an earlier date, or that the mourning had
been hastily gathered from cedar chests by Kesiah. The impression he
seized and carried away was one of elegance and remoteness; and the
little lonely figure in the midst of the green ridges bore no relation
in his mind to the girl in the red jacket, who had responded so ardently
to his kiss. The sunlight falling in flecks through the network of
locust boughs deepened the sense of unreality with which he watched her.

"It's a good service as such ready-made things go," observed Sarah as
they went homeward, "but it seems to me that a man as upright as Reuben
was is entitled to a sermon bein' preached about him when he's laid in
his grave. What's the difference between the good man and the bad, if
you're goin' to say the same words over the one and the other? I ain't
a friend to flattery, but it can't hurt a man to have a few compliments
paid him in the churchyard, and when all's said an' done, 'lookin' for
the general Resurrection' can't be construed into a personal compliment
to Reuben."

"When a man has been as pious as that he hasn't any use for compliments,
livin' or dead," rejoined Abner.

"Well, I ain't contendin'," replied his mother. "The Lord knows thar
ain't any of his kind left, the mo' 's the pity! Things have changed
sence Reuben an' I was young, an' the very language Abel an' Blossom
speak is different from ours. I reckon if old Mr. Jonathan was to ride
along these roads to-day thar wouldn't be anybody, unless it was a
nigger, to open the gate for him."

"You bet there wouldn't!" exclaimed Abel with fervour.

Abner, walking at Sarah's side, wore the unnerved and anxious expression
of a man who is conscious that he is wearing his Sunday suit when it has
grown too small to contain him. His agony was so evident that Blossom,
observing it in the midst of her sentimental disturbances, remarked
affectionately that he looked as if he "were tired to death."

"I've got the church fidgets in my legs," he said. "I reckon I'll get
into my everyday suit an' finish that piece of ploughin'. Are you goin'
back to the mill, Abel?"

"No, I've shut down for the day," Abel replied. The funeral had turned
his mind into its Sunday habit of thought and he was determined that his
present state of misery should extend reverently until the evening. From
some instinct, which he did not attempt to explain, it appeared more
respectful to Reuben to sit idle for the rest of the day than to follow
Abner's example and go out and finish his work.

The next morning he decided to write Molly a letter, and as the ordinary
paper his mother kept at the house seemed unsuitable for delivery at
Jordan's Journey, he walked down to the store to purchase a few sheets
from Mrs. Bottoms.

"Nothing common and cheap," he said, "but the very best you have in the
store--such as they use in the city."

Suspecting his purpose, she produced at once a turquoise coloured box,
from which she extracted an envelope that was ornamented on the flap
with a white dove holding a true lover's knot in his beak.

"This is the very thing you're lookin' for," she observed, in the tone
of one who is conscious of being an authority in that sphere to which
God has called her, "the latest style in Applegate."

Picking up the envelope he held it doubtfully toward the light in the
doorway.

"Are you sure it isn't a little--a little loud?" he inquired wistfully.

"Loud? Dear me, to think of you callin' a dove an' a blue ribbon bow
loud! Ain't that jest like a man? They can't be expected to have taste
in sech matters. No, it ain't loud!" she replied with more direct
condescension. "It's the latest thing from Applegate--the girls are all
crazy about it--jest the little artistic trifle that catches a woman's
eye."

In the end, under the sting of her rebuke, though but half convinced, he
concluded the purchase and went out, bearing the box of ornamented paper
under his arm. An hour later, after the letter was written, misgivings
besieged him anew, and he stood holding the envelope at arm's length,
while he frowned dubiously at the emblematic dove on the flap.

"It doesn't look just right to me," he said under his breath, "but Mrs.
Bottom ought to know, and I reckon she does."

The letter went, and the next afternoon he followed it in person to
Jordan's Journey. Gay was coming down the walk when he reached the lawn,
and after a moment's hesitation they stopped to exchange a few remarks
about the weather.

"There's something I want to explain to you, Revercomb," said Jonathan,
wheeling back abruptly after they had parted. "Molly has become a member
of our household, you see; so my relation to her is really that of a
cousin. She's a staunch little soul--I've a tremendous admiration for
her--but there has never been the slightest sentiment between us, you
understand."

"Yes, I understand," replied Abel, and fell silent.

There was a certain magnanimity, he recognized, in Gay's effort to put
things right even while he must have preferred in his heart to have them
remain in the wrong. As Molly's cousin it was hardly probable that he
should care to hasten her marriage to a country miller.

"Well, I wanted you to know, that was all," said Gay in a friendly tone.
"You'll find Molly in the side-garden, so I wouldn't trouble to knock if
I were you."

He went on, swinging with an easy stride between the hedges of box,
while Abel, passing the right wing in obedience to the directions, found
Molly walking up and down in a small grassy path, which was sprinkled
with snowdrops. The "side-garden" was a ruined, over-grown square,
planted in miniature box, which the elder Gay had laid out after one
of his visits to Italy. Now, with its dwindling maze and its unpruned
rose-bushes, it resembled a picture which has been blotted out until the
original intention of the artist is no longer discernible. Yet the place
was exquisite still. Spring had passed over it with her magical touch,
and she had decorated the spot she could no longer restore. The scent of
box filled the air, and little new green leaves had put out on the dusky
windings of the maze.

As Abel approached, Molly was moving slowly away from him, her long
black skirt, which had been made to fit Mrs. Gay, trailing over the
snowdrops in the path. When she turned at the end of the walk, there
was the faintest hesitancy in her manner before she came forward with a
smile and an outstretched hand. In some subtle way she had changed--he
felt it before she reached him--before she uttered a word. He had never
seen her in a long dress until to-day; and in putting on Mrs. Gay's gown
she seemed to have clothed herself in that lady's appealing and pensive
manner. The black skirt, flowing between them on the grass, divided them
more completely than the memory of their quarrel. He was chilled because
it made her appear reserved and distant; she was embarrassed because
she had not yet learned to walk in a train, and while it pleased and
flattered her with a sense of dignity, it also caused her to feel
awkward and unnatural in her movements, as if she were not "playing up"
successfully to the part that had been assigned her. She had learned
a good deal in three days, and she was still a little confused by the
endeavour to understand all of her lessons. Sincere as her sorrow was
for Reuben, her youth and a certain quickness of observation had kept
her mindful of every change through which she had passed, of every
detail which distinguished life at the "big house" from life in the
overseer's cottage. She had learned, for instance, the necessity, in
such circumstances, of eating as if it were an utterly indifferent
matter, and yet of coming to one's meals dressed as elaborately as if
one were on one's way to church. Kesiah had taught her much; but
from Gay, with his abundant kindliness, his self-possession, his good
clothes, she had learned incomparably more. Kesiah had shown her the
external differences in "things," while Gay had opened her eyes to the
external differences that might count in men. Until she knew Gay she
had believed that the cultivation of one's appearance was a matter that
concerned women alone. Now, when moved by some unfortunate impulse of
respect for her mourning, Abel showed himself before her in his Sunday
clothes, she was conscious of a shock which she would never have felt in
the old days in the overseer's cottage. In his working dress, with his
fine throat bared by his blue shirt, there was a splendid vitality about
her lover beside which Jonathan appeared flabby and over-weighted with
flesh. But dressed in imitation of the work of Gay's London tailor, the
miller lost the distinction which nature had given him without acquiring
the one conferred by society.

"You got my letter, Molly?" he asked--and the question was unfortunate,
for it reminded her not only of the letter, but of Gay's innocent jest
about the dove on the envelope. She had been ashamed at the instant,
and she was ashamed now when she remembered it, for there is nothing so
contagious as an active regard for the petty social values of life. In
three days she had not only begun to lose her own crudeness--she had
attained to a certain small criticism of the crudeness of Abel. Already
the difference between the two men was irritating her, yet she was still
unconscious as to the the exact particular in which this difference lay.
Her vision had perceived the broad distinction of class, though it
was untrained as yet to detect minute variations of manner. She knew
instinctively that Gay looked a man of the world and Abel a rustic, but
this did not shake in the least the knowledge that it was Abel, not Gay,
whom she loved.

"Yes, I got your letter," she answered, and then she added very softly:
"Abel, I've always known I was not good enough for you."

Her tone, not her words, checked his advance, and he stood staring at
her in perplexity. It was this expression of dumb questioning which had
so often reminded her of the look in the eyes of Reuben's hound, and as
she met it now, she flinched a little from the thought of the pain she
was inflicting.

"I'm not good and faithful, Abel; I'm not patient, I'm not thrifty, I'm
not anything your wife ought to be."

"You're all I'm wanting, anyway, Molly," he replied quietly, but without
moving toward her.

"I feel--I am quite sure we could not be happy together," she went on,
hurriedly, as if in fear that he might interrupt her before she had
finished.

"Do you mean that you want to be free?" he asked after a minute.

"I don't know, but I don't want to marry anybody. All the feeling I had
went out of me when grandfather died--I've been benumbed ever since--and
I don't want to feel ever again, that's the worst of it."

"Is this because of the quarrel?"

"Oh, know--you know, I was always like this. I'm a thing of freedom--I
can't be caged, and so we'd go on quarrelling and kissing, kissing and
quarrelling, until I went out of my mind. You'd want to make me over and
I'd want to make you over, like two foolish children fighting at play."

It was true what she had said, and he realized it, even though he
protested against it. She was a thing of freedom as much as one of the
swallows that flashed by in the sunlight.

"And you don't want to marry me? You want to be free--to be rich?"

"It isn't the money--but I don't want to marry."

"Have you ever loved me, I wonder?" he asked a little bitterly.

For an instant she hesitated, trying in some fierce self-reproach to
be honest. "I thought so once, and I suppose I'll think so again,"
she answered. "The truth is I've loved you some days, and some days I
haven't. I've never believed much in it, you know--I wasn't that kind of
woman. It always meant so much less to me than to others."

It was true again, he admitted it. She had never been--and he had
always known it--"that kind of woman." She had safely mocked at sex
only because she had never felt its significance. From the depths of his
misery, he told himself, while he faced her, that she would be perfect
if she were only a little different--if she were only "that kind
of woman." She possessed a thousand virtues, he was aware; she was
generous, honourable according to her lights, loyal, brave, charitable,
and unselfish. But it is the woman of a single virtue, not a thousand,
that a man exalts.

"Yes, I suppose it always meant less to you than to others," he repeated
dully.

"It wasn't my fault--why do you blame me?" she responded quickly. "Men
hold a woman to blame when she doesn't love, however ill they may use
her as soon as she does it. Oh, I know you're not that sort--you needn't
explain it. You are different, and this is why I am half loving you even
now. Last night when I awoke and heard a mockingbird in the cedars,
I told myself that I could never be happy away from you. But when
the light came, I wanted to see the world, and I forgot you. I'm only
twenty-one. I'm too young to tie myself down forever."

"My mother married when she was sixteen," he replied, partly because
he could think of nothing else to say at the moment, partly because he
honestly entertained the masculine conviction that the precedent in some
way constituted an argument.

"And a sensible marriage it was!" retorted Molly with scorn. "She's had
a hard enough lot and you know it." In her earnestness she had almost
assumed the position of Sarah's champion.

"Yes, I reckon it is," he returned, wounded to the quick. "I've no right
to ask you to exchange what they offer you for a life like my mother's."

Fulness of emotion lent dignity to his words, but if he had shown
indifference instead of tenderness, it would probably have served him
better. She was so sure of Abel--so ready to accept as a matter of
course the fact that she could rely on him.

"So you want it to be all over between us?" he asked.

"I don't want to be tied--I don't think I ought to be." Her tone was
firm, but she plucked nervously at a bit of crape on the sleeve of Mrs.
Gay's gown.

"Perhaps you're right," he replied quietly. He had spoken in a stiff and
constrained manner, with little show of his suffering, yet all the
while he felt that a band of iron was fastened across his brain, and the
physical effect of this pressure was almost unendurable. He wanted to
ease his swollen heart by some passionate outburst, but an obstinate
instinct, which was beyond his control, prevented his making a
ridiculous display of his emotion. The desire to curse aloud, to hurl
defiant things at a personal deity, was battling within him, but instead
of yielding to it he merely repeated:

"I reckon you're right--it wouldn't be fair to you in the end."

"I hope you haven't any hard feeling toward me," she said presently,
sweetly commonplace.

"Oh no, I haven't any hard feeling. Good-bye, Molly."

"Good-bye, Abel."

Turning away from her, he walked rapidly back along the short grassy
path over the snowdrops. As she watched him, a lump rose in her throat,
and she asked herself what would happen if she were to call after him,
and when he looked round, run straight into his arms? She wanted to run
into his arms, but her knowledge of herself told her that once there she
would not want to stay. The sense of bondage would follow--on his part
the man's effort to dominate; on hers the woman's struggle for the
integrity of personality. As long as he did not possess her she knew
that emotion would remain paramount over judgment--that the longing to
win her would triumph over the desire to improve what he had won. But
once surrendered, the very strength and singleness of his love would
bring her to cage. The swallow flights and the freedom of the sky would
be over, and she would either beat her wings hopelessly against the
bars, or learn to eat from his hand, to sing presently at his whistle.
Had passion urged her, this hesitancy would have been impossible. Then
she would either have seen none of these things, or, having seen them,
she would have dared greatly. She was too cool, too clear-sighted,
perhaps, for a heroine of romance. The single virtue that has fed
vampire-like on the blood of the others, the abject attitude of the
heart, the moral chicanery of sex--she would have none of these things.

"I am very fond of him, but I want to live--to live," she said, raising
her arms with a free movement to the sky, while she looked after his
figure. "Poor Abel," she added after a moment, "he will never get over
it."

Then, while the sigh of compassion was still on her lips, she was
arrested by a scene which occurred in the sunny meadow. From the brook
a woman's form had risen like a startled rabbit at Abel's approach,
wavering against the background of willows, as if uncertain whether to
advance or to retreat. The next instant, as though in obedience to some
mental change, it came quickly forward and faced the miller with an
upward movement of the hands to shelter a weeping face.

"I believe--I really believe it is Judy Hatch," said Molly to herself,
and there was a faint displeasure in her voice. "I wonder what she is
doing in the willows?"

Judy Hatch it was, and at sight of Abel she had sprung up in terror from
the edge of the brook, poised for flight like a wild thing before
the gun of the hunter. He saw that her eyes were red and swollen from
weeping, her face puckered and distorted. The pain in his own heart was
so acute that for a moment he felt a sensation of relief in finding that
he was not alone in his agony--that the universal portion of suffering
had not been allotted entirely to himself, as he had imagined. Had she
smiled, he would have brushed past her in silence, but because of her
agitated and despairing look, he called her name, and when she turned
toward him in bewilderment, held out his hand. It was a small accident
that brought them together--nothing more than the fact that she had
stooped to bathe her eyes in the stream before going on to the turnpike.

"Don't go, Judy; you're in trouble, I see, and so am I," he said with
bitterness.

"Oh, Mr. Revercomb!" she blurted out. "I didn't want anybody to catch me
in such a pass!"

"I'm not anybody, Judy; I'm a poor devil that was born without sense
enough to plough his furrow straight."

She was a plain woman, but a pretty one would have sent him off in a
panic over the meadow. He had had his lesson from a pretty woman, and
the immediate effect of it was to foster the delusion that there was a
mysterious affinity between ugliness and virtue.

"Tell me what it is, Judy. Can I help you?" he said kindly.

"It's nothin'. I am always in trouble," she answered, sobbing outright
behind her sunbonnet. "Between pa and my stepmother, there isn't a spot
on earth I can rest in."

She looked at him and he knew immediately, from her look, that
neither Solomon Hatch nor his second wife was responsible for Judy's
unhappiness. For a mocking instant it occurred to him that she might
have cherished a secret and perfectly hopeless passion for himself. That
she might be cherishing this passion for another, he did not consider at
the moment--though the truth was that her divinity inhabited not a mill,
but a church, and was, therefore, she felt, trebly unapproachable. But
her worship was increased by this very hopelessness, this elevation. It
pleased her that the object of her adoration should bend always above
her--that in her dreams he should preach a perpetual sermon and wear an
imperishable surplice.

"Well, I'm sorry for you," said Abel; "I'm sorry for you." And indeed he
was. "You're a good, pious, virtuous girl--just the sort of a girl a man
would want for his wife."

"I try to be good and I don't see why I should be so--so unhappy,"
sobbed Judy. "There ain't a better hand for raisin' chickens and flowers
and young lambs in the county."

Again she looked up at him through her tears, and the fool that lies at
the bottom of all generous hearts rose instantly to her bait. As he had
once been the sport of his desire, so he was to become now the sport of
his pity.

"Any man ought to be proud to have you for his wife, Judy," he said.

"Ought they, Abel?" she replied passionately, with the vision of the
Reverend Orlando rising in serene detachment before her.

For a moment he gazed down at her without speaking. It was pleasant to
feel pity; it was more than pleasant to receive gratitude in return. On
the raw wound in his heart something that was almost like a cooling balm
had been poured.

"God knows I'm sorry for you, Judy," he repeated; "we're both in the
same boat, so I ought to be. Come to me if I can ever help you, and
you'll find you may count on my word."

"I--I'll remember, Abel," she answered tearfully, but her thoughts
were of a certain pair of purple velvet slippers, begun in rivalry of
Blossom's black ones, which she was embroidering in pansies.

As he turned away from her into the crowd of silver willows beside the
brook, she stood looking after him with the abstracted gaze of one who
dwells not in the world of objects, but in the exalted realm of visions.



CHAPTER XXI


IN WHICH PITY MASQUERADES AS REASON


As Abel crossed the poplar log he said to himself, "I shall not think of
Her again"; when he reached the end of the willows he said, "I must
not think of Her again"; and at the beginning of the kitchen garden, he
changed this to, "I will not think of Her again."

The scent of hyacinths, which floated from a row blooming on either
side of the white paling gate, whipped his senses into revolt, and
he quickened his steps in a vain effort to escape from the tormenting
fragrance. Yet even while he fled from his pain he knew in his heart
that he did not desire the strength to turn and renounce it--that to
banish the image of Molly from his thoughts was to drive the bloom from
the meadow, the perfume from the air, the sunlight from the orchard.
Spring became as desolate as winter when it was robbed of the thought of
her.

By the house a late pear-tree was in blossom, and the sunshine, falling
obliquely across it, awoke a white fire in its branches, as if piles
of new fallen snow had warmed suddenly to a reflected flame. Beneath
it Sarah Revercomb was sowing portulaca seeds in a rockery she had made
over a decaying stump. Her back was strained with bending, but not once
had she stopped to gaze at the glorified pear-tree overhead. All her
life she had distinguished carefully between the aristocracy and the
common herd of blossoms, and not all the magic gilding of the spring
sunshine could delude her into regarding the useful product of a
fruit-tree as a flower.

"I don't see why you want to go wearin' yo' Sunday clothes every day,
Abel," she observed as he was about to pass her.

"Why shouldn't I?" he retorted with the defiance of despair.

Something in his voice caused the woman who had borne him to raise
herself from her stooping posture, and stare at him with an amazed and
incredulous expression, as if she were asking herself when and where
she could have given him birth. In her mental vision, which saw only one
thing at a time, but saw that thing with great distinctness, the idea
of love slowly presented itself as the cause of such a reversal of the
natural order as a Sunday suit on week days. Her conceptions of life
were derived so closely from facts, or from a logic as inexorable as
facts, that she was conscious of a baffled and exasperated sensation
when she was confronted by anything intangible which would not, as she
put it in her own mind, "get out of her way." It was natural enough, she
knew, that a material object or condition should possess the power
to block one's progress or even to change the normal current of one's
existence. Such things had happened a dozen times at least in her
limited experience. But when a mere emotion assumed the importance
and the reality of a solid body, she was seized by the indignant
astonishment with which a mathematician might regard the differential
calculus if it ceased suddenly to behave as he expected it to do. She
had always controlled her own feeling with severity, and it was beyond
the power of her imagination to conceive a possible excuse--unless it
was a disordered liver--for another person's inability to do the
same. Besides, as she had often asked herself, what was the use of not
controlling your feelings when you came to think about it?

"Thar ain't a bit of use in yo' goin' on this way over that girl, Abel,"
she said presently, as an annotation to his last remark, "you'd better
jest start along about yo' work, an' put her right straight out of yo'
mind. I al'ays knew thar warn't a particle of sense in it."

There was sound reason in her advice, and he did not attempt to dispute
it. The unfortunate part was, however, that in the very soundness of
her reason lay its point of offence. Philosophy was dealing again in her
high handed fashion with emotion, and emotion, in its turn, was treating
philosophy with an absence of that respectful consideration to which
she was entitled. Abel knew quite as well as Sarah that there wasn't "a
particle of sense" in his thinking of Molly; but the possession of this
knowledge did not interfere in the least with either the intensity or
the persistence of his thought of her. His mind seemed to have as much
control over the passion that raged in his heart as an admonishing
apostle of peace has over a mob that is headed toward destruction. At
the moment he felt that the last straw--the one burden more that he
could not bear--was to be told to follow what he admitted to be the only
clear and rational course. Turning away from her without a reply, he
rushed through the open gate and across the road and the poplar log into
the friendly shelter of his mill.

"What he needs is to wear himself out and to settle down into a sort of
quiet despair," thought Sarah as she looked after him. Then lifting her
trowel, she returned with a sigh to the sowing of portulaca seeds in her
rockery.

In the twilight of the mill, where he was hunted through the door by the
scent of flowers, he went over to the shelf of books in a corner, and
taking down the volumes one by one, turned their leaves with a trembling
and eager hand, as though he were seeking some thought so strong, so
steadying, that once having secured it, the rush of his passion would
beat in vain against its impregnable barrier. But the books, like
Sarah, treated life in the grand manner and with the fine detachment of
philosophy. He could get no assistance from them, because they only told
him that he would be happier if he acted always as a rational being, and
this did not help him. They told him, also, in what seemed a burst of
unanimity, that human nature would be better and happier if it were not
human nature, but something else. Some of the writers believed that this
result might be attained by making many laws and some of them were of
the opinion that the way to it was to undo a majority of the laws that
were already made. All admitted that the world was very badly off and
that something must be done, and done very quickly, to relieve it--but
the trouble was that each writer's remedy was different from every other
writer's, and yet each writer's was the imperative, the essential one.
There was a single point on which they agreed, and that was that human
nature would be better and happier if it were different. But poor human
nature, having known this ever since it left the tree-tops, went on,
just the same, being all the time the thing that it was obliged to be.

"There's no help for me here," said Abel, and moving away from the
shelf, he leaned his arms in the window, and looked out on the dripping
wheel and the crooked sycamore, which was decorated with little round
greenish balls of flowers. On the hot agony in his heart the languorous
Southern spring laid a cooling and delicate touch. Beneath the throb
of his pain he felt the stirring of formless, indefinite longings, half
spiritual, half physical, which seemed older and more universal than his
immediate suffering.

For six weeks the canker gnawed at his heart, and he gave no sign of
its presence. Then relief came to him for a few hours one day when he
drifted into a local meeting in Applegate and entered into a discussion
of politics. At the end he spoke for twenty minutes, and when his speech
was over, he told himself that at last he had found something that might
take the place of love in his life. The game of politics showed itself
to him in all the exciting allurement of a passion.

A gentle mannered old clergyman, with a dream-haunted face and the
patient waiting attitude of one who had watched for miracles for fifty
years, spoke to him when the meeting was breaking up, and after a
brief conversation, invited him to address a club of workingmen on the
following Friday. Though the old clergyman had spent half a century in a
futile endeavour to persuade every man to love his neighbour as himself,
and thereby save society the worry and the expense of its criminal
code, he still hoped on with the divine far-sighted hope of the
visionary--hoped not because he saw anything particularly encouraging
in his immediate outlook, but because it was his nature to hope and he
would probably have continued to do so had Fate been so unjust as to
consign him to an Inferno. He was one of those in whom goodness is a
natural instinct, and whose existence, even in a more or less inglorious
obscurity, leavens the entire lump of humanity. Mr. Mullen, who regarded
him with the active suspicion with which he viewed all living examples
of Christian charity, spoke of him condescendingly as a "man of
impracticable ideas"--a phrase which introduced his index prohibitory of
opinions. But the old clergyman, having attained a serviceable sense
of humour, as well as a heavenly fortitude, went on quietly doing good
after the fashion in which he was made. In his impracticable way he
had solved the problem of life by an indiscriminate application of the
Golden Rule. This solution had appeared to him so simple and yet so
complete, that he had spent fifty years, with but moderate success, in
persuading others to adopt it. At the end he was not what Mr. Mullen
would have called a "shining light," in the Church, yet his bread cast
upon the waters had returned to him in quantities, which, though small
and moist, were sufficient, with stringent economy, to keep body and
soul together. One of these quantities he discerned now in the eager
young countryman, whose face accompanied him through a trying day, and
helped to brighten his self-sacrificing labours.

To Abel, driving home some hours later in his gig, the old clergyman was
present less as a mental image, than as a vague yet impelling influence
for good. The impression was still in his thoughts, when he overtook
Judy Hatch a mile or two before reaching the crossroads, and stopped to
ask her to drive with him as far as her cottage. At sight of her wan and
haggard face, he felt again that impulse of pity, which seemed while it
lasted to appease the violence of his suffering.

"I haven't seen you to speak to for a long time," he observed, as she
mounted over the wheel to her place at his side.

"Not since that day by the brook," she answered, and flinched as if a
raw wound had been touched.

Though she did not look at him, he was conscious, through some subtle
undercurrent of feeling, that her spirit was drenched with the young
summer, with the pulsing of life of the June forest and the scent of
wild grape and honeysuckle which filled the air. Her face was lifted to
the fluted leaves of a sycamore, from which the song of a thrush rippled
like running water, and which gave her, if he had only known it, a
likeness to one of the minor saints in a primitive Italian painting. So
little, however, did her passion use her body as its medium that, after
glancing casually at her parted lips, he decided that she was probably
counting the eggs she had set to hatch in her hen-house, and hesitated
to interrupt the absorbing business of her calculations. Mentally,
he regarded her with the ungrudging respect which a man of any sort
instinctively yields to a woman who obviously disdains to ensnare his
judgment in the mesh of his senses. The palpitations of her spirit were
communicated to him in so elusive a process, that, even while he felt
the stir of his pulses, he was not aware that it was due in any measure
to the woman at his side. If she had been pretty--if she had been
even attractively plain--it would hardly have occurred to him that her
intense and breathless expression was associated with the hatching of
chickens; but, like other philosophers of whom he had never heard,
it was impossible for him to distinguish the qualities of the
thing-in-itself from the qualities of the phenomenon beneath his eyes.
Had he winnowed his superficial impressions the underlying thought would
probably have been: "No woman with a bosom as flat as that can have any
nonsense about her." From the first moment of their meeting he had never
doubted that it was this lack of "nonsense" which had attracted him. He
liked her evident indifference to his opinion of her, and he liked, too,
her listless silence, when she sat, with clasped hands, gazing straight
ahead through the shadowy colonnade of the woods. Not once had her
troubled look wandered from the moist dead leaves on the ground, to the
misty edges of the forest, where small wild flowers thronged in a pale
procession of pipsissewa, ladies' tresses, and Enchanter's nightshade.

"Did you know that the Gays are in Europe?" asked Judy turning her eyes
on his face for the first time.

His heart gave a throb and was quiet.

"No, I hadn't heard it," he replied in an arid voice.

"They say it's more than likely Molly will marry Mr. Jonathan. He's
waitin' on her."

Reaching for the whip, Abel touched the mare lightly on her glossy
flank. After that single pang his suffering had left him--for six weeks
of sleepless nights and tormented days had exhausted his endurance and
reduced him to a condition of emotional lassitude. In his brief
reaction from spiritual revolt into a state of apathetic submission, he
approached his mother's permanent austerity of mind as closely as he was
ever likely to do in the whole of his experience. The mere possibility
of a fresh awakening of feeling filled him with aversion. At the moment
he had as profound a distrust as Sarah of the immaterial elements; and
looking ahead, he saw his future stretching before him as firm and
flat as the turnpike which he was approaching. Delight and despair were
equally distasteful to him. He shrank as instinctively from the thought
of love as a man shrinks from re-opening an old wound which is still
sensitive to the touch, though it has ceased to ache. And so prone
is human nature to affirm its inherent belief in the eternity of the
present, that he was assured, not only that this was the most desirable
point of view he had ever reached, but that it was entirely out of the
question that he should ever travel beyond it to another. Forgetting
the many times when he had revolted from advice merely because it was
"sensible," he began calmly to arrange his life in accordance with that
law of practical expediency against which a month ago he had so hotly
rebelled.

As they drove out of the woods, and turned into the sunken road beyond
the ordinary which led in the direction of Solomon Hatch's farm, he
withdrew his gaze from the head of his mare and looked attentively at
his companion.

"I hope you are having an easier time, Judy," he said.

Her eyes brimmed. "You are the only person who cares about that, Abel."

"Why shouldn't I care? You are the best and the cleverest girl I know,"
he returned.

Her gratitude fanned his sympathy, which was beginning to smoulder, and
he felt again the pleasant sense of being in the position of benefactor
rather than of the benefited. His eyes rested without shrinking on her
sallow face, with the faint bluish tinge to the eyelids, and on her
scant drab coloured hair, which was combed smoothly back from her
forehead--and while he looked his pity clothed itself in the softer and
gentler aspect of reason. "She ought to be happy," he thought. "It's
a shame they should lead her such a life! It's a shame some good man
doesn't fall in love with her and marry her. She's really not so plain,
after all. I've seen many women who were worse looking than she is."
Unknown to him, an illusion was gradually shedding colour and warmth on
his vision of her. Mentally, he had endowed her with all the sober and
saner virtues to which his present mood was committed--though he had, in
reality, no better reason for so doing than the fact that she evidently
esteemed him and that she was deserving of pity. The discordant forces
of passion no longer disturbed the calm and orderly processes of his
mind, and he told himself that he saw clearly, because he saw stark
images of facts, stripped not only of the glamour of light and shade,
but even of the body of flesh and blood. Life spread before him like
a geometrical figure, constructed of perfect circles and absolutely
conformable to the rules and the principles of mathematics. That these
perfect circles should ever run wild and become a square was clearly
unthinkable. Because his nature was not quiescent it was impossible for
him to conceive of it in motion.

And all the while, in that silence, which seemed so harmless while it
was, in reality, so dangerous, the repressed yet violent force in
Judy wrought on his mood in which bare sense and bare thought were
unprotected by any covering of the love which had clothed them as far
back as he could remember. That breathless, palpitating appeal for
happiness--an appeal which is as separate from beauty as the body of
flesh is separate from the garment it wears--was drawing him slowly yet
inevitably toward the woman at his side. Her silence--charged as it was
with the intoxicating spirit of June--had served the purpose of life as
neither words nor gestures could have done. It had reconciled him to her
presence in the very moment that made him conscious of the strength of
his pity.

Presently, as they drove through the burned out clearing, she spoke
again.

"I wonder why you are always so good to me, Abel?"

He liked the honest sound of the words, and he did not know that before
uttering them she had debated in her heart whether it was worth while
to marry Abel since she could not marry Mr. Mullen. Marriage, having
few illusions for her, possessed, perhaps for that reason, the greater
practical value. She was unhappy with her stepmother in a negative way,
but so impervious had she become to casual annoyances, that she
hardly weighed the disadvantages of her home against the probable
relinquishment of Mrs. Mullen's washing day after her marriage to Abel.
Her soul was crushed like a trapped creature in the iron grip of a
hopeless passion, and her insensibility to the lesser troubles of
life was but the insensibility of such a creature to the stings of the
insects swarming around its head. The outcome of her drive with Abel
aroused only a dull curiosity in her mind. Some years ago, in the days
before Mr. Mullen, she would probably have fallen a helpless victim to
the miller had his eyes wandered for an instant in her direction. But
those days and that probability were now over forever.

Unfortunately, however, it is not given to a man to look into the soul
of a woman except through the inscrutable veil of his own personality.
Had Abel pierced that purple calico dress and witnessed the pathetic
struggle in Judy's bosom, his next words would hardly have been uttered.

"I wish I could do something to make you happier, Judy."

She looked at him with mysterious, brooding eyes, and he was conscious
again of the attraction, as subtile and as penetrating as a perfume,
which she exhaled in the stillness, and which vanished as soon as she
broke the quivering intensity of the silence. That this attraction was
merely the unconscious vibration of her passion for another man, which
shed its essence in solitude as naturally as a flower sheds its scent,
did not occur to him. Without his newly awakened pity it could not have
moved him. With it he felt that he was powerless to resist its appeal.

"Why shouldn't I be good to you, Judy?" he repeated.

Tears overflowed her eyes at his words. Looking at her, he saw her not
as she was, but as he desired that she should be; and this desire, he
knew, sprang from his loneliness and from his need of giving sympathy
to some one outside of himself. The illusion that surrounded her bore
no resemblance to the illusion of love--yet it was akin to it in the
swiftness and the completeness with which it was born. If any one had
told him an hour ago that he was on the verge of marriage to Judy, he
would have scoffed at the idea--he who was the heartbroken lover of
Molly! Yet this sudden protecting pity was so strong that he found
himself playing with the thought of marriage, as one plays in lofty
moments with the idea of a not altogether unpleasant self-abnegation.
He did not love Judy, but he was conscious of an overwhelming desire to
make Judy happy--and like all desires which are conceived in a fog of
uncertainty, its ultimate form depended less upon himself than it did
upon the outward pressure of circumstances.

"I sometimes think it's more than anybody can stand to go on living as
I do," said Judy, breaking the silence, "to slave an' slave an' never to
get so much as a word of thanks for it."

For a moment he said nothing. Then turning he looked hard into her humid
eyes, and what he saw there made him bend over and take her hand.

"Do you think I could make you happier, Judy?" he asked.




BOOK SECOND

THE CROSS-ROADS



CHAPTER I


IN WHICH YOUTH SHOWS A LITTLE SEASONED


Some six months after Abel's parting from Molly, he might have been seen
crossing the lawn at Jordan's Journey on a windy November morning, and
even to a superficial observer it would have been evident that certain
subtle modifications had been at work in his soul. Disappointed love had
achieved this result with a thoroughness which victorious love could
not have surpassed. Because he had lost Molly, he had resolved, in his
returning sanity, that he would make of himself the man who might have
won Molly had she known him in his completeness. And in the act of
resolving, his character had begun to ripen into the mellowness of
maturity.

The day was bleak, and something of this external bleakness was
reflected in the look which he raised to the ivy draped dormer-windows
in the hooded roof. Small greyish clouds were scudding low above the
western horizon, and the sorrel waste of broomsedge was rolling high as
a sea. The birds, as they skimmed over this billowy expanse, appeared
blown, despite their efforts, on the wind that swept in gusts out of
the west. On the lawn at Jordan's Journey the fallen leaves were dancing
madly like a carnival in rough carousal. Watching them it was easy to
imagine that they found some frenzied joy in this dance of death--the
end to which they had moved from the young green of the bud through the
opulent abundance of the summer. The air was alive with their sighing.
They rustled softly under foot as Abel walked up the drive, and then,
whipped by a strong gust, fled in purple and wine-coloured multitudes
to the shelter of the box hedges, or, rising in flight above the naked
boughs, beat against the closed shutters before they came to rest
against the square brick chimneys on the roof.

Beneath the trees a solitary old negro was spreading manure over
the grass, hauling it in a wheelbarrow from a pile somewhere in the
barnyard. Back and forth he passed, scattering the fine manure from his
spade until the wheelbarrow was empty, when he replenished it in
the barnyard and returned to his sprinkling. All the while he smoked
steadily a long corncob pipe, and to watch him at his task, was to
receive an impression that the hauling of manure was sufficient to fill
one's life with dignity and contentment. The work appeared no longer a
menial employment but a sober and serious share of the great problem of
production.

"That's the way I intend to go about the work of my mill," thought Abel,
as he watched him. "When you do it like that it really makes very little
difference what you are doing. It all comes to good." A minute before
his thought had been on the new roller mill he had recently bought and
was now working in his primitive little building, which he had slightly
remodelled. The next thing to go, he supposed, would be the old wooden
wheel, with its brilliant enamel of moss, and within five years he
hoped to complete the reconstruction of his machinery on lines that were
scientific rather than picturesque. His water power was good, and by the
time he could afford an entire modern equipment, he would probably have
all the grain at his door that he was ready to handle. Then he began to
wonder, as he had often done of late, if the work of the farm and
the mill might be left safely to Abner and Archie when he went up to
Richmond to the General Assembly, in the event of his future election?
Already he had achieved a modest local fame as a speaker--for his voice
expressed the gradual political awakening of his class. Though he was in
advance of his age, it was evident, even to the drowsy-eyed, that he was
moving in the direction whither lagging progress was bound. In the last
eighteen months he had devoured the books of the political economists,
and he had sucked in theories of social philosophy as a child sucks in
milk. That the business of the politician is not to reshape theories,
but to readjust conditions he was ready to admit, yet impelled by a
strong religious conviction, by a belief in the determining power of a
practical Christianity, he was sharing the slowly expanding dream of
his century--the dream of a poverty enriched by knowledge, of a
social regeneration that would follow an enlightened and instructed
proletariat. Ripples from the thought waves of the world had reached him
in the dusty corners of his mill at Old Church. Since no man thinketh to
himself, he could no more have escaped the mental impulsion of his
time than he could have arrested his embryonic development from the
invertebrate to the vertebrate. His mind being open, ideas had
entered, and having entered, they proceeded immediately to take active
possession. He was serving a distant Utopia of industrial democracy as
ardently as a lover serves his mistress.

As for his actual mistress, she had become not only visionary, but
enskied. Some months ago, while his wound was still fresh, he had not
suffered his thoughts to dwell on her because of the violence of the
pain. Pride as well as common sense, he had told himself during the
first weeks of his loss, demanded that he should banish her image from
his mind. Though he had never, even in his first anger, called her
"a light woman," he had come perilously near the feeling that she had
grazed the skirts of impropriety with a recklessness which no sober
minded son of Sarah Revercomb could countenance for a minute. His
very success as a miller depended upon an integrity of character which
permitted no compromise with the fundamental moralities. Youth is the
period of harsh judgments, and a man seldom learns until he reaches
thirty that human nature is made up not of simples, but of compounds.
What Abel had never divined was that Molly, like himself, might
approach the angelic in one mood and fall short of the merely human in
another--that she, also, was capable of moments of sublimation and of
hours of recusancy. There were the ashes of a poet in her soul as in
his, and to contain the ashes of a poet one must have been first the
crucible for purifying flames.

But it was six months ago that he had condemned her, and since then the
subtle modifications had worked in his habit of thought. As the soreness
passed from his heart, he had nursed the scar much as a crusader might
have cherished a wound out of the Holy Wars. From the actual conditions
of life in which he had loved her, he now beheld her caught up into the
zone of ideal and impossible beauty. Through the outer covering of her
flesh he could see her soul shine, as the stars shone through the web of
purple twilight on the marshes. From his earlier craving for possession,
his love had grown, through frustration and disappointment, into a
simpler passion for service.

"Well, one has to find out things," he said to himself on this November
morning, while he watched the old negro at his work. Some red leaves
whirled into his face, and the wind, lifting the dark hair from his
forehead, showed three heavy furrows between his knitted brows. He
appeared a little older, a little braver, a little wiser, yet there was
about him still the look of superb physical vitality which had been the
result of a youth spent in the open fields.

"Howdy, Uncle Boaz," he said to the old negro, who approached with his
wheelbarrow. "Your folks have all gone away for good haven't they?"

"Hit looks dat ar way, marster, hit sutney do look dat ar way."

"Well, you keep good grass here all the same."

"Dar ain' but one way ter do hit, suh, en dat's ter dung hit," replied
Uncle Boaz, and he remarked a minute afterwards, as he put down the
lowered handles of the wheel barrow, and stood prodding the ashes in his
pipe, "I'se gwinter vote fur you, Marse Abel, I sholy is---"

"Thank you, Uncle Boaz!"

"En I'se got a sack er co'n I'd be moughty bleeged ter git ground up fur
hominy meal---"

With a laugh Abel passed on through the side-garden, and entered the
leafless shrubbery that bordered the Haunt's Walk. The old negro had
disturbed his dream, which had been of Molly in her red stockings, with
the red ribbon binding her curls. Then he thought of Spot, the aged
hound--"That dog must have lived to be seventeen years old," he said
aloud in the effort to smother the sharp pang at his heart, "I remember
how fond old Reuben was of him even as a puppy. He would never let him
run hares with anybody except himself." It was seventeen years ago that
Spot was a puppy and he a boy--and now the one was dust with old Reuben,
and the other had settled down so effectually that he was going to marry
Judy in a fortnight. At least Judy was a good woman--nobody had ever
said a word against her--and she would make him a good wife. That, after
all, was what a farmer must think of--a good, saving wife, without any
foolishness about her, who would be thrifty and lend a hand at his work
when he needed it. All the rest was nonsense when once a man married.
Dreams were all very well in their way, but realities and not dreams,
after all, were things he must live with. Looking ahead he saw his
future stretching smooth and firm, like the flat white turnpike that
dragged its solid length into the distance. On that road there was no
place for the absurdity of red stockings! And so, in the absence of all
elation, only the grim sense of duty in the doing soothed him as he made
his way to Solomon Hatch's cottage.

On the back porch he found Judy deftly taking butter out of the churn,
and watched her while she worked the soft lumps with a wooden paddle
in a large yellow bowl. Though he would have been the last to suspect
it--for passion like temptation appeared to him to beset the beautiful
alone--Judy, in her homely way, was also a crucible, and the little
earthern pot of her body was near to bursting at the moment from the
violence of the flames within. She had just seen a black coated figure
in a red gig spin by on the road, and for one blissful minute, she had
permitted herself a flight of fancy, in which she was the bride, not of
Abel Revercomb, but of Orlando Mullen. To sit in that red wheeled gig,
touching the sleeve of his black coat! To stitch the frayed seams in is
silk waistcoat! To iron his surplices as only she could iron when the
divine fury seized her! To visit his poor and afflicted! To lift her
swooning gaze every Sunday, with a sense of possession, to that pulpit!
For a minute only the rapture lasted, and all the time, she went on
placidly making butter in the large yellow bowl. She was in the mood to
commit sublime follies and magnificent indiscretions. For the sake of
a drive in that red wheeled gig she would have foresworn Abel at
the altar. For the ecstasy of ironing those surplices she would have
remained a spinster forever.

"That's nice butter, Judy," remarked her lover, and believed that he had
paid her a tribute peculiarly suited to the complexion of her soul.

His gaze followed the drab sweep of her hair, which was combed straight
back from her forehead. Her eyes were looking heavenward while she
worked, yet they caught no beam, no colour from her celestial visions.
Small hectic blotches burned in the centre of her cheeks, and her
thin lips were pressed tightly together as though she bit back a cry.
Sometimes she would remain dumb for an hour in his presence, while her
thoughts soared like birds in the blue region of dreams. She indulged
her imagination in grotesque but intoxicating reveries, in which she
passed nobly and with honour through a series of thrillingly romantic
adventures; and, in fact, only ten minutes before Abel's arrival, she
had beheld herself and the young clergyman undergoing a rapturous, if
slightly unreal, martyrdom, as missionaries to the Chinese.

Her dreams dropped suddenly, with broken wings, in their flight, for
her stepmother, a small sickly woman, with a twisted smile, looked out
through the dining-room window, and remarked facetiously:

"You all don't look much like a co'tin couple to my eyes."

"I've been admiring her butter," replied Abel, who was always unduly
regardful of his English in the presence of Mrs. Hatch.

"She's a good hand at butter when she chooses to be, but she has her ups
and downs like the rest of us."

"All of us have them, I suppose," he rejoined, and Mrs. Hatch drew in
her head.

"I never imagined that you got put out, Judy," he said, forgetting the
tears that had led him to his sacrifice; "you always seem so quiet and
sober."

She glanced up, for there was a sound of wheels on the road, and Mr.
Mullen drove by again, sitting very erect, and uncovering, with a
graceful bend, to some one who was visible at the front. Her face
flushed suddenly to the colour of the brickdust, and she felt that
the confusion in her soul must fill the universe with noise. Quiet and
sober, indeed, if he could only have heard it!

But Abel was busy with his own problems, while his gaze followed Mr.
Mullen's vanishing back, which had, even from a distance, a look of
slight yet earnest endeavour. He still liked the young rector for his
sincerity and his uprightness, but he had found, on the whole, that he
could approach his God more comfortably when the straight and narrow
shadow of the clergyman did not come between.

"Aren't you going to pat it any more?" he asked presently, returning to
his consideration of the butter.

Picking up a square linen cloth, Judy dipped it into a basin of brine,
and, after wringing it out, carefully folded it over the yellow bowl.

"All the buttermilk is out of it," she answered, and thought of the
unfinished pair of purple slippers laid away in tissue paper upstairs in
her bureau drawer. As a married woman could she, with virtue, continue
to embroider slippers in pansies for her rector? These had been laid
aside on the day of her engagement to Abel, but she yearned now to riot
in purple shades with her needle. While she listened with a detached
mind to Abel's practical plans for the future, her only interest in
the details lay in the fact that they would, in a measure, insure the
possibility of a yearly offering of slippers. And while they looked into
each other's eyes, neither suspected for a moment the existence of a
secret chamber in the other's soul. All appeared plain and simple on the
surface, and Judy, as well as Abel, was honestly of the opinion that she
understood perfectly the situation and that the passionate refusal of
her heart was the only element that threatened the conventional security
of appearances.

She was in the morbid condition of mind when the capacity for feeling
seems concentrated on a single centre of pain. Her soul revolved in a
circle, and outside of its narrow orbit there was only the arid flatness
which surrounds any moment of vivid experience. The velvet slippers,
which might have been worn by the young clergyman, possessed a vital
and romantic interest in her thoughts, but the mill and the machinery
of which Abel was speaking showed to her merely as sordid and mechanical
details of existence.

Looking at her suddenly, he realized that she had heard nothing of what
he was saying. If he had looked deeper still he would have seen the
tragedy of her lovely little soul spinning the web of its perishing
illusion. Of all the martyrdoms allotted to love's victims, she was
enduring the bitterest, which is the martyrdom of frustration. Yet
because she appeared dull and undesirable on the surface, he had
declined, with the rest of Old Church, to regard her emotions any less
casually than he regarded her complexion.

"Well, I ought to be a proud man to have you, Judy," he remarked, and
rose to his feet.

"I hope neither of us will ever regret it," she returned.

"Not if I can help it," he said, and, putting his arm around her, he
drew her to him and kissed her lips. It was the second time he had
kissed her, and on the first occasion she had burst into hysterical
weeping. He did not know that it was the only caress she had ever
received, and that she had wept because it had fallen so far short of
what her imagination had deluded her into expecting. Now, though she
had herself well in hand and gave no visible sign of her disappointment,
there was a fierce, though unspoken, protest in her heart. "To think
that after all the nights I've lain awake an' wondered what 'twas
like, it should turn out to be so terrible flat," she said bitterly to
herself.

"It's just a fortnight off now, Judy," he remarked gently, if not
tenderly.

"I hope your mother will get on with me, Abel."

"She sets great store by you now. You're pious, and she likes that even
though you do go to the Episcopal church. I heard her say yesterday that
it was a rare thing to see a girl find as much comfort in her religion
as you do."

"You'll never want to come between me and my church work, will you,
Abel? I do most of the Foreign Mission work, you know, an' I teach in
Sunday school and I visit the sick every Friday."

"Come between? Why, it makes me proud of you! When I asked Mr. Mullen
about marrying us, he said: 'She's been as good as a right hand to me
ever since I came here, Revercomb.'"

"Tell me over again. What were his words exactly?"

"'She's been as good as a right hand to me, Revercomb,' that was what he
said, and he added, 'She's the salt of the earth, that's the only way to
describe her.' And now, goodbye, Judy, I must be going back to work."

Without glancing round, he went at his rapid stride down the narrow walk
to the whitewashed gate, which hung loose on broken hinges. In the road
he came face to face with Jonathan Gay, who was riding leisurely in the
direction of Jordan's Journey.

"How are you, Revercomb? All well?"

"Yes, all well, thank you." Turning in his tracks, he gazed thoughtfully
after the rider for a moment.

"I wonder why he came out of his way instead of keeping to the
turnpike?" he thought, and a minute later, "that's the third time he's
come back since the family left Jordan's Journey."



CHAPTER II


THE DESIRE OF THE MOTH


At the gate before the Revercombs' house Blossom was standing in a dress
of vivid blue.

"Are you going to a party?" Abel inquired as he reached her, and she
answered impatiently:

"I promised to wear this dress over to Judy's, so that she could see how
it is trimmed."

"Does she want a blue one?" he asked. It seemed to him little short of
ludicrous that Judy should buy a new dress because she was going to be
married to him; but in the presence of a custom so firmly entrenched
behind the traditions of respectability, he knew that protest would be
useless. Judy would check out her unromantic person in wedding finery
because finery was customary on such occasions.

"Of course we couldn't dress just alike, Abel," replied Blossom. His
question had seemed foolish to her and her usual soft solemnity was
ruffled by a passing irritation. "Judy's frock will be green, but she
wants bretelles like these on it."

"Bretelles?" he repeated as incredulously as if he had possessed any but
the vaguest idea of the article the word described. "Why didn't she wait
until she was married, and then I'd have bought them for her," he added.

"Of course she wants her wedding clothes--all girls do," said Blossom,
invoking tradition. "Are you coming in now. We're having dinner a little
earlier."

She turned and moved slowly up the walk, while he followed, caressing
the head of Moses, his spotted hound. From the kitchen he could hear
Sarah Revercomb scolding the small negro, Mary Jo, whom she was training
to wait on the table. On one side of the hearth grandmother sat very
alert, waiting for her bowl of soup, into which Mary Jo was crumbling
soft bread, while across from her grandfather chuckled to himself over a
recollection which he did not divulge.

At Abel's entrance, the old man stopped chuckling and inquired in an
interested tone,

"Did you buy that ar steer, Abel?"

"Not yet, I'm to think it over and let Jim Bumpass know."

"Thar never was sech a man for steers," remarked grandmother,
contemptuously. "Here he's still axin' about steers when he can't hist
himself out of his cheer. If I were you, Abel, I'd tell him he'd better
be steddyin' about everlastin' damnation instead of steers. Steers ain't
goin' to haul him out of hell fire if he once gits down into it."

"Well, you can tell her, Abel," retorted grandfather, "that it's time
enough to holler 'hell-fire!' when you begin to burn."

Mary Jo prevented a rejoinder by appearing with a napkin, which she tied
under his wife's chin, and a little later the old woman could be heard
drinking greedily her bowl of soup. She lived for food, yet, like most
passions which have become exaggerated by concentration out of all
proportion to the fact upon which they depend, the moment of fulfilment
seemed always brief and unsatisfactory after the intensity of
anticipation. To-day the trouble was there were no carrots in the soup,
and this omission reduced her to tears because it had blighted the hopes
of her entire morning.

"An' I'd been hankerin' arter them carrots ever since breakfast," she
whimpered.

"Don't cry, ma, I'll mash you up some nice ones for supper. That'll
be something to look forward to," said Sarah, who might have won
an immortal crown had such trophies been awarded to the patience of
daughters-in-law. "So you didn't buy that steer, Abel?"

"No, I didn't buy it."

"Have you seen Judy to-day?"

"I stopped there on my way home. She was making butter, and we talked
about buying an extra cow or two and letting Blossom and her send some
to market."

"Well it beats me!" observed Sarah, but whether her discomfiture was due
to Judy's butter or to Abel's love making, she did not explain. On the
whole the staidness of the courtship was pleasing to her. Her sense
of decorum was flattered by it, for she had as little tolerance of the
softer virtues as of the softer vines. It had been years since she
had felt so indulgent toward her second son; yet in spite of the
gratification his dejection afforded her, she was, as she had just
confessed, utterly and entirely "beat." His period of common sense--of
perfect and complete sobriety--had lasted for half a year, but she
was too shrewd a woman to be deceived by the mere external calmness of
appearances. She had had moreover, a long experience with males of
the Revercomb stock, and she knew that it was when their blood flowed
quietest that there was the greatest danger of an ultimate "rousing."
All her life she had lived in dread of this menace to respectability--to
that strict observance of the letter of the social law for which the
Hawtreys had stood for generations. On several occasions she had seen
a Revercomb really "roused," and when the transformation was once
achieved, not all the gravity of all the Hawtreys could withstand the
force of it. And this terrible potential energy in her husband's stock
would assert itself, she knew, after a period of tranquillity. She
hadn't been married to a Revercomb for nothing, she had once remarked.

If anything could have put her into a cheerful humour, it would have
been the depressed and solemn manner with which Abel went about the
preparations for his marriage. The inflexible logic of Calvinism had
passed into her fibre, until it had become almost an instinct with her
to tread softly in the way of pleasure lest God should hear. Generations
of joyless ancestors had imbued her with an ineradicable suspicion of
human happiness--as something which must be paid for, either literally
in its pound of flesh, or in a corresponding measure of the materials of
salvation.

"I declar' things are goin' on so smooth that something must be gettin'
ready to happen," she said anxiously to herself at least twenty times a
day--for she had observed life, and in her opinion, the observation had
verified the rigid principles of her religion. Do what you would the
doctrines of original sin and predestination kept cropping up under the
surface of existence. And so--"It looks all right on top, but you never
can tell," was the habitual attitude of her mind.

When dinner was over, Abel went out to the mill, with Moses, the hound,
trotting at his heels. The high wind was still blowing, and while he
stood by the mill-race, the boughs of the sycamore rocked back and forth
over his head with a creaking noise. At each swing of the branches a
crowd of broad yellow leaves was torn from the stems and chased over the
moving wheel to the open meadow beyond.

With the key of the mill in his hand, Abel stopped to gaze over the
green knoll where he had once planned to build his house. Beyond it he
saw the strip of pines, and he knew that the tallest of the trees had
fallen uselessly beneath his axe. The great trunk still lay there, fast
rotting to dust on the carpet of pine cones. He had never sold it for
timber. He would never use it for the rafters of his home.

As he looked back now all that past life of his appeared to him fair and
desirable. He remembered the early morning risings in his boyhood,
and it seemed to him that he had enjoyed every one of them to its
fullest--that it was only the present that showed stale and unprofitable
in his eyes. A rosy haze obscured all that was harsh and unlovely in the
past, and he thought of himself as always eager and enthusiastic then,
as always finding happiness in the incidents that befell him. The year
when he had gone away, and worked in the factory in order to educate
himself, was revealed as a period of delightful promise, of wonderful
opportunity. In remembering his love for Molly, he forgot the quarrels,
the jealousies, the heartburnings, and recalled only the exquisite
instant of their first lover's kiss. Then, he told himself, that even
while he had enjoyed his life, it had cheated him, and he would not live
it over again if he could.

Turning presently in the other direction, he discerned a patch of vivid
blue in the pasture, and knew that it was Blossom crossing the fields to
Solomon Hatch's. "She's gone a good piece out of her road," he thought,
and then, "I wonder why she doesn't marry? She might have anybody about
here if she wasn't so particular." The vivid blue spot in the midst of
the russet and brown landscape held his gaze for a moment; then calling
Moses to his side, he unlocked the door of the mill and began counting
the sacks of grist.

Outside, in the high wind, which made walking difficult, Blossom moved
in the direction of the willow copse. Gay had promised to meet her,
but she knew, from the experience of the last few months, that he would
neither hasten his luncheon nor smoke a cigar the less in order to do
so. As she pressed on the wind sang in her ears. She heard it like the
sound of rushing wings in the broomsedge, and when it died down, she
waited for it to rise again with a silken murmur in the red-topped
orchard grass. She could tell from the sound whether the gust was still
in the field of broomsedge or had swept on to the pasture.

In spite of her blue dress, in spite of the flush in her cheeks and
the luminous softness in her eyes, the joy in her bosom fluttered on
crippled wings. Gay was kind, he was gentle, he was even solicitous on
the rare occasions when she saw him; but somehow--in some way, it was
different from the ideal marriage of which she had dreamed. If he was
kind, he was also casual. She had hoped once that love would fill her
life, and now, to her despair, it looked as if it might be poured into
a tea-cup. She had imagined that it would move mountains, and the most
ordinary detail of living was sufficient to thrust it out of sight.

When she reached the brook, she saw Gay coming slowly along the Haunt's
Walk, to the spring. As he walked, he blew little clouds of smoke into
the air, and she thought, as he approached her, that the smell of his
cigar was unlike the cigar of any other man she knew--that it possessed,
in itself, a quality that was exciting and romantic. This trait in
his personality--a disturbing suggestion of the atmosphere of a richer
world--had fascinated her from the beginning, and after eighteen months
of repeated disappointments, it still held her, though she struggled now
in its power like a hare in a trap.

"So you're here!" he exclaimed as he reached her. Then, after a swift
glance over the fields, he drew her into the shelter of the trees, and
holding his cigar in his left hand, kissed her lips.

Closing her eyes, she leaned against him, while the scent of tobacco
intoxicated her with its train of happier associations.

"You're looking all right, though your letters have been rather jumpy.
My dear girl, when you pounce on me like that you frighten me out of my
wits. You really mustn't, you know."

"O Jonathan!" she gasped, and clung to him.

"Why, I had to manufacture some excuse on the instant for coming down. I
couldn't tell what foolishness you'd be capable of if I didn't."

His tone was half caressing, yet beneath it there was a serious
annoyance, which killed the suffering joy in her heart. She was slowly
learning that it is not safe to remind the man of pleasure of his
obligations, since he is attracted chiefly by his opportunities.

"The time was when you wanted to come just as much as I," she said.

"Don't I still? Haven't I proved it by telling a tremendous lie and
rushing down here on the first train? Come, now, kiss me like a good
girl and look cheerful. You've got to make up, you know, for all the
trouble you've put me to."

She kissed him obediently, yielding to his casual embraces with a
docility that would have charmed him had his passion been in its
beginning instead of its decline.

"You're glad now you came, aren't you?" she asked presently pleading to
be reassured.

"Oh, yes, of course, I like it, but you mustn't write to me that way
again."

Putting his arm closer about her, he pressed her to his side, and they
sat in silence while the wind whistled in the tree-tops above them. From
their shelter they could see the empty chimneys of Jordan's Journey, and
a blurred and attenuated figure on the lawn, which was that of the old
negro, who passed back and forth spreading manure. Some swallows with
slate grey wings were flying over the roof, and they appeared from a
distance to whirl as helplessly as the dead leaves.

"You do love me as much as ever, don't you, Jonathan?" she asked
suddenly.

He frowned, staring at the moving figure of the old negro. Again she had
blundered, for he was disinclined by temperament to do or say the thing
that was expected of him.

"Why, of course I do," he answered after a pause.

She sighed and nestled against him, while his hand which had been on
her shoulder, slipped to her waist. Her heart had turned to lead in her
breast, and, like Judy, she could have wept because the reality of love
was different from her virgin dreams.



CHAPTER III


ABEL HEARS GOSSIP AND SEES A VISION


Two nights before the wedding a corn shucking was held in the barn at
Bottom's Ordinary--a usually successful form of entertainment, by which
the strenuous labours of a score of able-bodied men were secured at the
cost of a keg of cider and a kettle of squirrel stew. In the centre of
the barn, which was dimly lighted by a row of smoky, strong-smelling
kerosene-oil lanterns, suspended on pegs from the wall, there was a
huge wooden bin, into which the golden ears were tossed, as they were
stripped of the husks, by a circle of guests, ranging in years from
old Adam at the head to the youngest son of Tim Mallory, an inquisitive
urchin of nine, who made himself useful by passing the diminishing
pitcher of cider. It was a frosty night, and the faces of the huskers
showed very red above the knitted woollen comforters which wrapped their
throats. Before each man there was a small pile of corn, still in the
blade, and this was replenished when it began to dwindle by a band of
workers in the moonlight beyond the open windows. In his effort to keep
warm somebody had started a hymn, which was vigorously accompanied by
a beating of numbed feet on the scattered husks on the floor. Above the
volume of sound old Adam's quavering falsetto could be heard piping on
like a cracked and discordant flute.

     "O-ver thar, O-ver thar,
     Th-ar's a la-nd of pure de-light.
             O-ver th-ar,
     We will la-y our bur-den do-wn.
     An' re-ceive our gol-den cro-wn.
     In that la-nd of pure de-light
              O-ver th-ar."

"That's a cold hymn, an' unsuitable to the weather," remarked Tim
Mallory at the end of the verse. "If you ask me, I'd say thar was mo'
immediate comfort in singin' about the redness of hell-fire, an' how
mortal close we're comin' to it."

"We don't want no impiousness at this here shuckin', Tim," observed
William Ming, who occupied the position of host in Betsey's absence
about the more important matter of supper. "You fill up with cider an'
go at that thar pile befo' you."

"Then pass it on," replied Mallory, reaching for the jug of cider, which
travelled in a regular orbit from old Adam's right hand round the circle
to the neighbour on his left, who chanced to be Solomon Hatch.

"Speakin' of impiousness," remarked that sour-faced little man, "have
you all heard the tales about Reuben Merryweather's gal sence she's had
her windfall? Why, to see the way she trails her skirt, you'd think
she was the real child of her father." Then rushing hurriedly to
generalization at Abel's entrance, he added in a louder tone--"Ah, it's
a sad pass for things to come to, an' the beginnin' of the end of public
morality, when a gal that's born of a mischance can come to act as if a
man was responsible for her. It ain't nothin' mo' nor less than flyin'
in the face of the law, which reads different, an' if it keeps up,
the women folks will be settin' up the same rights as men to all the
instincts of natur'."

Old Adam--the pride and wonder of the neighbourhood because he could
still walk his half mile with the help of his son and still drink his
share of cider with the help of nobody--bent over the heap of corn
before him, and selecting an ear, divested it of the husks with a
twirling, sleight-of-hand movement.

"They're losing virtue fast enough," he observed, throwing the naked
ear into the bin and reaching for another. "Why, when I was young thar
warn't nothin' in the way of meanness that a good woman wouldn't put up
with. They'd shut thar eyes to Hagars, white or black, rather than lose
the respect of men by seemin' to be aware of any immodesty."

"Ah, the times have changed now!" sighed Solomon Hatch, "but thar's one
thing sho' to my mind, an' that is, that if a woman thinks she's goin'
to attract men by pryin' an' peekin' into immorality an' settin' it
straight ag'in, she's gone clean out of her head. Thar's got to be
indecency in the world because thar al'ays has been. But a man sets a
heap mo' sto' by his wife if she ain't too inquirin' upon the subject."

"True, true, Solomon," said old Adam, "I for one was al'ays set against
teachin' women to read for fear they'd come to know things. Thar's a
deal of evil that gits into print, an' if you ain't acquainted with yo'
letters thar's less temptation to nose arter it. Reuben Merryweather
would have his daughter Janet taught, though I urged strongly against
it--holdin' that she could learn about sins an' immoralities even in
Holy Writ. Who knows if she'd ever have gone wrong if she hadn't learned
to read printed words?"

"Well, I'm glad print is too difficult for me," observed young Adam.
"The pains I take to spell out the words would stand greatly in the way
of my enj'yin' any immorality if I was to stumble across it. What part
of Scripture, pa, is it that deals with sech doin's?"

"They crop up powerful thick in Kings, son, but I've found 'em when I
looked sharp in Leviticus."

"If you are goin' to talk free, men, you can go to yo' own homes to do
it," remarked Betsey, who was accustomed to appear at unexpected moments
in order to impress them with the necessity of earning their supper.
"This ain't no place for loose speakin'," she added, solemnly eyeing
young Adam, who, having a weak memory, was striving to fix the names of
Kings and Leviticus in his mind by repeating them slowly to himself.

"Axin' yo' pardon, Mrs. Bottom, we didn't know a lady was in hearin' or
we'd never have made so bold," said old Adam. "Stop workin' yo' lips,
son, an' hand Mrs. Bottom a cheer."

"What's all this talk anyway about Molly Merryweather an' Mr. Jonathan?"
she demanded. "Abel, have you heard anything about it?"

The men glanced at each other with uneasy eyes, while they worked
nervously at the shucking, for the question had been in the air from the
moment of Abel's entrance, though none of them had been bold enough
to speak it aloud. And now a woman, with characteristic feminine
recklessness, had uttered the thought which had been revolving in each
mind for ten minutes--yet nothing had happened!

Old Adam, pausing for the first time in his work, glanced with
ungrudging respect at the short, lumpy figure in the black calico dress.
Her face was still comely, and there was the mild mulishness in
her expression that is seen in the countenances of many amiable yet
obstinate persons.

"No, I haven't heard," replied Abel, and he added a moment later, "What
do they say?"

"Well, Mr. Halloween had it from a man in Applegate who had it from a
man in Petersburg who had it from a man in Richmond."

"Had what?"

"That Mr. Jonathan had been waitin' on her steady for some months, an'
'twas mo' likely than not to end in marriage. She's a good girl, is
Molly. I ain't got no use for a woman that don't stand up for her sex in
the face of men."

"True, true," admitted her hearers solemnly, one after another, for none
among them had ever dared to defy the source of so many benefactions.

"Thar're some that thinks morals ain't meant for any but women," she
pursued, "but I ain't one of 'em, as William Ming can testify, that
holds to that view. Viciousness is viciousness whether it be male or
female, and Mr. Mullen himself in the pulpit couldn't convince me that
it don't take two to make an impropriety."

"True, true," they repeated, belying themselves under coercion in the
accents of the chorus in a Greek drama. "'Tis true, ma'am, as you speak
it."

"Thar were some mean enough to side against the po' innocent from the
hour of her birth," she continued oracularly, while she looked severely
at Solomon, who nodded in response, "an' these same folks have been
preachin' over her an' pintin' at her ever sence she larned to crawl out
of the cradle. But thar never was a kinder heart or a quicker hand in
trouble than Molly's, an' if she did play fast and loose with the men,
was it any worse, I'd like to know, than they deserve?"

"Thar's truth in what you say, ma'am, thar's a deal of truth in it,"
they agreed, nodding dejected craven heads over their pipes. Like all
born politicians, their eye was for the main chance rather than for
the argument, and they found it easier to forswear a conviction than to
forego a comfort.

"Well, I'm roastin' a young possum along with the squirrel stew, so
you'd better work up an appetite," she said in a mollified tone at at
the end of her lecture, as though she were desirous of infusing a more
ardent spirit into them before her departure.

When the barn door closed behind her, a sigh of relief, half stifled
through fear of detection, passed round the group.

"Thar goes a woman in a thousand," observed old Adam, edging nearer the
bin.

"In a million--let's make it a million," urged Solomon Hatch.

"If they were all like that the world would be different, Mr.
Doolittle," remarked Jim Halloween.

"Ah, yes, it would be different," agreed old Adam, and he sighed again.

"Thar'd be strict walkin' among us, I reckon," said his son.

"An' a chalk line the same as we draw for the sex," added Solomon Hatch.

"Sin would be scarce then an' life earnest," remarked William Ming,
who had alluded to Betsey in the most distant terms ever since he had
married her.

"We'd abide by the letter like the women, not by the spirit as we do,"
reflected Solomon.

They sighed for the third time more heavily, and the dried hus