hehotih  ce e the child shouted. She looked round,--there stood the
old Count watching her in mute delight.

"Has he conquered you too at last?" he exclaimed, "there's no finer
little fellow in all Austria than our Ossi!" And he held out his hands
to the child. She let him be taken from her, and without a word walked
away toward the castle. Ah, what a wretched night she passed after this
episode! No, she would not think of him, it hurt too much.

Time passed; for weeks she would not look at him; then suddenly she
would appear when he was taking his lessons, and for a couple of days
she would watch him with a morbid intensity which sometimes degenerated
into lurking distrust; then finding nothing to justify the distrust she
would again turn from him.

In spite of his excellent disposition the boy might perhaps have grown
up a good-natured but inconsiderate egotist, had not Count Lodrin taken
an unwearied interest in his training, guiding him aright with the most
affectionate gentleness. The influence of the frail old man upon the
child was invaluable. In the society of an invalid so tender and so
loving, the boy learned what he could have learned nowhere else,--to
bow before weakness, and helplessness, the only two potentates whose
sway natures as proud as Oswald's acknowledge. He learned to refine his
innate haughtiness by the most considerate delicacy towards his
inferiors, and to consider his pride as inseparable from devotion to
duty and an impregnable sense of honour.

Sometimes the Countess would steal to the door of the library, where
the father and son were wont to talk together, and would listen. She
did so once when the old man was seriously reproving the boy for some
rudeness that he had shown towards his tutor.

"I know it, papa, I am wrong, but Herr Mueller is a coarse kind of man,
and I cannot abide coarseness," she heard the boy say, and the old man
rejoined gently, "He is unfortunate, Ossi, remember that before all.
How, think you, could he endure his lot if in his veins ran such blood
as yours?"

All things swam before the mother's eyes, as with downcast looks she
hurried away, locked herself in her room and wrung her hands.

                               *   *   *
She never addressed a kind word to him, treating him with studied
indifference, with almost malignant severity. Under such treatment the
boy suffered, grew pale, thin, and nervous. Then came a damp, warm
autumn, the skies were every day veiled behind leaden clouds,--it
drizzled continually without actually raining, and the leaves instead
of falling rotted on the trees. A terrible epidemic broke out in the
country around Tornow, and raged like a pestilence, carrying off victim
after victim, until at last it appeared in the market town itself.

The Count, fanatically faithful as ever to the duties of his position,
would not leave Tornow for fear of increasing the panic, but he
entreated his wife to go away and take the boy with her, but this she
obstinately refused to do, not even allowing Oswald with his tutor to
be sent to her relatives.

One morning the Count came to her saying, "Ossi has the fever! The
disease is of a malignant and contagious character; it is quite
unnecessary that you should expose yourself to it, Schmidt and I can
take care of him." Whereupon he left her.

She was fearfully agitated; the hour of her liberation was perhaps
about to strike; she determined not to lift a finger to save the
child's life. She forced herself to keep away from his sick-room for
several days; the boy rapidly grew worse; for his recovery the Count
had mass said in the chapel of the castle, although he himself was not
present at it,--he would not leave the child's bedside; but of course
the Countess attended at the religious celebration. She was very
generally beloved by her servants, but on that day she could see on
their faces ill-concealed surprise, nay, scarce-repressed indignation,
beneath their conventional expression of respect.

After the Elevation the chaplain delivered a short discourse in which
he praised the sick boy's amiable qualities, and requested all to join
him in imploring God's grace for the heir of the house. Tears ran down
the cheeks of all the old servants while the priest prayed, but the
Countess kneeled on her _prie-dieu_, her face pale, her eyes tearless,
her lips scarcely moving.

The day wore on; hour after hour passed into eternity, the early
autumnal twilight descended from the gray clouds upon the earth, and
gradually deepened to black night; throughout the castle reigned
unbroken silence, and not even outside was heard the sound of a falling
leaf. The Countess's pulses throbbed with a feverish longing for her
child, that nearly drove her mad. She wondered if he in turn did not
feel a yearning for her presence?--if his grief at her absence from his
sick-bed did not aggravate the disease?--how if it were killing him?
She pictured him borne away upon the dark, swiftly-rushing stream of
eternity so close beside her that she might have stretched forth her
hand to save him,--and she dared not! Oh, that she could have commanded
fate, "Take him, I will not keep him, but take me too!"

Minutes grew to hours; perhaps at that very instant he was breathing
his last. She sprang up,--she would not nurse him back to life, no, but
she must see him once more, once more clasp him to her heart before he
died.

She hurried to the door of the sick-room, listened, and heard the low
monotonous moan that is wrung from a half-conscious sufferer. She
entered; at the foot of the bed sat the old Count, bent and weary.
Schmidt, Oswald's old nurse, was applying a cold, wet towel to the
boy's forehead. The Countess took it from her, thrust her aside with
jealous haste, and herself laid the wet cloth upon her son's head.
Strange! at the touch of her hand he opened his eyes, and even in his
half-unconscious state, recognised her with a faint, wondering smile.

From that hour she never left his bedside. The famous physician in whom
she had great confidence, and for whom she telegraphed to Vienna,
frequently declared afterwards: "Never have I seen a child nursed with
such devotion by a mother!"

She tended him like a sister of charity,--like a maid-servant. She
gloried in his refusal to allow any one else to wait upon him, that he
screamed with pain when another hand than hers touched him, that he
turned from his medicine if she did not administer it.

The crisis passed; the physician pronounced all danger over if no
unforeseen relapse occurred. This he made known to the Count and
Countess in the antechamber of the sick-room, whither they had
withdrawn to hear his opinion. When the Count feelingly thanked him for
saving his child's life, Doctor M .... denied that any credit was due to
him, "my share," said he, "in this fortunate result is but trifling;
the recovery of our little patient is owing solely to the wonderful
nursing that he has been blessed with," and turning to the Countess he
added respectfully, "Your Excellency may say with pride that your child
owes his life to you for the second time."

The ground seemed to reel beneath her,--she could have shouted for joy,
and yet never in her life had she been so wretched as at this blissful,
terrible moment. Without a word she returned to the sick-room, and sat
down by the little white bed; she motioned to Schmidt who had been
watching the boy's sleep, to retire, she wanted to be alone with her
child. He was sleeping soundly, his breath came and went regularly, and
his brown head rested comfortably on the pillow. She could not look
long enough at the dear little emaciated face, wearing now a smile in
sleep. He was like herself, his every feature resembled hers, his
straight, broad brow, the short, delicately chiselled nose, the finely
curved mouth, firm chin, nay, even the gleam of gold in the dark hair
about the temples, all were her own. Even his hands lying half-closed
on the coverlet resembled hers; they were longer and more muscular, but
they were shaped like hers. How she admired him, how proud she was of
him in her inmost soul! She had not been able to let him die,--he _owed
his life to her for the second time!_ It was useless to combat a
feeling that always gained the upper-hand; but how was she to adjust
herself to her false position?--what was her duty? This question she
asked herself in desperate earnest, honestly ready to atone for her
guilt by any sacrifice. Her stern, cold duty was perhaps to go to her
husband, confess to him the terrible truth, and then, with her child,
and with all the means that was her own, depart for some quarter of the
world where amid strangers she could provide a tolerable existence for
her boy. She shuddered!--her own disgrace was of no consequence;
she suffered so fearfully beneath the weight of the falsehood of her
life, that it would have been a relief to burst its bonds,--but her
child!--Why, in comparison with the torture to which her confession
would subject him, it would be merciful to stab him to the heart. He
was too old and too precocious not to appreciate fully the disgrace of
his position; he was too proud and too sensitive to find any
consolation or support under such fearful circumstances in the love of
a dishonoured mother.

She must continue to carry out the lie. Who would thus be the
sufferer?--Her own conscience; hers must be the torture! A confession
would ruin the existence of her husband, and her son, and would
overwhelm two families with disgrace, while now ....! The only being who
had any claim to the Lodrin estates was a good-for-naught, who never
could be to his people what Oswald promised to be. And suddenly she
seemed to see her duty clear before her, a noble sacrificial duty!

She would so train Oswald that he should fill the station that he
occupied better than any other could possibly fill it,--his excellence
should justify her deceit.

She solemnly vowed, by her child's bedside, to watch over his heart and
soul, to guard his fine qualities like a priceless treasure, to see
that no breath of evil should ever taint them. Then she bent over him
and kissed his hands gently. He woke and smiled, whispering, "Mamma,
will you go on loving me when I am well?"

                               *   *   *

Love him indeed! Ah, how she petted and indulged him during his long
convalescence, how willingly she complied with all his little whims,
how gladly she submitted to the exactions of his affection, half
selfish though they were at times, as those of an invalid on the road
to recovery are so apt to be! How well she knew how to amuse, and
occupy him! how many games of chess and of cards she played with him!
how she read aloud for his entertainment, albeit unused to such
exertion, Cooper's Leatherstocking Tales, and Dumas' _Trois
Mousquetaires_!

When he had fully recovered, her treatment of him was more serious. She
kept the vow she had made to herself, she watched his every impulse,
his every breath, spared no pains to train him to be,--what he must be
to satisfy her conscience, her pride,--a blessing to all around him.
She even did what was for her the hardest task of all, she repressed
her tenderness for him, lest it should make him effeminate. She made it
her duty, when the time came for him to resume his studies, to engage a
new tutor for him, and, quite out of patience with the cringing,
fawning candidates for the position that had hitherto made their
appearance in Tornow, she wrote to a foreign Professor of her
acquaintance asking him to aid her in procuring the person whom she
needed. A month later there came to Tornow a young fellow with the
lightest possible hair standing up like a brush above a very
intelligent face, not at all handsome, ruddy, clean-shaven, and with a
very sympathetic expression. He carried himself erect, and his manner,
while it was perfectly easy, was never obtrusive. He was much
interested in his profession of tutor, although he fully recognised its
difficulties, and it never occurred to him to regard it simply as a
provision for impecunious scholars whose hopes were bounded by the
prospect of a future pension. Oswald ridiculed the Prussians, until
this particular Prussian not only compelled his respect, but won his
friendship.

                               *   *   *

The Countess's social relations dwindled to a point; everything that
interfered with her care for her child wearied her. She was often
present while his lessons were going on, she rode with him daily, and
he and his tutor always took their meals with the Count and Countess.

                               *   *   *

She adjusted her life by her boy in every respect. One word from Ossi
sufficed, where her mother's and her brother's entreaties had failed,
to produce a change in her hard, impatient bearing towards her invalid
husband. It was long before she perceived how her conduct in this
respect wounded Ossi's feelings; she sometimes wondered what depressed
the boy. It made her anxious, and one day she asked him about it.
Taking his face tenderly between both her hands she said, "How sad your
eyes are, Ossi, does anything trouble you?" For a moment he hesitated,
and then he spoke out bravely. "Mother, dear, you are so very kind to
every one else; be a little kind to papa!"

She started, turned pale, and left the room without a word; he looked
after her anxiously. Had he alienated her affection again?

                               *   *   *

No! that which all the arguments and representations of her mother and
brother had failed to accomplish a couple of words from boyish lips had
achieved. From that hour she testified towards her invalid husband the
unvarying respect, the careful regard of a dutiful daughter, and
although his various, and increasing infirmities,--he lost his
hearing, and very nearly his eyesight,--becoming at last a complete
paralytic,--made her tendance upon him most distressing, she was
never again betrayed into uttering an impatient word. Hers was a hard
task--especially at the beginning--a very hard task! But what of that?
Ossi was pleased with her, and that was reward enough! She had learned
to read his eyes; for love of him she altered everything in herself
that could displease him, although he himself could not have explained
why; she purified and strengthened her character day by day, and really
became the mother that he dreamed her.

The old Count died; Georges Lodrin had disappeared. An American
newspaper announced his death, and as the announcement was not
contradicted it was held to be true. Georges was the last heir; at his
death the property would have escheated to the government; thus the
Countess need no longer be tormented by the thought that she was
depriving another of his rights.

                               *   *   *

Days of cloudless delight ensued; Ossi grew to manhood, left her
protecting arms, and launched forth upon the broad, perilous stream of
life, while she, gazing after him anxiously, was forced to stay upon
the shore. The time was past when tenderly, delicately, and yet with a
certain shyness of the son already a head taller than herself, she
could ask to know all of his life, could extort from him his small
confessions. She had to leave him to himself, with, at times, a secret
tremor. Only secret, however; she would not interfere with his freedom
of action. Praise of him greeted her on all sides; she was satisfied
with her work.

He was like her in every way, even in his faults; but those faults
which had wrought her ruin,--pride, and passionate blood--became him
well. There was no throne upon earth that she did not consider him
worthy to fill, and which should not have been his if she could have
given it to him; there was no conceivable torture that she would not
have borne willingly if thereby she could have added to his happiness.

His excellence was her justification; her maternal love was her
religion.

                               *   *   *

She still sat in the same arm-chair where she had resolved to utter the
falsehood, which, after all, her lips had refused to speak! Her heart
seemed to have burst in twain, and from it had fallen the whole
treasury of fair memories which she had stored within it; her slain
joys lay about her in disarray, shattered, dead. She tried to collect
them, groping for them in memory; all at once her thoughts hurried to
the future,--the confusion subsided,--she understood!

She moaned, and stroked back the hair from her temples; her wandering
glance fell upon a newspaper lying on her table. The date caught her
eye,--the sixth of August,--she started, the morrow was his birthday!
She remembered the little surprise she had prepared for him; she had
selected from among her jewels something very rare and beautiful which
he could give to his betrothed. Rising from her chair, she said to
herself aloud, "The marriage is impossible!" Then followed the
question, "What will he do, how will he live on?"--"Live?" she
repeated, and on the instant a wild dread assailed her. "For God's
sake!" she groaned, "that must not be, I must prevent it."

Again her thoughts hurried confusedly through her mind. She would go to
him, and on her knees before him entreat, "Despise me, curse me, but be
happy, live to bless those whose fate lies in your hands, and who could
find no better master. The injustice of it I will answer for here, and
before God's judgment-seat! Or--if you cannot sustain the burden of
these unlawful possessions, cast it off. Let my name be blasted, I
deserve nothing better. But you,--you live, take everything that is
mine and that is yours of right, and found a new existence for yourself
wherever it may be!"

She hurried out into the corridor, wild, beside herself. Before his
door she paused, overcome by a horrible sense of shame,--she could
never again look him in the face! What would have been the use? Another
might perhaps compromise philosophically with circumstances. But
he,--detestation of the blood flowing in his veins, would kill him! She
raised her arms, and then dropped them at her sides, like some wounded
bird, that, dying in the dust, makes one last vain effort to stir its
wings to bear it to its lost heaven. Then she kneeled down and pressed
her lips upon the threshold of his door before groping her staggering
way back to her room.




                             CHAPTER XIII.


The mood in which Conte Capriani took his place beside Kilary in the
victoria that was to carry him to the place of meeting, was a very
strange one. Never had he felt such pride of victory; his thoughts
reverted to his first meeting with the beautiful Countess Lodrin at the
beginning of his career, when with his keen scent for all that was
lowest in human beings, he had divined her passionate nature, a nature
held in check with despotic resolution after the great disappointment
of her early life.

With calculating cunning he had plotted and schemed to get her into his
power. But when at last he thought he had quelled and broken her pride,
she suddenly reared her head more haughtily than ever, and thrust him
from her.--He had not believed such audacity possible!

And now the woman whom he had thought to tread beneath his feet stood
at so unattainable a height above him, that his treachery was of no
avail as a weapon against her. How his heart had been consumed by
futile rage! Only the day before yesterday she had dared to send him
word by Zoe Melkweyser that she did not remember him.

"But it is my turn now," he thought, "this duel has forced an
explanation between herself and Oswald,--she has had to humble
herself before her child!" A fiendish exultation thrilled him to his
very finger-tips. "At last they must bow before me," he said to
himself.--"Mother and son, the two haughtiest of the whole haughty
crowd!"

It never occurred to him that this explanation which he had forced so
relentlessly upon the mother and son could have results other than
those which he contemplated. Absolutely content, for the first time in
his life, he leaned back among the cushions slowly puffing forth big
clouds of smoke into the fresh morning air, as the carriage approached
the old monastery of St. Elizabeth.

It was a large building blackened by time, standing quite isolated at
about half a league from Tornow upon fallow land. Formerly a monastery,
afterwards a hospital, and then a poor-house, it was now one of those
melancholy ruins that only await the pickaxe of demolition. The walls
were dirty, the windows black, with half the panes broken and patched
up with paper.--Two grape-vines trailed over the grass where once had
been a garden, and a couple of knotty mulberry-trees grew close to the
ruinous walls.

Leaning against one of these walls stood an ancient black, wooden
crucifix; the nail that had held fast the right hand of The Crucified
had fallen out and the arm hung loose, lending to the rudely-carved
image a strange reality. It looked as if the Saviour in the death
struggle had torn away his bleeding hand from the cross to bless
mankind with it once more.

Beneath the figure of Christ was a tablet with an inscription, the gilt
letters of which, much faded by time, still glistened in the morning
sunlight.

The atmosphere was unusually clear, the skies cloudless. Oswald,
Georges, and old Doctor Swoboda arrived before Capriani; whilst Georges
and Doctor Swoboda walked about the old building discussing various
parts of it to keep themselves cool, Oswald leaned against the doorway
of the old cloister, and gazed silently into the distance. Not a trace
was perceptible of the irritability which Georges had observed on the
previous day. His was the repose of one who sees the goal where the
terrible burden with which destiny has laden him can be cast off.--His
soul was filled with anguish, but was conscious of the remedy at
hand.--Release went hand in hand with duty.

Dear old memories arose upon his mind,--vaguely as if obscured by thick
vapour. His mother's image hovered before him; he clasped his hands
tightly, stood erect, threw back his head and looked upwards as
desperate men always do before final exhaustion. His glance fell upon
the Christ; the tablet at His feet attracted his attention, he
approached it.

"What have you found there?" asked Georges, with forced carelessness.

"I am only trying to decipher the inscription," replied Oswald.

"The inscription?--'God--God--have....'" Georges spelled out.

"'God have mercy upon us all!'" Oswald read, and at that moment the old
iron-barred gate of the monastery garden creaked on its hinges,--Kilary
entered first and Oswald returned his bow with friendly ease. But when
the Conte, following Kilary closely, bowed with a sweet smile Oswald
scarcely touched his hat.

The Conte glanced keenly at him; for an instant his eyes encountered
those of the young man and gazed into their depths, but found nothing
there save immeasurable disgust.

The conditions of the duel called for thirty paces with an advance on
each side of ten paces. The seconds measured off thirty paces and at
the distance of ten paces apart laid two canes down on the grass.

The whole proceeding was to Georges a disgusting farce; he seemed to be
acting as in a dream, without any will of his own. It was impossible
that his cousin Oswald Lodrin should condescend to fight with this
adventurer.

Oswald and the Conte took their places, the seconds gave the signal. On
the instant Oswald shot wide of the Conte. A brief, dreadful pause
ensued; the Conte hesitated. With utter disdain in his eyes, his head
held erect, Oswald advanced; the Conte had never seen him look so
haughty.

The sight of the handsome set face recalled to the adventurer the
manifold humiliations that he had been obliged to endure all his
lifelong at the arrogant hands of 'these people.' All his hatred for
the entire caste blazed up within him,--all power of reflection gone he
blindly discharged his pistol!

Oswald felt something like a hard cold blow on his breast,--a crimson
cloud seemed to rise out of the earth before him, he staggered and
fell.

"Good God!" exclaimed Georges quite beside himself, as he raised the
dying man in his arms and held him there while the old Doctor bent over
him.

Oswald opened his eyes. His mind was somewhat astray,--everything about
him seemed wavering vaguely; then, in the midst of the terrible,
chaotic confusion of every sense that precedes dissolution he made a
mighty effort to grasp and hold a thought that glided indistinctly
through his half-darkened mind. "Georges," he gasped, "what day of the
month is it?"

"The seventh of August."

"My birthday."--Suddenly his mind grew clear once more, and there came
over him the incredible celerity of thought, the wonderful illumination
of vision of the dying, who in a moment of time grasp the memory of an
entire life. As the earth slipped away from him he was able to judge
human weaknesses in the light of eternity.

"Georges!" he began.

"Yes, dear old fellow!" said Georges softly, in a choked voice.

"Tell my mother--and for God's sake do not forget--that for the happy
twenty-six years that are past I thank her, and that I kiss her dear,
dear hands in token of farewell!"

He was silent, he breathed with difficulty,--his lips moved again,
and Georges put his ear down to them that he might understand
him--"Georges,--if I have ever done you wrong,--you or any one else in
my life--without knowing it,--then...."

"Ah Ossi, would to God that I could ever lay down my head as calmly and
proudly as you can," whispered Georges, clasping him closer in his
arms.

The dying man smiled--possessed by a great calm. He knew that what had
been his secret was his own forever.

He tried to raise himself a little, rivetting his eyes upon the
crucifix;--the gilt letters gleamed in the morning light. He lifted his
hand by an effort, to make the sign of the cross,--Georges guided his
hand. A bluish pallor appeared upon his features,--twice a tremor ran
through his limbs, his hands fell clinched by his side--his lips moved
for the last time. "Poor Ella!" he murmured scarcely audibly.

                               *   *   *

God have mercy upon us all!




                              CHAPTER XIV.


The Countess Lodrin had passed the night without lying down. When her
maid appeared to see if her mistress were not ill, she had been
dismissed by a mute wave of the hand. At last, towards morning, sitting
beside her writing-table, she had fallen into the leaden sleep that is
wont to follow terrible mental agitation.

The sun was high in the heavens when she awoke with stiffened limbs and
a dull pain at her heart, but without any distinct consciousness of
misfortune. She looked around her, and started, perceiving that some
strange commotion was astir in the castle; she could hear footsteps
overhead, and outside her door.--She hurried out, the corridor was
filled with people--people who had no claim to be up here. And all the
servants were hurrying hither and thither in the confusion of a
household where some catastrophe has occurred, all weeping, trembling,
not one showing unsympathetic curiosity, and amongst them was Pistasch,
vainly trying to quiet the loud howling of Oswald's Newfoundland.

"What is the matter?" the Countess shrieked,--"what has happened?"

But no one had the courage to answer her. She ran to Oswald's
bedroom--all gazed after her in horror-stricken compassion; they might
have restrained her, but who could dare to do so? At the door she met
Georges.

"What is it?" she gasped, clutching his arm, "where is Ossi?"

"In there," he murmured hoarsely, "but ...!"

"'But'--for God's sake tell me what has happened?"

"A duel," said Georges with an effort,--he would fain have detained
her, would fain have found the conventional phrases with which men
attempt to break bad news, he could not recall any, and he stammered.

"A duel?" she asked sharply, "with whom?"

"With Capriani;--he...."

Before he could say another word she had opened the door and had
entered Oswald's room.

They had lain him on his bed,--the noble outlines of his stalwart
figure were distinctly visible beneath the white sheet;--his face was
uncovered, and bathed in all the ideal charm of dead youth.

The Countess staggered, tried to hold herself erect, tripped over her
dress, and fell; then dragged herself on her knees to the bed of her
dead child. At its foot she lay, her face buried in her hands.

When, two hours afterward, Truyn who had been informed of the frightful
catastrophe entered the room with Georges Lodrin, she was still
kneeling in the same place, her head still in her hands.

Profoundly shocked Truyn bent over her, and gently begged her to leave
the room. She arose mechanically, and leaning upon his arm went to the
door. There she paused, turned, and hurried back to the bed. They
feared that force would be necessary to separate her from the dead
body, when Georges remembered the message entrusted to him by the dying
man. In the tumult, the horror, in his own terrible grief he had
forgotten it. "Let me try to persuade her, wait for me here," said he
to Truyn, and going to the bedside where the Countess was again
kneeling he whispered: "Aunt, I have a message for you from him; he
died in my arms, and while dying he thought of you!"

She shrank away from him.

"To-day is his birthday," Georges continued, "he remembered it in his
last moments and begged me to tell you, and, for God's sake not to
forget it, that he thanked you for the past happy twenty-six years, and
that he kissed your dear, dear hands in token of farewell."

The wretched woman, who had hitherto seemed carved out of marble, began
to tremble violently; a hard hoarse sob burst from her lips.

It was the first warm breath of spring breaking up the ice. She
instantly rose and threw herself in an agony of tears upon the corpse,
exclaiming: "My child, my fair, noble boy!"

Georges withdrew; the moment was too sacred to be intruded upon.
Shortly afterwards she tottered, bent and bowed, from the room. Truyn,
whom she had not seemed to perceive, offered her his arm, and she
quietly allowed herself to be led to her own apartment.




                              CHAPTER XV.


The death of the young man excited universal sympathy. He was mourned
not only by his relatives and friends, but by all his dependants, the
peasants on his estates, nay, even by strangers to whom he had only
been pointed out as he passed by. And on the day when he was buried,
with all the honours befitting the noble name which he had borne so
worthily, there was in the whole country round no little child whose
hands were not folded in prayer for him, no poor labouring woman who
had ever met him in the road, and whose existence his kindly smile had
helped to lighten, who did not wear a black apron or a black kerchief,
in loving memory of him. No one, perhaps, could have told what he or
she had expected of the young Count, but all felt that with him some
hope had died, some sunshine had been buried.

Fritz Malzin, the only witness of the insult offered to the Conte, died
the night before the duel; nothing therefore was known save what the
Conte chose to tell; the versions of the reasons that had induced
Oswald's rash acceptance of the Conte's challenge were many and widely
differing, but not one of them bore the least relation to the truth.

As Oswald had foreseen, his relatives overwhelmed Georges with
reproaches for the part he had borne in a duel between his cousin and a
parvenu. But the letter to Truyn which Oswald left behind, exculpated
Georges completely.

People declared, to be sure, that Georges ought to have restrained the
folly of his hot-tempered cousin, but the unaffected grief evinced by
the man, hitherto regarded as careless and indifferent, disarmed every
one. His devotion to his dead cousin revealed itself in his every
action, in the exquisite tenderness of his treatment of Oswald's
wretched mother, and his management of the estates thus suddenly fallen
to him, absolutely in accordance as it was with all Oswald's wishes,
soon won him the warmest sympathy from all.

Of course the Conte was denounced; Oswald's associates in his own rank
regarded the man as no better than a murderer. But he coldly defied
public opinion, and held his head higher than ever; he seemed even to
pride himself upon his deed, and several newspapers defended him.




                              CONCLUSION.


When in May a white-edged, black cloud discharges a storm of hail upon
the fresh, green wheat, the tender blades break and are buried out of
sight beneath heavy sleet; when the storm is past, and the ice melted,
and the sun once more beaming bright and warm in cloudless skies, the
bruised blades think they cannot bear the light, and lying close upon
the ground would fain die. Then over the fields thus laid waste many a
head is shaken, and many a sigh is breathed for the broken promise of
the harvest.

But some there are who, seeing farther and knowing better, shrug their
shoulders, and say "A hailstorm in spring prostrates, but does not
kill!" and they look forward hopefully to the future.

Gradually, and very slowly, the warm sunshine penetrates the crushed
blades, awakening and strengthening within them the benumbed forces of
youth. Before the summer is fully abroad in the land, the wheat stands
erect and tall, to the inexperienced eye all unharmed, but the
husbandman can detect the callous ring where the blade was bent, and
says: "The wheat has been shot in the knee."

Thus it is with youthful souls, crushed to the earth in the spring-time
of life by some fierce tempest. Slowly but surely the spirit, well-nigh
wounded to death, recovers, and God grants to the hearts of those whom
he loves a glorious resurrection.

Gabrielle recovered from the fearful blow that had befallen her,--very
slowly, and painfully to be sure, but at last. At first indeed, her
grief was so profound, she suffered so silently, so tearlessly, that
they feared for her reason, and then, when all seemed darkest to her,
she was suddenly possessed by an intense, inexplicable yearning to
return to the pretty home in the Avenue Labedoyere in which the fairest
hours of her shattered bliss had been spent.

Her desire was complied with; and for many a long winter night Zinka
sat beside her by the same little white bed where the girl had once
whispered to her in the delirium of her happiness that it seemed as if
her heart would break with joy. With tenderest sympathy the young
stepmother talked of the departed unweariedly with the girl, allowing
her tears free course, without ever cruelly attempting to restrain the
expression of her grief. And when Truyn, in despair over such endless
grieving, unreasonably taxed his wife with exciting Ella's emotion, and
with hindering her from forgetting, Zinka replied gently, "Let me
alone; I know what I am doing. There is nothing more terrible, more
dreadful than the spectre of a grief that has been violently stifled;
it lurks in wait for us, and persecutes us all the more persistently,
the more resolutely we thrust it from us. The memory of our beloved
dead must not be banished, it must be tenderly welcomed and cherished,
until in time it loses all bitterness, and is ever with us, sad, but
very dear."

Truyn listened incredulously, but a few weeks later he perceived with
surprise, and with trembling delight that Gabrielle's pale cheeks began
to show a faint colour, and that her weary gait grew more elastic. Then
when he was alone with Zinka he kissed her gratefully, saying "I see
you understand better than I how to comfort."

"And from whom did I learn the art?" she asked in reply, with a loving
glance, "do you not see that I am only repaying old debts?"

With the first snowdrops in February came a golden-haired little
brother for Gabrielle, who, by Zinka's desire was christened "Ossi."
Thus Gabrielle learned to utter her dead lover's name without tears.
She idolizes the little one, and sometimes smiles when she has him in
her arms; he has given her a fresh interest in life. Georges who came
to Paris the last of May, only to see the Truyns, and to find out
especially how Gabrielle was, perceived this with pleasure, and said
much that was encouraging to Truyn, who is still anxious about his
sorrowing child. A hailstorm in spring prostrates, but does not kill.

                               *   *   *

But when a storm of hail just before harvest beats down the ripened
ears, the grain never recovers. Bowed down to the earth, broken and
blasted by the weight of the hailstones, the crop lies prostrate in the
fields, only awaiting the hand that shall clear it away.

                               *   *   *

Never again will the Countess Lodrin rally. Had her health been less
vigorous she might have died of agony, had her mind been less strong,
she might have forgotten. But her health is perfect, and her mind clear
as daylight.

She occupies her modest suite of apartments at Tornow, which Georges
has prayed her always to consider as her home. Her rooms are but a
shrine for relics and memorials of the dead. Every object which
Oswald's hand ever touched is sacred for her. Every benevolent scheme
devised by Oswald in his generous desire, 'to brighten the existence of
as many people as possible,' she promotes. She heaps his former
servants with benefits, his faithful Newfoundland is her constant
companion. She tried to employ her widow's jointure in buying back
Schneeburg for poor Fritz's children, but her agent could effect
nothing against Capriani's obstinacy and millions. At least she
succeeded in buying Malzin's children of their mother.

Charlotte married again, another secretary of Capriani's. The little
Malzins live at Tornow under the care of an English governess, and
thrive apace. The Countess attends to every detail of their education
and training, and sees them every day although only for a short time;
there is no close tie between them. In spring when she hears their
sweet voices resounding with merriment in the park, she winces, and
grows paler than usual. She avoids them, but if she encounters them by
chance she never fails to speak a kind word to them, or to bestow upon
them a gentle caress. She is no longer capable of a fervent affection
for any living being. Her heart is a tomb, completely filled by a
single, idolized, dead son, but for his dear sake she does all the good
that she can to the living. Thus, even after his departure, she seems
striving for his approval.

She devotes the greatest part of her income and of her time to the most
self-sacrificing benevolence. There is no misery in all the country
round which she does not search out, and try to alleviate, going from
hut to hut, and never shrinking from even the most menial services to
the sick. She is revered as a saint throughout the district. In her
social intercourse with her peers, which grows less year by year, her
son's name never passes her lips; if others mention it she turns the
conversation. But when the country-people utter his name with
blessings, and recall his constant kindliness and readiness to
aid;--when the peasants and day-labourers kiss the hem of her dress,
with tears, saying, "God give him his reward in Heaven, we shall never
have another such master!" she lifts her head and her eyes gleam with
intense, sacred pride. Those who meet her then walking erect and with
beaming looks on her way back to the castle, think her wonderfully
recovered, and never dream how utterly shattered her life is. But could
they see her later, when, exhausted by the temporary exaltation, she
takes refuge in her chamber and sinks into the arm-chair wherein she
fell asleep on that horrible night, they would be horror-struck by the
fearful misery of her expression.

There she sits for hours, erect, her elbows close pressed, her hands
folded in her lap. Her whole life is but a protracted, lingering agony;
with fixed gaze she seems listening for the rustling wings of the
messenger who shall release her: the Angel of Death.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of 'Gloria Victis!', by Ossip Schubin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 'GLORIA VICTIS!' ***

***** This file should be named 35672.txt or 35672.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/7/35672/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by Google Books

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Bell's Cathedrals: The Cathedral Church of
Carlisle, by C. King Eley


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Bell's Cathedrals: The Cathedral Church of Carlisle
       A Description of Its Fabric and A Brief History of the Episcopal See


Author: C. King Eley



Release Date: November 20, 2006  [eBook #19881]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BELL'S CATHEDRALS: THE CATHEDRAL
CHURCH OF CARLISLE***


E-text prepared by Jonathan Ingram and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (https://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 19881-h.htm or 19881-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/8/8/19881/19881-h/19881-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/8/8/19881/19881-h.zip)


Transcriber's notes:

   1. Words and phrases which were italicized in the original have
      been surrounded by underscores ('_') in this version. Words
      or phrases which were bolded have been surrounded by pound
      signs ('#').

   2. Obvious printer's errors have been corrected without note.

   3. Inconsistencies in hyphenation and the spelling of proper
      names, dialect and obsolete word spellings, have been
      maintained as in the original.

   4. Scribal abbreviations in the original text which used a tilde
      above a letter have been transcribed as [~x], where x is the
      letter over which the tilde appears.

   5. A single letter super- or subscript is transcribed as '^'
      (super) or '_' (sub) followed by the letter. If multiple
      letters are super- or subscripted, these are enclosed in
      braces {} after the '^' or '_'.





THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF CARLISLE

A Description of Its Fabric and a Brief History of the Episcopal See

by

C. KING ELEY

With Twenty-Nine Illustrations







[Illustration: CARLISLE CATHEDRAL FROM THE SOUTH-WEST.
               _A. Pumphrey, Photo._]


[Illustration]



London George Bell & Sons 1900
W.H. White And Co. Limited
Riverside Press, Edinburgh





GENERAL PREFACE


This series of monographs has been planned to supply visitors to the
great English Cathedrals with accurate and well illustrated guide-books
at a popular price. The aim of each writer has been to produce a work
compiled with sufficient knowledge and scholarship to be of value to the
student of Archaeology and History, and yet not too technical in
language for the use of an ordinary visitor or tourist.

To specify all the authorities which have been made use of in each case
would be difficult and tedious in this place. But amongst the general
sources of information which have been almost invariably found useful
are:--(1) the great county histories, the value of which, especially in
questions of genealogy and local records, is generally recognised; (2)
the numerous papers by experts which appear from time to time in the
Transactions of the Antiquarian and Archaeological Societies; (3) the
important documents made accessible in the series issued by the Master
of the Rolls; (4) the well-known works of Britton and Willis on the
English Cathedrals; and (5) the excellent series of Handbooks to the
Cathedrals originated by the late Mr. John Murray; to which the reader
may in most cases be referred for further detail, especially in
reference to the histories of the respective sees.

                                                      GLEESON WHITE.
                                                      EDWARD F. STRANGE.




AUTHOR'S PREFACE


Amongst the works consulted in compiling this handbook may be specially
mentioned Nicolson and Burn's "History and Antiquities of Westmoreland
and Cumberland," Hutchinson's "History and Antiquities of the City of
Carlisle," Jefferson's "History and Antiquities of Carlisle," Billings'
"Architectural Illustrations, History and Description of Carlisle
Cathedral," "Guide to the Cathedral, Carlisle," by R.H. and K.H.

Much help has also been obtained from the late J.R. Green's historical
works, as well as the various biographies in the "National Dictionary of
Biography."

I also wish to record my thanks to my friend, Mr. A. Tapley, who kindly
read through part of the manuscript; and to Mr. A. Pumphrey for
permission to reproduce the photographs used.

                                                                C.K.E.





CONTENTS

                                                             PAGE
CHAPTER I.--History of the Cathedral Church of the
            Holy and Undivided Trinity                          3

CHAPTER II.--The Cathedral, Exterior                           12
    The Nave                                                   12
    The North Transept    15
    The Tower   15
    The North Aisle of the Choir                               16
    The East End                                               19
    The Choir                                                  21

CHAPTER III.--The Cathedral, Interior                          25
    The Nave                                                   25
    The Font and Organ                                     26, 28
    The North Transept                                         28
    The Tower                                                  30
    The South Transept                                         30
    St. Catherine's Chapel                                     32
    Monuments in the Transepts                                 34
    The Choir                                                  39
    The Triforium                                              42
    The Clerestory                                             44
    The Roof                                                   44
    The Hammer-beams                                           45
    The East Window                                            46
    The Salkeld Screen                                         52
    The Bishop's Throne and Pulpit                             53
    The North Choir Aisle                                      54
    Monuments in the North Choir Aisle                         56
    Legendary Paintings                                        58
    The Retro-choir                                            66
    Monuments in the South Choir Aisle                         68
    The Bells                                                  70
    The Monastic Buildings                                     73
    The Fratry                                                 73
    The Deanery                                                74

CHAPTER IV.--History of the See                                75

CHAPTER V.--The Castle                                         89




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                             PAGE
The Cathedral from the South-West                   _Frontispiece_
Arms of the Diocese                                   _Title Page_
The Cathedral from the North-East                               2
The Cathedral and Precincts (from an Old Plan)                  7
The Exterior from the North                                    13
The North Door of Nave                                         15
The South Door                                                 17
Elevation of East End                                          18
The East End                                                   20
The Nave, South Side                                           24
Longitudinal Section                                           27
View across the Transepts in 1840                              29
South Transept and St Catherine's Chapel                       31
One Bay of the Nave                                            33
Screen, St Catherine's Chapel                                  35
The Choir, looking West                                        37
One Bay of the Choir                                           41
The Choir, looking East, in 1840                               43
The Choir and East Window                                      49
Miserere in the Stalls                                         50
North Aisle of the Choir                                       55
East End of the Fratry and South Transept                      63
The Crypt under the Fratry                                     65
The Fratry                                                     71
The Abbey Gateway                                              77
Redness Hall                                                   83
Old Plan of the Castle                                         90
The Castle                                                     91

PLAN OF THE CATHEDRAL                                          93




[Illustration: THE CATHEDRAL FROM THE NORTH-EAST.
               From an original Drawing by R.W. Billings.]




CARLISLE CATHEDRAL




CHAPTER I

HISTORY OF THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF THE HOLY AND UNDIVIDED TRINITY


The details of the founding of the cathedral of Carlisle are very
precise and clear.

When William Rufus returned southwards after re-establishing the city of
Carlisle, he left as governor a rich Norman priest named Walter. He
began at once to build a church to be dedicated to the Blessed Virgin
Mary, which was to have in connection with it a college of secular
canons. Walter did not, however, live to see the building finished, and
Henry I. took it upon himself to complete the good work. It is said that
his wife on one hand, and his chaplain on the other, urged him to do
this. By the beginning of the twelfth century (1123) he founded and
endowed a priory of regular Augustinian canons, making his chaplain the
first prior.

Ten years afterwards--1133--Henry founded the see of Carlisle, and the
priory church became the cathedral. At its endowment Henry laid on the
altar the famous "cornu eburneum," now lost. This horn was given,
instead of a written document, as proof of the grants of tithes. Its
virtue was tried in 1290 when the prior claimed some tithes on land in
the forest of Inglewood, but it was decided that the grant did not
originally cover the tithes in dispute. "The ceremony of investiture
with a horn is very ancient, and was in use before there were any
written charters. We read of Ulf, a Danish prince, who gave all his
lands to the church of York; and the form of endowment was this: he
brought the horn out of which he usually drank, and before the high
altar kneeling devoutly drank the wine, and by that ceremony enfeoffed
the church with all his lands and revenues." (Jefferson, "History of
Carlisle," 171_n._)

Aldulf (or AEthelwulf) was made the first bishop, and he placed
Augustinians in the monastery attached to the cathedral. These were
called "black" canons, their cassocks, cloaks, and hoods being of that
colour. A further difference between them and other monks was that they
let their beards grow and covered their heads with caps. As a
consequence of this order being introduced into the monastery the
Episcopal chapter was Augustinian, other English cathedral chapters
being generally Benedictine.

On some high ground between the west wall of the city, and the road to
the castle the cathedral was built. The site was nearly square in shape,
about five acres in extent, and was the highest part in Carlisle after
that on which the castle stood. This situation was very advantageous
owing to the presence of water near the surface, its frontage to the
city wall, and proximity to the river. A narrow piece of ground of about
half-an-acre, extending along the walls, and upon which the monastic
grounds abutted, was in after years given to the priory by its owner,
Robert de Eglesfield, who was chaplain to Philippa, wife of Henry III.

The church was set out, almost due east and west, diagonally across the
north-west part of the site, the west end being about 100 feet from the
boundary; and was finished about 1130. Its nave consisted of eight bays,
and was about 140 feet long.

There was a very fine west front with a handsome central doorway of four
orders. The western wall was more than 7 feet in thickness, and had four
flat pilaster buttresses nearly 7 feet broad, and 15 inches deep.

The nave was provided with north and south aisles covered with
high-pitched wooden roofs, while the north and south transepts were also
roofed in a similar manner, and a small apsidal chapel projected from
the eastern face of each. The archway of the south transept apse is now
the entrance to St. Catherine's Chapel. With the exception of the
present elaborate entrance to the south transept and the window above
it, the transept is identical with that of the Norman minster.

The choir was only 80 feet long, reaching to the end of the present
stalls. Eastward it terminated in an apse. Its width can be judged from
traces of the original roof, still perceptible in the west wall of the
present choir. In accordance with a frequent arrangement, the ritual
choir extended westward of the crossing, and included the two eastern
bays of the nave.

In the centre was a low square typical Norman tower, 35 feet square, of
which the lower parts of the piers remain. To allow for the extension of
the ritual choir the eastern and western arches of the crossing were
carried on corbels.

White or grey sandstone from quarries in the district was used in the
construction of the minster, perhaps supplemented by stones from the
Roman wall. Stucco was applied to the exterior, red lines marking the
joints. There is no doubt that this stucco has materially helped to keep
the Norman stone-work in a good state of preservation.

It will be seen then that the original church was a Norman minster, of
moderate size, consisting of a nave, with north and south aisles, a
small choir, a low square tower, and north and south transepts.

Thus it remained till about 1250, when, as usually happened, the clergy
became dissatisfied with the smallness of their choir, and a new one was
projected on a much larger scale. Its length was to be equal to the
nave, while in height and breadth it was to be greater. The increased
length allowed room for the ritual choir on the east side of the
crossing.

Any extension of the cathedral on the south was prevented by the
presence of the conventual buildings: therefore the north choir-aisle
was thrown into the choir, and a new one added northward of the former.
One consequence of this alteration is seen by comparing the entrance to
each aisle. That of the south choir aisle is the original Norman arch,
while the entrance to the north aisle is a beautiful late
thirteenth-century arch (Decorated). The corresponding Norman arch of
the north aisle has been blocked up, but is still easily traced.

Another consequence is, that the extension having taken place on one
side only, the eastern arch of the tower fills but a part of the west
end of the choir. The choir arch consequently is symmetrically placed
with regard to the roof of the nave, but not with the choir roof; and
the central line of the choir does not coincide with that of the nave;
for, though the south wall of the choir is in a line with the south wall
of the nave, the choir being 12 feet broader than the nave, the axis of
the former is to the north of the axis of the nave. The view from the
east end looking towards the nave is quite spoiled by this want of
symmetry.

Not very much remains to-day of this thirteenth-century Early English
choir. In 1292, just as it had been roofed in, a terrible fire, the most
disastrous the cathedral has ever experienced, destroyed everything
except the outer walls of the aisles, the graceful lancet windows, and
the beautiful cinque-foiled arcading beneath them. Belfry and bells,
too, shared in the destruction.

One hundred years passed away while a new choir was being built. Bishop
Halton (1292-1325), a very energetic prelate, and a great favourite of
Edward I., began the work, and laboured at it for quite thirty years,
and was followed by Bishops Kirkby, Welton, and Appleby. It was arranged
to rebuild the choir on a still larger scale, a bay being added, and the
east end rebuilt from the foundation. The general plan of the earlier
work of the aisles was followed in the new bay. The glory of the
cathedral--the great east window, which marks a distinct transition in
art--was also projected, but at this time only carried up as high as the
top of the choir arches.

The wall arcade and the lancet windows above were repaired, and later
work of a more elaborate character added. The great arches, and the
groin ribs of the aisle ceilings were underset with new pillars; so that
we get Early English _arches_ of the thirteenth century on Decorated
_pillars_ of the fourteenth century.

After some years interval, building was resumed about 1350. The
Decorated portions of the choir were now put in hand: the triforium,
clerestory, and upper part of the east end, as well as the tracery and
much of the mouldings of the east window and the roof. The carving,
hitherto unfinished, was now completed; but, as the style had developed
in the mean-time, we once more find examples of decidedly early work
with much later work both above and below. The roof inside was finished
with a very fine panelled ceiling. The building was finished 1375-1400,
and in the roof were placed the arms of those who had helped in the
rebuilding--the Lacys, the Nevilles, and the Percys.

The material used for the new choir was red sandstone, both for the
interior and the exterior, giving in some cases a curious patched
appearance to the walls.

[Illustration: THE CATHEDRAL AND PRECINCTS. From an old Plan in Lyson's
"_Magna Britannia_."]

About 1380-1384 the east window was filled with glass.

In 1392 the cathedral once again suffered from fire, and the damage was
repaired by Bishop Strickland (1400-19). No efforts appear to have been
made to bring the nave into correspondence with the extended choir, and
the end of the thirteenth century marks the close of the cathedral's
history in the direction of its enlargement and beautifying.

On a review of the cathedral we find in the aisles thirteenth-century
work, on a small scale, in its perfection.

The south aisle shows development of window tracery, and the gradual
steps taken towards uniting single lights under one arch.

Tracery carried to its perfection can be seen in the east window.

Early English carving is shown in St. Catherine's Chapel, especially in
the corbels; and the more naturalistic carving which was developed at a
later period, is exhibited in the corbels of the roof of the choir and
the capitals of the piers. The latter afford the most complete
representation of the seasons known to exist. On the south side (from
east to west) are the first six months, and on the north side (west to
east) the remainder.

About 1401, William Strickland being Bishop of Carlisle, the tower was
rebuilt on its original scale, probably because the foundations would
not permit one to be erected proportioned to the size of the choir. It
was capped by a short wooden spire covered with lead; this, however, was
removed in the seventeenth century.

The forty-six stalls in the choir, erected on a plinth of red sandstone,
belong to this period (1401-19). The elaborate tabernacle work by Prior
Haithwaite (1433) was originally gilded and coloured, and the niches
were filled with images.

Prior Gondibour (1484-1507) painted the backs of the stalls. The remains
of some screens he added to the choir may still be seen in St.
Catherine's Chapel.

He had the roof painted in red, green, and gold, on a white ground;
painted the choir pillars white, diapered with red roses nearly 12
inches in diameter, and with the letters I.H.C. and J.M. in gold; and no
doubt finished whatever decorative work of the choir still had to be
done.

Laurence Salkeld, last prior, and first dean, erected the very fine
Renaissance screen on the north side of the choir, near the pulpit. It
bears his initials, followed by the letters D.K. (_Decanus
Karliolensis_), of his new title.

The priory was surrendered to the Crown in January 1540, and the last
prior--Salkeld--was made dean of the chapter founded by Henry VIII. The
revenue was at that time estimated at L 481 per annum. Five years later,
June 1545, the present foundation was settled, and the dedication
changed to that of the Holy and Undivided Trinity.

We get a glimpse of the cathedral in the first half of the seventeenth
century, in the record left by some officers who visited the English
cathedrals in 1634. Carlisle they curtly speak of as "more like a great
wilde country church" than a fair and stately cathedral.

After the capture of the city in 1645 the parliamentary troops pulled
down part of the nave in order to repair the fortifications. It is very
probable that the Norman church was partly built of stones taken from
the Roman wall; and it is strange to find the western part of the same
church being destroyed nearly six hundred years after in order to repair
the city walls.

George Fox, the intrepid founder of the Society of Friends, came to
Carlisle in 1653 and preached in the cathedral. Some of the congregation
being opposed to him, he was guarded while preaching, by certain
soldiers and friends who had "heard him gladly." At length the "rude
people of the city" rushed into the building, and made a tumult, so that
the governor was forced to send musketeers to quell it.

Fox thus describes the scene, in his "Journal":

"From thence we came to Carlisle.

"On the First-day following I went into the steeple-house: and after the
priest had done, I preached the truth to the people, and declared the
word of life amongst them. The priest got away, and the magistrates
desired me to go out of the steeple-house. But I still declared the way
of the Lord unto them, and told them, 'I came to speak the word of life
and salvation from the Lord amongst them.' The power of the Lord was
dreadful amongst them in the steeple-house, so that the people trembled
and shook, and they thought the steeple-house shook: and some of them
feared it would fall down on their heads. The magistrates' wives were in
a rage and strove mightily to be at me: but the soldiers and friendly
people stood thick about me. At length the rude people of the city
rose, and came with staves and stones into the steeple-house crying,
'Down with these round-headed rogues'; and they threw stones. Whereupon
the governor sent a file or two of musketeers into the steeple-house, to
appease the tumult, and commanded all the other soldiers out. So those
soldiers took me by the hand in a friendly manner, and said they would
have me along with them. When we came forth into the street, the city
was in an uproar, and the governor came down; and some of those soldiers
were put in prison for standing by me, and for me, against the
town's-people.

"The next day the justices and magistrates of the town granted a warrant
against me and sent for me to come before them. After a large
examination they committed me to prison as a blasphemer, a heretic, and
a seducer: though they could not justly charge any such thing against
me."

Fuller, about 1660, describes the building as "black but comely, still
bearing the remaining signes of its former burning."

Further mischief was also done to the building by the Jacobite prisoners
who were lodged in it after the defeat of the Young Pretender.

In the latter half of the eighteenth century some attempts were made at
restoring the cathedral, but they for the most part consisted of hiding
the beautiful choir roof with a stucco groined ceiling, and plentifully
whitewashing the building.

"The roof was 'elegantly' vaulted with wood. But this failing by length
of time, together with the lead roof, the dean and chapter some few
years ago new laid the roof, and the ceiling being totally ruined and
destroyed they in the year 1764 contracted for a stucco groined ceiling,
and for cleaning and whitening the whole church. And finding the new
lead much torn and broken by wind for want of a ceiling underneath, the
upper tire of that was done again, and a coping added to the rigging.
And thus proceeding from one repair to another the whole expence hath
amounted to upwards of L 1300."[1]

  [1] Nicholson and Burn, page 249.

Eastward of the stalls the choir was formerly separated from the aisles
by screens of elaborate tracery work. When the cathedral was "repaired
and beautified" as just described, they were removed to outbuildings,
and by far the greater part lost or destroyed.

The cathedral was restored 1853-7, in good taste, at a cost of about
L 15,000. Mr. Ewan Christian, the architect of the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, undertook the work, and happily succeeded in
counteracting the "repairing and beautifying" of 1764.

Carlisle is not a large or notable cathedral, but its delightful Early
English choir with its magnificent east window will ever redeem it from
being insignificant or uninteresting.




CHAPTER II

THE EXTERIOR


On examining the north side of the cathedral, it is apparent that more
than one plan has been followed in the construction of the building as
it stands.

There are the remains of a Norman nave whose roof is lower than the
choir roof. The choir is Early English with clerestory windows, and the
easternmost bay (the retro-choir) Late Decorated; while the tower is
Perpendicular. In the north window of the north transept we have a
specimen of work of the nineteenth century. Thus the cathedral supplies
examples of architecture from the Norman period down to the present
time.

The moderate height of the #Nave# (65 ft.), and the treatment of its
details, are quite characteristic of the best work of the period when it
was erected.

The bays of the aisle are separated by flat buttresses about five and a
half feet wide projecting nearly one foot beyond the wall, and the
parapet wall in which they terminate is supported above the windows by a
corbel table of shields and trefoil heads.[2]

  [2] These date from about 1400.

Upon the string-course which runs along the wall unbroken by the
buttresses there is in each bay a window with a circular head, flanked
by single columns. A ring-like ornament is used as a decoration for one
of the mouldings of the arch.

These windows, except the one above the doorway, are restorations. The
doorway itself, which leads into the nave, is modern, imitated from the
Norman window.

The Clerestory in each compartment has a window which differs from the
aisle windows in having the billet as decoration of its outer moulding.
The string-course at the spring of the round head runs without a break
from one to the other.

There is also an unbroken corbel table above the windows, of very
expressive, life-like heads, no two of which are alike.

[Illustration: THE CATHEDRAL FROM THE NORTH. _A. Pumphrey, Photo._]

#North Transept.#--The north window is Debased Gothic, the tracery of
the previous window having been similar to that of the great east
window, while the west window is early English.

[Illustration: NORTH DOOR OF NAVE. _A. Pumphrey, Photo._]

The #Tower#, the latest part of the cathedral, was the work of Bishop
Strickland early in the fifteenth century. He erected it upon the piers
of the ancient Norman tower. Its height is not much over 100 feet, and
is very disappointing, because in England "cathedral towers are apt to
be good, and really make their mark" (Pater). In fact, it does not at
all give the impression of being part of such an important building as a
cathedral. This is caused by its having been rebuilt on the scale of the
Norman nave, and not on that of the enlarged choir. It takes up only
about two-thirds of the width of the choir, and to mask this defect a
turret rising to the top of the third stage of the tower is introduced
on the north side, and another turret is added at the north-east angle.

The tower rises in four stages above the transepts. The second storey is
pierced with loopholes. The third has two pointed windows lighting a
room immediately below the belfry. Between these, in a niche with a
canopy, is the figure of an angel holding a drawn sword. On his head is
fixed a tablet to support another figure. There is only one window in
the fourth storey, which gives light to the belfry, and is very large.
Its labels are ornamented with very vigorously carved heads, and the
cornice above is decorated very much like that of the clerestory. The
tower terminates in an embattled parapet.

All the windows have been thrown out of centre by the addition of the
lower turret.

Originally the tower was crowned by a leaden spire about fifteen feet in
height, but this was removed at the end of the seventeenth century on
account of its decayed condition.

On the east side of the tower there is a single window in the third
storey. In place of a second window there is an opening into the roof of
the choir. This leads into a passage running from the tower to the east
end.

The bold attempts to veil the inadequate size of the tower by the
addition of two turrets can be best studied from this side.

The North Aisle of the #Choir# consists of eight bays, all Early
English, except the easternmost one (the retro-choir), which is Late
Decorated; while the western bay has a Perpendicular window.

Sometime in the fifteenth century the third bay from the east, in each
aisle, was altered and a large Perpendicular window inserted in order to
admit more light to the sanctuary. During the restoration of the
cathedral these later windows were removed, and replaced by careful
copies of the other Early English windows.

The basement is composed of bold mouldings with a plain wall equivalent
in height to the internal wall arcade. Over this, a string-course runs
uninterruptedly round the choir just below the windows.

[Illustration: THE SOUTH DOOR. (See p. 21.) _A. Pumphrey, Photo._]

Each compartment has an arcade of four lancet-shaped divisions, the
external ones blank; while the internal divisions (which are wider than
the others) form the window. The slender, banded, shafts are detached,
which is rather unusual, and have moulded bases and capitals. The bands
divide the shafts into unequal lengths, the lower portion being the
shorter. The arch mouldings are good. Owing to the fact that the blank
arches are more acutely pointed, their outer mouldings terminate higher
than the mouldings of the internal arches.

Towards the east end small heads, and bosses of foliage, ornament the
junction of these mouldings. Above these the cornice and parapet rest
upon blocks bearing the nail-head ornament.

[Illustration: ELEVATION OF EAST END.]

The second bay from the east is divided into three equal spaces, with a
very narrow acute angle on the right.

A series of fine gabled buttresses gives relief to the exterior of the
choir on each side.

The windows of the #Clerestory# have very rich mouldings, and also
afford fine examples of flowing tracery. Each bay has an arch with three
divisions, the central one higher and wider than the others. On this
side only--the north--the base is ornamented with trefoils.

There is a cornice above the windows extending from the tower to the
east end. It is richly decorated with heads and the ball-flower ornament
which is characteristic of fourteenth-century work. It is broken here
and there by gargoyles projecting almost three feet from the wall. The
parapet makes but a poor show in comparison with the rich windows and
cornice.

As the choir never had a groined ceiling there was no necessity for
flying buttresses, and their absence gives the clerestory a very
monotonous flat effect. This is further intensified by the window
tracery being level with the wall, the architraves having no depth of
moulding round them.

Some years ago the aisles and clerestory were skilfully refaced, and
consequently the exteriors have a very modern appearance.

East of the retro-choir is the exterior of a staircase leading from the
north choir aisle to the clerestory parapet. It terminates in a
highly-finished octagonal turret whose parapet is enriched with a
running trefoil ornament resembling that on the base of the clerestory
windows. The north-eastern and the small east buttresses terminate just
beneath, in gables richly ornamented with minute crockets. The panelling
of the former is rather like the decoration of the central portion of
the east end.

#East End.#--An irregularity in designing the east end has been covered
by placing the great buttresses so as to make the pediment appear
irregular, and the cross at the apex seems, consequently, not to be in
the centre of the choir; while, in fact, it is the great east window
(with the gable window over it) that is out of position.

The sill of the east window is unusually near the ground, and it is
flanked by substantial buttresses finely pinnacled. Each buttress
contains two niches with beautifully carved canopies: the base of the
lower ones being a trifle higher than the springing of the arch. They
display full-length statues of St. Peter, St. Paul, St. James, and St.
John.

A staircase crossing over the east window in the thickness of the wall
receives light from the triangular window enclosing three trefoils which
appears in the gable. Immediately beneath this Trinity window--as it is
called--is a richly-canopied niche adorned with a statue of the Virgin
Mary bearing in her arms the Holy Child.

The summit of the gable is crowned by a large richly-floriated cross;
and on each side are four smaller ones, with crockets of foliage between
them.

[Illustration: THE EAST END. _Photochrom Co. Ltd., Photo._]

In spite of the fact that the east end has been almost entirely rebuilt,
it is a remarkably good example of Late Decorated work, and it would be
difficult to find its equal in England.

The wall of the north aisle is higher than the south aisle, because of a
passage between the staircases. The buttresses do not rise above the
parapet, and are finished off with richly-panelled gables, ornamented
with crockets and finials.

The end of the south aisle is decorated with corbels and parapet, like
the choir, and with pinnacled buttresses.

On the south side of the #Choir# the first three bays from the east end
are practically the same as those on the north side.

The remaining windows, including those of St. Catherine's Chapel on the
east of the south transept, are Early English, but of later date and not
so pleasing as the others. Instead of two lights they are furnished with
three; some of these have small circular openings in the spandrels over
the mullions filled with stained glass.

The fifth compartment (against which a vestry was formerly built) shows
traces of a door, and over that a passage, probably connected originally
with some of the conventual buildings.

The grotesque gargoyles, "these wild faces, these images of beasts and
men carved upon spouts and gutters," are very vigorously executed.

The windows on the south side of the clerestory are without the trefoil
which ornaments the base of those on the north side.

The blank window next to the tower is also wanting; in other respects
the clerestory presents the same features as on the north.

#South Transept.#--The chapter-house and cloisters formerly adjoined the
south transept, and there was probably an entrance from the
chapter-house leading down a flight of stairs into the transept.
Billings says: "The modern casing at the base of the end of the transept
(about 12 ft. high) shews the height of the #Cloisters#: and the doorway
above, the level of the chapter-house floor. From this it would seem
that the cathedral was entered at the south transept from the
chapter-house by a flight of steps."

The foundation of the south wall having been shaken by the removal of
the remains of the conventual buildings, massive buttresses were added,
and a very richly sculptured doorway inserted between them (1856). It
was designed by Mr. Christian and is the principal entrance to the
Cathedral. Its character is that of the late work of the choir, and is
somewhat out of keeping with this distinctively Norman portion of the
building.

The window over the entrance is of the same date.

The west side of the transept is lighted by two plain round-headed
windows, not quite central.

The outer moulding of the window arch of the south transept clerestory
has billet ornament. Above this is a corbel table of heads and mouldings
which interferes with the upper window mouldings. The transept
compartments differ from those of the nave by the addition of a flat
buttress between each, which consequently breaks the continuity of the
corbel table.

As the side of the nave was covered by the conventual buildings it was
of plainer character than the north, and had no buttresses between the
windows.

The clerestory is exactly the same as on the north.

The foundations of the old west wall are behind one of the prebendary's
houses to the west of the nave.

The west end, as it stands at present, was restored by Mr. Christian.

A local sandstone was used in the construction of the building: grey, or
white in the Norman portion, and red in the other parts. This red
sandstone is not so good for exterior as for interior work, because it
is liable to perish by the action of the weather.

[Illustration: THE NAVE, SOUTH SIDE. _G.W. Wilson & Co., Photo._]




CHAPTER III

THE INTERIOR


The cathedral now consists of part of the original nave (the two eastern
bays only) with aisles; and north and south transepts without aisles,
but with a chapel on the east side of the south transept; the central
tower; and the choir with north and south aisles and ambulatory or
retro-choir.

The #Nave.#--Entering by the modern doorway on the north, we are at once
in the fragmentary nave, of Early Norman work. Its present length is
about 38 feet and width about 60 feet. In 1645 the Scots destroyed about
100 feet of the nave, and it has never been rebuilt. This mutilation has
had a serious effect upon the proportions of the building, and induces a
feeling of want of balance. The open timber roof, raised to the original
height, was substituted at the restoration for a flat ceiling which had
been put up at a previous "embellishment" of the cathedral. Bishop
Walkelin made use of similar roofs in Winchester Cathedral (1070-1097).

The triforium (1140-50) has in each compartment a semi-circular arch
entirely without ornament.

The clerestory consists of three arches supported by columns with carved
capitals; the centre arch, which is larger than the other, is lighted at
the back by a round-headed window.

We may say that the nave is

          "propped
  With pillars of prodigious girth."

They are massive circular columns nearly six feet in diameter, and
support semi-circular arches. The capitals of those on the south side
are carved with leaf ornament; the rest are plain. Against the wall
between each arch is a semi-circular engaged shaft reaching to the base
of the triforium. The arches near the tower have been partly crushed
owing to the shifting of the tower piers caused by faulty foundations.
About 1870 the west end of the nave was restored by Mr. Christian. The
window is filled with glass, in memory of the Rev. C. Vernon Harcourt,
canon and prebendary of Carlisle (d. 1870).

One of the south aisle windows--the "Soldiers'" window--is in memory of
men and officers of the 34th (or Cumberland) Regiment, who fell in the
Crimea, and in India during the mutiny. Three Old Testament warriors
appear in stained glass--Joshua, Jerubbaal ("who is Gideon"), and Judas
Maccabeus. The battle-torn fragmentary regimental colours hang from the
arch opposite. Just beneath this window a doorway (now blocked up)
formerly led from the cloisters into the nave.

Up to the year 1870 the nave was used as a parish church. The cathedral
from its beginning as the priory church, in accordance with a very
common practice of the Augustinian body, contained two churches
belonging to two separate bodies quite independent of each other.

The choir and transepts formed the priory church, in the possession of
the prior and canons until the dissolution of the monastery, when it
passed to the dean and chapter. The nave formed the parish church of St.
Mary, and belonged to the parishioners. After the civil wars it was cut
off from the transepts by a stone wall, and furnished with galleries and
a pulpit. A new church to accommodate the parishioners having been built
in the abbey grounds in 1870, all these additions were removed, and the
nave was restored to the cathedral, adding greatly to the general
effect. An interesting event in the history of the parish church was the
marriage of Sir Walter Scott to Miss Carpenter on the 24th December
1797.

He had made the acquaintance of Miss Carpenter at Gilsland in July while
touring in the Lake district. She had "a form that was fashioned as
light as a fay's, a complexion of the clearest and lightest olive; eyes
large, deep-set, and dazzling, of the finest Italian brown; and a
profusion of silken tresses black as the raven's wing." Scott was
strongly attracted to her, and within six months she became his wife.

A tombstone under the west window shows the matrix of what was once a
magnificent brass.

The #Font#, standing on a fine marble flooring close to the west window,
has bronze figures of St. John Baptist, the Virgin and Child, and St.
Philip. It was designed by Sir A. Blomfield, and presented by Archdeacon
Prescott 1891.

[Illustration: LONGITUDINAL SECTION, NORTH.]

The #Organ.#--The former organ built by Avery, London, has been given
to Hexham Abbey Church. The present one extends from one side of the
eastern tower arch to the other. It was built by Willis (1856), and the
diaper work was executed by Hardman. About the year 1877 it was enlarged
at a cost of nearly L 1000.

#North Transept.#--The transept is very lofty and very dark. It is about
22 feet wide, and its length from north to south is nearly 114 feet.

Standing near the entrance to the north choir aisle, looking southwards
and across the nave, a capital general view of the remains of the Norman
portion of the cathedral can be obtained.

This end of the transept was rebuilt after the fire of 1292. Having been
greatly injured by another fire that broke out about a hundred years
later, Bishop Strickland rebuilt it (1400-19.) During the restoration of
the cathedral it was once again rebuilt.

On the west side is a Norman arch, the entrance to the north aisle of
the nave. The sinking of the tower piers has partly crushed it out of
shape. The portion of an arch visible above, acts as a buttress to the
tower arches. To the right is a late thirteenth-century window filled
with glass in memory of the Rev. Walter Fletcher, Chancellor of Carlisle
(died 1846). This window exhibits plate tracery--tracery cut, as it
were, out of a flat plate of stone, without mouldings, not built up in
sections. It is the transitional link between the lancet and tracery
systems.

The doorway in the corner communicates with the transept roof.

The north window is very large, and is filled with stained glass in
memory of five children of A.C. Tait, Dean of Carlisle, afterwards
Archbishop of Canterbury. They all died of scarlet fever in the short
space of five weeks, 6th March to 9th April 1858.

This end of the transept was till quite recently railed off, and used as
the consistory court of the Chancellor of Carlisle.

Originally the transept had a chapel on the eastern side opening with a
single arch, similar to St. Catherine's Chapel in the south transept.

The opening to the north choir aisle is Decorated in style; above this
is a portion of an arch for buttressing the tower-arches.

[Illustration: VIEW ACROSS THE TRANSEPTS IN 1840. From Billings.]

To the right is the blocked-up entrance of the old Norman choir aisle,
an exact counterpart of the present south choir aisle entrance.

The roof is now an open timber one of the original pitch.

Near the north-east pier of the tower is a well, completely covered
over. This, it is said, was done by a former dean, on the supposition
that the well, or the water, in some occult fashion, affected the music
in the cathedral.

The #Tower# was rebuilt by Bishop Strickland (1400-19), who used the
Norman piers, and placed upon them other columns of about the same
length. The Early Norman piers have square-fluted capitals and are a
little higher than the arches of the nave. The added columns have
capitals carved with birds and foliage, and are carried up to the arches
of the tower. This rebuilding was rendered necessary by the shifting of
its foundations. The piers sank nearly one foot, and the arches near
them have been to some extent distorted. Springs of water are said to
run across the transept from north to south, and this may explain the
sinking, which probably happened before the erection of the present
choir.

Clustered columns uphold the transept arches, but the western and
eastern arches are supported on each side by a single column terminating
in a bracket at about the level of the base of the triforium. This was
arranged so as to increase the width of the passage between the piers
from the choir to the nave.

The decoration of the eastern arch capitals consists of the badges of
the Percy family--the crescent and fetterlock. Hotspur was Governor of
the town and Warden of the Marches under Henry IV., and it is probable
that he aided in the work of the bishop. The western arch capitals have,
as decoration, the rose and escallop shell alternately--badges of the
Dacres and Nevilles, who also may have been benefactors to the
cathedral.

Across the north transept from the upper capitals is a depressed arch of
stone with Perpendicular tracery.

#South Transept.#--With the exception of the wall itself, the south arm
of the transept is modern. The ancient wall, eight feet thick, is quite
suitable for a fortress. A richly-decorated modern doorway has been
made, and above it is a window by Powell, representing the "Days of
Creation."

[Illustration: PART OF SOUTH TRANSEPT AND ST. CATHERINE'S CHAPEL. From
Billings.]

The west wall is out of the perpendicular through the shifting of the
tower piers, and the Norman arch, opening to the south aisle of the nave
has also been distorted. To the left is a round-headed window, filled
with glass in memory of the Rev. W. Vansittart, canon and prebendary of
Carlisle 1824.

The triforium has a plain rounded opening.

The clerestory is very much like that of the nave, but is not so regular
in construction, the architecture being merely massive and destitute of
ornament, except in the case of the capitals, which are very sparingly
decorated.

On the east side of the transept, the second arch from the doorway, is
the entrance to the south choir aisle. It is Norman, ornamented with a
simply executed but very pleasing zigzag: the capitals of the piers are
cushioned. On the whole, it is much the same as the arch immediately
opposite, opening on the south aisle of the nave.

All this side of the transept, with the exception of the small doorway
(which was built a few years later), dates from about 1101.

#St Catharine's Chapel.#--Between the choir aisle entrance and the
modern doorway is another Norman arch, which is the entrance to St.
Catherine's Chapel--a chantry of Early Decorated style erected on the
walls of a former Norman building.

Jefferson says: "In most large churches, altars, distinct from that in
the chancel, were founded by wealthy and influential individuals, at
which masses might be sung for the repose of the dead; the portion thus
set apart, which was generally the east end of one of the aisles, was
then denominated a chantry: in it the tomb of the founder was generally
placed, and it was separated from the rest of the church by a screen. In
the fourteenth century this custom greatly increased, and small
additional side aisles and transepts were often annexed to churches and
called mortuary chapels; these were used indeed as chantries, but they
were more independent in their constitution, and in general more ample
in their endowments. The dissolution of all these foundations followed
soon after that of the monasteries.

"In the year 1422 Bishop Whelpdale at his death left the sum of L 200,
for the purpose of founding and endowing a chantry for the performance
of religious offices for the souls of Sir Thomas Skelton, knight, and
Mr. John Glaston, two gentlemen with whom he had been on terms of
intimate friendship, and who were buried in the cathedral. Nicholson
thinks it probable this was the chantry of St. Roch; its revenues were
valued at L 2, 14s. per annum.

[Illustration: ONE BAY OF THE NAVE.]

"There was another chantry dedicated to St. Cross; but the period at
which, and the person by whom it was founded are not known. It was
granted by Edward VI. 'with all messuages, lands, tenements, profits,
and hereditaments belonging thereto,' valued at L 3, 19s. per annum, to
Henry Tanner and Thomas Bucher.

"The chapel of St. Catherine in the Cathedral of Carlisle was founded
at an early period by John de Capella, a wealthy citizen, and endowed by
him with certain rents, lands, and burgage houses. In the year 1366 a
portion of its revenues being fraudulently detained, Bishop Appleby
commanded the chaplains of St. Mary's and St. Cuthbert's to give public
notice that the offenders were required to make restitution within ten
days on pain of excommunication with bell, book, and candle. Its
revenues, according to the rotuli, called the king's books, which were
made up in the reign of Henry VIII., were valued at L 3, 2s. 8d. per
annum."[3]

  [3] "History of Carlisle," page 158.

Some very fine foliated brackets can be seen in the arch between this
chapel and the choir aisle.

Dividing the chapel from the transept and aisle is some exquisite carved
screen-work (Late Decorated) dating from the latter part of the
fifteenth century, and attributed to Prior Gondibour. Its great beauty,
and the skilful variations of the designs, will repay careful
inspection. The chapel now serves as a vestry for the clergy: but it is
to be regretted that it cannot add to the beauty of the cathedral by
being utilised for its proper purpose.

The pointed doorway on the left, originally opened on to a well which
was closed in the course of the restoration of the building. The
position of Carlisle on the border making it liable to sudden attacks in
early times, it is probable that the inhabitants may have taken
sanctuary in the cathedral many a time, when a well of water would be of
great advantage to the refugees.

#Monuments in the Transepts.#--North Transept. Near the entrance to the
north choir aisle stands the altar-tomb of Prior Senhouse. It is covered
with a slab of dark blue marble. An inscription runs thus: "The tomb of
Simon Senhouse, Prior of Carlisle in the reign of Henry VII. The
original inscription being lost, the present plate was substituted by
the senior male branch of the Senhouse family, A.D. 1850. Motto, 'Lothe
to offend.'"

It was on this tomb that the tenants of the priory were accustomed to
pay their rents.

South Transept.--On a stone in the west wall (now covered with a pane of
glass) is an inscription which was discovered in 1853. It is written
in Norse runes, and is as follows:--

  "Tolfihn yraita thasi rynr a thisi stain."
  "Tolfihn wrote these runes on this stone."

The runes are Norse, not Anglo-Saxon. The latter are not often found,
but the former are scarcer still. The runes, perhaps, date from the
eleventh century.

[Illustration: SCREEN--ST. CATHERINE'S CHAPEL. From Billings.]

There is also a marble tablet containing a medallion likeness of George
Moore.

  "A man of rare strength and simplicity of character,
  of active benevolence and wide influence.
  A yeoman's son
  he was not born to wealth
  but by ability and industry he gained it,
  and he ever used it
  as a steward of God and a disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ
  for the furtherance of all good works."

George Moore was born at Mealsgate, Cumberland, the 9th April 1806. He
went to London in 1825. Two years later he was working for Fisher,
Stroud & Robinson, lace merchants, as town traveller, and, soon after,
as traveller in the north of England. He was so successful that he was
nicknamed "The Napoleon of Watling Street." When he was twenty-three he
accepted an offer from a firm of lace merchants, Groucock & Copestake,
to become a partner. He gave up travelling for orders in 1841, but soon
suffered in health. As a remedy he took to following the hounds, and
later (in 1844) went on a three months' trip to America. On his return
he started on his career of philanthropy which has made him famous. A
few of the institutions for which he worked, and to which he contributed
largely, may be mentioned; the Cumberland Benevolent Society, the
Commercial Travellers' Schools, the British Home for Incurables, the
Warehousemen and Clerks' Schools, the Royal Free Hospital, and the
London City Mission. Various Cumberland charities found in him a
generous supporter. He met with his death in Carlisle. Knocked down by a
runaway horse, 20th November 1876, while on his way to attend a meeting
of the Nurses' Institution, he died the next day from his injuries.
The following was a favourite motto with him:--

    "What I spent, I had,
    What I saved, I lost,
    What I gave, I have."

[Illustration: THE CHOIR, LOOKING WEST. _A. Pumphrey, Photo._]

There is a memorial tablet to Robert Anderson, "the Cumberland Bard,"
1770-1833. Born in Carlisle, he had but little schooling, and at ten
years of age he was earning wages as assistant to a calico printer;
later, he was bound apprentice to a pattern-drawer in his native city.
He went to London to pursue his calling, and he seems to have been led
to attempt to write poetry through hearing some imitation Scottish songs
sung at Vauxhall. He published his first volume in 1798, and his
Cumberland Ballads in 1805. His verses, not altogether destitute of real
poetry, are valuable for the pictures they give of obsolete manners and
customs of the district.

The #Choir.#--A low doorway in the eastern arch of the tower gives
entrance to the choir. Some of the woodwork of the stalls fills the
lower part of this arch, and the entrance has been placed towards the
north, so as to open exactly on the centre of the choir. In point of
beauty the choir compares favourably with any we possess in England, and
the eye can rest upon it again and again with renewed satisfaction and
delight. Its superb main arcade, with the boldly-designed and
finely-carved capitals representing the twelve months of the
year--unrivalled in this country; its handsome clerestory windows; its
great east window (the pride of the cathedral); and, overhead, its
richly-coloured roof, unique in shape, afford a combination not easily
to be surpassed.

The choir is about 134 feet long, 34 feet 6 inches wide between the
columns, and 72 feet 6 inches between the aisle walls.

The nave is not so wide by about 12 feet, and as the columns of both
nave and choir on the south side are on the same line, the extra width
is all on the north.

Looking westward, the view is marred by the tower arch not being in the
centre of the west wall, in consequence of which there is an ugly space
of blank wall between the arch and the north choir aisle.

There are eight bays, averaging about 18 feet in width. Those at the
end, however, east and west, are not so wide. At the east they probably
suffer from the intrusion of the east wall, which is about six feet
thick. The western bays may have lost the space taken for the choir
entrance. They have very acute arches, and at the west end rest on
responds or half-piers against the tower walls. Those at the east end
rest on brackets, and their mouldings lose themselves in the wall on
each side of the great window.

The presbytery is reached by two steps from the choir, and the last bay
but one (in which the altar stands) is raised three steps above the
presbytery.

The main arcade practically dates from after the terrible fire in 1292.
The arches escaped, and are splendid specimens of Early English, "of the
Pointed style in all the purity of its first period." They were
underbuilt with Early Decorated piers, while the capitals were finished
at the same time as the triforium and clerestory (Late Decorated)
1350-1400.

The piers are not equal in diameter to those of the nave; they measure
but five feet and a quarter. Each consists of eight clustered pillars of
red sandstone. The four facing the cardinal points of the compass are
larger than the intermediate ones, which are filleted. The base moulding
is very deep and hollow. These piers support the Early English arches,
with dog-tooth ornament large in the interior, small in the exterior.
Altogether, these fine arches give a very pleasing impression of
lightness and grace, and make us feel "the fascination of the Pointed
style."

At the junctions of the arches are small grotesque heads very well
executed. On the north side, where the presbytery begins, is a queen's
head, and on the opposite side a figure with a dog's head.

There are altogether fourteen complete, and two half piers, the capitals
of which are carved with foliage alone, or with the addition of winged
monsters, birds, beasts, and human figures. Twelve of them represent the
domestic and agricultural occupations of the months. The first capital
on the south side (east end) shows a creature with a man's head, wings,
and a tail terminating in the head of a serpent, which bites the monster
on the temple. January is symbolised on the next one, and the series
continues westward, then crosses over, and proceeds from west to east on
the north side, finishing at the last pier but one.

_January._--A figure in a loose-fitting tunic, sitting down. He has
three faces--two in profile--and is drinking with the right and left
mouths. At his feet is a third vessel.

_February._--A man in a loose tunic, and head closely wrapped up. He
appears to suffer from cold, for his face is woe-begone, and he is
sitting over a fire, holding out one boot upside down as if to drain
water from it, while he lifts up one foot to catch the heat. The
fireplace is very skilfully carved.

_March._--A man, hood on head, digging with a spade at the foot of a
leafless tree. Other decorations are, a squirrel, a bear with hands,
birds, and a beast's body with a mitred head.

_April._--A bare-legged man with his head tied up, pruning a tree. On
this capital are also two figures half-human, half-bestial, clasping
each other round the neck.

[Illustration: ONE BAY OF THE CHOIR.]

_May._--A woman in a long gown holding in each hand a bunch of foliage,
which she offers to a young man clad in a tunic, with his hood thrown
back. In addition there are three winged beasts with human heads, one
mitred.

_June._--A horseman, bareheaded, holding on his right hand a hawk, and
bearing a branch of roses in his left hand. There are also some
half-human figures, and men playing musical instruments. This capital is
more elaborately carved than any of the others.

_July._--A man mowing. In addition there are owls carrying mice in their
mouths.

_August._--A man working in a wheat-field. He wears a conical hat, and
grasps a crutch with one hand while he holds a pruning hook in the
other.

_September._--A man reaping with a sickle.

_October._--A man whose head is tied with a handkerchief; he is engaged
in cutting grapes. A fox carrying off a goose is also vigorously carved
on this capital.

_November._--A man sowing grain from a basket. There is a stag on his
right and a horse on his left hand.

_December._--A man wearing a loose tunic, who is about to fell an ox
which another man holds by the horns. In addition there is a man tending
swine.

The last capital shows several heads, and a man sitting on a tree stump.

In each bay of the #Triforium# there are three arches with curvilinear
tracery. The principal mullions have octagonal bases. On account of
their reduced width, the extreme eastern and western bays have only two
arches.

The courses of stone above the base of the triforium are not by any
means so smooth and well-proportioned as those beneath. The workmen do
not seem to have been actuated by the spirit of those builders "in the
elder days of Art" who

  "... wrought with greatest care
  Each minute and unseen part,
  For the gods see everywhere."

[Illustration: THE CHOIR, LOOKING EAST, IN 1840. From Billings.]

The #Clerestory# consists of two planes. Each compartment on the face
of the choir wall has three high-pitched arches, the middle one being
higher than those at the side, and more than twice as wide in the
opening. The eastern bay has only the central arch, while the western
bay is blank.

The base is decorated with a low parapet pierced with quatrefoils, four
in the centre, and two in each side opening. On the south, however, the
quatrefoil decoration is slightly different. There are only three
quatrefoils in the centre and two smaller ones on each side. This
parapet is in great part a restoration, the original having been almost
entirely removed, in the vain hope of admitting more light to the lower
part of the choir.

In the other plane the windows are in triplets, three lights in the
central and single lights on either side, decorated with flamboyant
tracery.

The eastern bay has no side lights.

Although the windows seem to be all different, there are but six
varieties, distributed as follows:

On the north side beginning at the east the design of the first window
is not repeated. That of the next window occurs in the second window on
the south side. The third and fifth are alike. The sixth and the last
are like the fourth. The design of the seventh window does not occur
again.

On the south side one new pattern appears in three windows--the first,
fourth, and sixth from the east. The second is like the window opposite,
and the third, fifth, and seventh are like the third on the north side.

Of all the windows the second from the east is the most beautiful.

Before 1764 they were filled with stained glass of which some remains
are still to be seen. The trefoil heads above the mullions have a brown
border with the insertion in some cases of a yellow diamond ornament,
and in others of a crown.

The #Roof#--This unique specimen of a waggon-headed ceiling,
semi-circular in all its parts, is of oak. Bishop Welton began its
construction about 1350. A plaster ceiling, put up in the year 1764, hid
this fine timber roof until its removal in 1856. It was then found that
enough remained of the original to allow a faithful restoration to be
made. But the scheme of colouring--red and green upon white--was not
copied. In its stead Owen Jones suggested another--a background of blue
plentifully ornamented with golden stars.

The _Saturday Review_ is responsible for the statement--for the truth of
which, however, it does not vouch--"that on the first occasion when Dean
Close found himself beneath the roof, then glowing in all the brilliancy
of modern painting and gilding, in semblance of 'the spangled firmament
on high,' he solemnly ejaculated, 'Oh my stars!'"

At the triforium base foliated brackets support vaulting shafts of three
clustered columns. At the point of contact with the base of the
quatrefoil parapet they are ornamented with rings, and their capitals
are foliated, but not so naturally as the capitals below. Great
semi-circular rafters spring from the capitals and cross the choir.
Smaller rafters start from the cornice of the clerestory. These are
intersected in the centre of the ceiling by a longitudinal beam. Small
moulded ribs divide the space between each great rafter and the
longitudinal beam into sixteen panels. The intersections are decorated
with carved bosses.

#Hammer-beams.#--From the foot of three of the principal ribs
hammer-beams project. They seem to indicate an intention on the part of
the builders to cover the choir with an open-timber roof like that of
the Great Hall at Westminster. But having decided on the waggon-headed
roof, they did not trouble to remove these beams. Wall pieces and curved
struts now connect them with the vaulting shafts, and they have been
decorated with "carved angels ever eager-eyed, with hair blown back and
wings put cross-wise on their breasts."

More than one hundred carved figures ornament the cornice, and the
following texts in black-letter appear above them:--

NORTH SIDE.--Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of the Lord.
(Eccles. v. 1.)

Lift up your hands in the sanctuary and bless the Lord. (Ps. cxxxiv. 2.)

Praise ye the name of the Lord. (Ps. cxxxv. 1.)

Praise God in His sanctuary, (Ps. cl. 1.)

Exalt ye the Lord our God and worship at His footstool. (Ps. xcix. 5.)

SOUTH SIDE.--How amiable are Thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! (Ps.
lxxxiv. 1.)

My praise shall be of Thee in the great congregation. (Ps. xxii. 25.)

O magnify the Lord with me and let us exalt His name together. (Ps.
xxxiv. 3.)

Holiness becometh Thine house for ever. (Ps. xciii. 5.)

The great #East Window# is the crowning ornament and special glory of
the cathedral. It is unsurpassed by any other in the kingdom; perhaps
there is not a window equal to it in the whole world.

Rickman says: "It is one of the finest if not _the_ finest Decorated
window in the kingdom. Its elegance of composition and the easy flow of
its lines rank it even higher than the celebrated west window of York,
which it also excels in the number of divisions. The window is by far
the most free and brilliant example of Decorated tracery in the
kingdom."

Fergusson, in his "History of Architecture," also praises it: "Its upper
part exhibits the most beautiful and perfect design for window tracery
in the world. All the parts are in such just harmony the one to the
other--the whole is so constructively appropriate and at the same time
so artistically elegant--that it stands quite alone, even among windows
of its own age."

"The stone-work of all this part (the east window) is entirely new,
although it reproduces most minutely the original design" (King, 202-3).

"The whole of the _mouldings_, both of the mullions and tracery,
_externally_ are nearly destroyed, owing to the perishable nature of the
stone with which it is constructed" (Billing, p. 60 (1840)).

This great window almost entirely fills the east end of the choir, being
51 feet high from the sill to the top of the tracery and about 26 feet
wide in the clear.

Immediately after the fire in 1292, the work was started, and the jambs
with their slender shafts and foliated capitals were erected. Nothing
more was done till about the middle of the fourteenth century, when the
arch mullions were added; and the tracery dates from about the end of
the same century. The mouldings were left unfinished until the
restoration of the cathedral, 1856. The tracery (Decorated) is composed
of eighty-six pieces struck from 263 centres. Some of the pieces forming
the chief divisions are nearly five feet in length. Although the
stone-work is modern, the design has been most faithfully copied from
the original. In the lower part there are nine lights, no other
Decorated window in existence having so many. The west window of Durham
Cathedral (partly copied from, but inferior to, the west window of York)
and the Rose window in the south transept at Lincoln are of the same
character; but that of York ranks next in importance, and is the only
window able to compete with the east window of Carlisle.

The design consists of two complete compositions united under one head
by interposing a third. The York window, on the contrary, is altogether
one complete design, from which no part can be separated without
breaking the integrity of the composition.

The width of the opening is the same in both windows, but while the
actual tracery of the York window is more than two feet higher, the
Carlisle window is greatly superior in the beautiful arch mouldings
above its tracery, and also in the side shafts and mouldings.

Again some stiffness is imparted to the design of the York window by the
central mullion which reaches from the basement to the top of the arch.
The tracery branches outwards from this on each side, and depends upon
the arch for support; while the tracery in the Carlisle window is not so
dependent. Neither in skilful workmanship nor in variety of ornament is
the York window equal to that at Carlisle. With the exception of four
quatrefoils (placed above each alternate mullion) it is composed of
trefoils. Carlisle, on the contrary, possesses nine quatrefoils, in
addition to four placed like those at York. Nearly all the small
spandrels formed by the various ornaments are perforated, and this
imparts a remarkable air of lightness to the window.

The beautiful stained glass in the tracery is all that remains of the
ancient glass. It is of the time of Richard II., and was no doubt
preserved because of the expense that reglazing its small intricate
forms would have involved.

The subject is a Doom--the Resurrection, the Last Judgment, and the New
Jerusalem.

"We have our Lord sitting in judgment; the Procession of the Blessed to
the Palace of Heaven; the Place of punishment for the wicked; and the
general Resurrection.

"The figure of our Saviour is in the uppermost quatrefoil of the central
compartment; His countenance will bear the closest inspection; it
exhibits evident traces of suffering, but is calm, severe, and
dignified. His head is surrounded by a cruciform nimbus. Below this are
two quatrefoils, easily distinguished by their silvery appearance. These
represent the Procession of the Redeemed to the heavenly Jerusalem,
whose towers and pavilions are shown in the quatrefoil to the right. St.
Peter stands in the gateway in an attitude of welcome; at his feet flows
the River of Life, which some of the Redeemed have reached. The red
glare of the Place of punishment makes it easy to be distinguished; the
tortures represented are of the most realistic character, and the devils
are very material beings, with tails, hoofs, and horns.

"The rest of the picture is occupied with the representation of the
general Resurrection:--the dead rising from their graves--ecclesiastics
are vested, but laity rise naked, though kings wear their crowns:
several bishops are among the crowd, and a pope wearing the triple
tiara. Some of the ecclesiastics are bearded, and probably are intended
for canons of the cathedral, who, being Austin or Black canons, would
wear their beards.

"In one of the quatrefoils, just above the mullions, is a figure
surrounded by a heraldic border; this represents John of Gaunt, who was
Governor of Carlisle from 1380 to 1384. It is said that he supported the
prior, William de Dalston, who refused obedience to the bishop, and had
been excommunicated; and that, out of gratitude, he was thus represented
in the east window."[4]

  [4] "Guide to the Cathedral of Carlisle," by R.H. and K.H.

[Illustration: THE CHOIR AND EAST WINDOW. _A. Pumphrey, Photo._]

A "Jesse," which originally filled the lower part of the window, was
destroyed at the Reformation. The present glass was inserted in 1861, in
memory of Bishop Percy (d. 1856). It represents events in the history of
our Lord. Although the colours do not harmonise well with the old glass,
they are in accord with the gorgeous colouring of the ceiling. Like
most of the stained glass in the cathedral, this is by Hardman of
Birmingham.

[Illustration: MISERERE, SOUTH SIDE OF THE STALLS. From Billings.]

Bishop Strickland (1399-1413) erected the #Stalls#, which are of black
oak, and occupy the three western bays of the choir.

Our English cathedrals are far ahead of foreign cathedrals in the
beauty and richness of the tabernacle work of their stalls, which in
many instances are "like a whole wood, say a thicket of old hawthorn,
with its topmost branches spared, slowly transformed into stalls." These
in Carlisle, if not among the finest specimens in England, certainly
take very high rank.

There are forty-six compartments, divided by fifty columns, upon which
the tabernacle work rests. Each compartment consists of a large canopy
decorated with quatrefoils, and battlemented. This is surmounted by
three smaller canopies and pedestals which were originally occupied by
small carved figures. A large pinnacle, richly decorated, like the
others, with crockets and finials, finishes the compartment.

Between each stall is a small buttress beginning at the capital and
finishing somewhat beneath the top of the large pinnacle. These
buttresses have, alternately, a pedestal with a canopy above; and a
pedestal supporting a small flying-buttress terminating in a pinnacle
enriched with small crockets.

Prior Haithwaite is said to have added the tabernacle-work after the
year 1430.

The division between each stall shows either a well-executed foliated
ornament, or an angel. In the north-west and south-west angles the
elbows of the seats are carved with the head of a king supposed to
represent Henry IV. The panels of the desks are elaborately worked, and
the stone plinth which supports them is decorated with quatrefoils.

The stalls at the west end of the choir are wider than the others, and
are used by the higher dignitaries of the cathedral.

The Dean's stall is on the left of the choir entrance, and the Bishop's
on the right. This arrangement is said to have existed since the time of
AEthelwulf. He was the first prior, and upon his elevation to the
bishopric he still kept the prior's seat.

The hinged seats, known as misereres or misericordes, were constructed
to keep the monks from falling asleep while at prayers. The carvings
beneath these seats are of different designs, generally grotesque.

The following is a list of the subjects found carved thereon:--

  NORTH SIDE

  A dragon swallowing a man.
  Bird and young.
  Dragon and lions.
  Three dragons, one with a human face.
  Winged figure with a tabour.
  Dragon devouring a bird.
  Coronation of the Virgin.
  Three griffins.
  Pelican in its act of piety.
  Dragon and lion fighting.
  Griffin and two young ones.
  Two dragons joined together.
  Two storks eating out of a sack.
  Figure with wings, claws, and human face.
  Angelic musician.
  Two eagles.
  Double-headed eagle.
  Fox and goose.
  Two dragon bodies with a human head.
  Angel playing an instrument.
  A man with two eagles plucking his beard.
  Dragon, and two lions with human faces.

  SOUTH SIDE

  Two angels.
  Dragon.
  Bird and beast fighting.
  Human head on two animal bodies.
  Winged dragon.
  Winged serpent.
  Two beasts with one head.
  Two men fighting.
  Griffin with human head.
  Dragon and foliage.
  Two eagles holding the head of a beast.
  Fox and goose.
  Human figure with four wings.
  Man and dragon fighting.
  Angel bearing a shield.
  Angel and dragons.
  Pelican in its act of piety.
  Boar killing a man.
  Man holding two dragons.
  Dragon killing a beast.
  Mermaid.
  Dragon and lion in combat.

The #Salkeld Screen.#--On the north side of the choir, the westernmost
bay of the presbytery is filled by a fine wooden screen of Renaissance
work, erected about 1542 by Lancelot Salkeld, last prior and first dean
of Carlisle. It is divided into three compartments; through the central
one entrance could be gained to the choir formerly by an ascent of three
steps from the north choir aisle.

It is very elaborate, and some portions are very beautiful. The lower
part is panelled, each panel having two heads carved in bas-relief. The
upper part is of well-executed tracery work.

Over each compartment is a pediment decorated in the centre with
shields. The western one has been restored. The initials L.S. and D.K.
(Lancelot Salkeld, Decanus Karliolensis) occur on the screen. The other
bays were originally filled with screen-work similar to that in St.
Catherine's Chapel. In 1764 these screens were removed and stored in the
Fratry crypt as lumber. In the end they were used as firewood; only a
few pieces preserved by the neighbouring gentry escaping destruction. A
stone screen now surrounds the sacrarium on three sides. The reredos is
higher than this screen. It is arcaded, and its compartments have
triangular-headed canopies and some well-executed figures. The late Mr.
Street designed it, and its cost was L 1790.

The #Bishop's Throne#, of English and foreign oak, was also designed by
the late Mr. Street. The canopy of the throne is nearly thirty feet high.

The #Pulpit# is a memorial of Archdeacon Paley, who is buried close at
hand in the north choir aisle. It is of richly-carved Caen stone, on a
plinth of black Manx marble, and ornamented with carvings in white
alabaster, of scenes from the New Testament. In shape it is hexagonal,
with shafts at the angles rising into an enriched cornice. The
lectern--a brass eagle--was given in memory of the late G.C. Mounsey,
sometime diocesan registrar.

In the middle of the choir is a monument to Bishop Bell. On a blue slab
under a triple canopy, the centre pediment of which has I.H.S., and its
point the Deity and Christ, is a brass figure of a bishop _in
pontificalibus_, mitre and gloves; his right hand holds on his breast an
open book inscribed--

  _Hec mea_
  _Spes in sinu meo_

His left hand, over which hangs the maniple, has a rich crosier. On a
semi-circular scroll over his head--

  _Credo q^d redemptor meus vivit et noviss[~i]o die de terra surrect[~u]r
   s[~u] et in Carne mea videbo de[~u] salvatore me[~u]._

Under his feet--

  _Hac marmor fossa Bell presulis en tenet ossa
   Duresme dud[~u] prior his post pontificat[~u]
   Gessit atq' renuit primum super o[~m]ia querit
   Dispiciens mud[~u] poscendo pramia fratr[~u]_

On the ledge round the slab--

  _Hic jacet Reverendus Pater Ricardus Bell quondam Episcopus
   Karleolensis qui ab hac luce migravit videlicet vicesimo Quarto
   die ... Anno Domini.... Et omnium fidelium defunctorum.
   per misericordiam dei requiescant in perpetua pace_. Amen.

The ancient high altar probably stood one bay nearer to the west than
the present altar. There, in the presence of Bishop Halton, Robert Bruce
took an oath of fidelity to Edward I. Ten years later he proved false to
this oath, and the Papal Legate solemnly excommunicated him with bell,
book, and candle.

Very shortly after this, Edward I. dedicated the litter in which he had
journeyed thus far, and mounting his horse at the cathedral door rode
through the priory gateway bent on the conquest of Scotland. He never
lived to reach that country, for he died in sight of the Scottish coast
at Burgh-on-Sands.

#North Choir Aisle.#--This aisle is entered by a handsome Decorated
arch, a very good example of thirteenth-century work.

The north wall, with the exquisite two-light lancet windows, is Early
English, and dates from the period immediately after the demolition of
the Norman choir about 1260.

Each compartment of the cinquefoil #wall-arcade# is separated by triple
columns, and the space divided into four parts by shafts, barely
detached from the wall, supporting foliated arches. This is the general
description for both north and south choir aisles.

The eastern bay belongs to the retro-choir, and is of later date.

Above the wall-arcade are the graceful two-light lancet windows, with
their slender columns, deep mouldings, and rich dog-tooth decoration.

In each bay there are four divisions; the two outer ones blank, and the
two others forming the window. The shafts are detached from the wall;
the central one is higher than the rest, and its capital is foliated.
From the outer columns in the blank divisions, the shoulder, or hipped
rib, after rising a short distance, sinks to the level of the capitals
of the vaulting columns. At the side of the window columns two small
circular mouldings, decorated with small dog-tooth ornament, continue
without a break round the head of each window. A large blank quatrefoil
is inserted in the space between the lights and the outer arch moulding.

[Illustration: NORTH AISLE OF THE CHOIR. From Billings.]

The corner column (north side of entrance) has been inserted by cutting
away part of the east wall of the north transept. Like the aisle it
dates from about the last half of the thirteenth century. On its capital
there is the spring of a pointed arch, enriched with dog-tooth ornament
similar to the entrance arch.

Probably it was intended to pull the north transept down, and rebuild it
with the addition of an eastern aisle. This column would then have been
part of it. The existence of an offset on the north face of the aisle
wall, with the return of the base-course and string-course upon it,
seems to add weight to this theory.

The nearest clustered column to it has also been altered, and consists
of five shafts instead of three. A rib springs from the additional
shafts to the centre of the corner column. There are also remains of
groining like that of the aisle.

The bay near the entrance has a window (Perpendicular) dating from after
the Civil Wars. Beneath this there was formerly an entrance to the
cathedral. This has now been walled up.

The groined stone roof dates from after 1292, although, perhaps, it is
composed of materials of an earlier date.

On the south side of the entrance is a very beautiful foliated bracket;
the foliated boss at its base was at one time ornamented with a very
fine knot.

#Monuments in North Choir Aisles.#--In the third bay from the east are
two low-arched recesses. Being of the same date as the aisle, they may
have been intended to receive the statues of the bishops who did their
best to repair the ravages of the fire in 1292. The arches are almost
flat, and decorated with a kind of chevron moulding very rarely met
with. In Burpham Church, Sussex, there is another example of this
moulding applied to the decoration of the south side of the south
transept arch.

A bishop's effigy is in the eastern recess. It is of Early English date;
and before 1292 was situated within the choir. Afterwards a niche was
cut in the fourth bay from the east for its reception. It was eventually
placed in its present position at the time of the restoration of the
cathedral, and the other niche filled up. It may possibly represent
Bishop Silvester of Everdon. It has suffered damage during its
migrations in the cathedral; and the feet are broken. This was probably
done when it was removed from the choir to the aisle (1856). Jewels
which originally enriched the mitre and the cross on the breast have
disappeared.

In the next bay to the east is a small mural brass plate finely engraved
in memory of Bishop Robinson (1598-1616.) He was a native of Carlisle,
and, entering Queen's College, Oxford, as a "poor serving child,"
eventually became provost, and proved a great benefactor to that
foundation.

"The bishop is represented _in pontificalibus_, kneeling, with one hand
supporting a crosier; the other is sustaining a lighted candle, and
holding a cord to which three dogs are attached, who appear guarding an
equal number of sheepfolds from the attack of wolves. Below the candle
is a group of figures bearing implements of agriculture and peaceful
industry; near their feet is a wolf playing with a lamb; and various
warlike instruments scattered and broken. Each part is illustrated with
appropriate Greek and Latin sentences chiefly selected from the
Scriptures. Behind the bishop is a quadrangular building, enclosing an
open court, and apparently intended to represent the college which he
had so much benefited.

"Over the gateway is a shield charged with three spread eagles, being
the arms of Robert Eglesfield, the founder of that college; on the
college are the words, _Invenit destructum; reliquit extructum et
instructum_ (he found it destroyed; he left it built and furnished).
Above this building is the delineation of a cathedral; over the entrance
is inscribed--_Intravit per ostium_ (he entered by the door); on a label
across the entrance is _Permansit fidelis_ (he endured faithful to the
end), and below, on the steps, under a group of figures, one of whom is
kneeling and receiving a benediction, are the words, _Recessit beatus_
(he departed blessed). Near the top of the plate is the angel of the
Lord bearing a label inscribed in Greek characters, _Tois Episcopois_
(Unto the Bishops).

"Above are the words, _Erant pastores in eadem regione excubantes et
agentes vigilias noctis super gregem suum_ (there were in the same
country shepherds abiding in the field and keeping watch over their
flocks by night). At the bottom of the plate in the cathedral is a Latin
inscription to this effect: 'To Henry Robinson of Carlisle, D.D., a most
careful provost of Queen's College, Oxon, and afterwards a most watchful
bishop of this church for eighteen years, who on the 13th Calend of July
in the year from the delivery of the Virgin, 1616, and of his age 64,
devoutly resigned his spirit unto the Lord. Bernard Robinson, his
brother and heir, set up this memorial as a testimony of his love.'"[5]

  [5] Jefferson, "History of Carlisle," p. 180.

About halfway up the aisle Archdeacon Paley lies buried between his two
wives, Jane (d. 1791), and Catherine (d. 1819). On a brass plate in the
centre of the stone is the following inscription:--

  Here lie
  interred the remains
  of
  WILLIAM PALEY, D.D.
  who died May 25th
  1805
  Aged 62 years.

Archdeacon Paley wrote both of his well-known works, "Horae Paulinae"
and "Evidences of Christianity," at Carlisle.

#Legendary Paintings.#--Between the bays east and west of the Salkeld
screen there is a broad stone plinth panelled in front. The stalls stand
on the plinth west of the screen, and the backs are painted with scenes
from the monkish legends of St. Anthony the Hermit, St. Cuthbert, and,
in the south choir aisle, St. Augustine. A rhymed couplet explains each
picture; and the paintings, though rudely executed, give good examples
of late fifteenth-century dress and ornament. Prior Gondibour caused the
work to be done, and as Richard Bell was bishop at the time he may have
suggested illustrating the life of St. Cuthbert, who was really the
first bishop of Carlisle, and whose body was enshrined at Durham, where
Bell had been prior before his elevation to the bishopric.

The following is a detailed account of the _Legendary Paintings_, with
short note of the principal persons therein represented:--

St. Cuthbert was born in the Lothians; at eight years he was living
under the care of a widow in the village of Wrangholm.

In 651 while keeping watch over his master's flocks near the Lauder,
which flows into the Tweed, he had a vision of the soul of Bishop Aidan
being carried up to heaven by angels. A few days after, he heard of the
death of the good bishop, and straightway journeyed to the monastery of
Melrose. Here he was accepted, and in a short time received the tonsure.

The Northumbrian peasants at this time were, mostly, only Christians in
name. Cuthbert wandered among them, choosing the most out-of-the-way
villages, where other teachers would not go. "He needed no interpreter
as he passed from village to village; the frugal long-headed
Northumbrians listened willingly to one who was himself a peasant of the
Lowlands and who had caught the rough Northumbrian burr. His patience,
his humorous good sense, the sweetness of his look, told for him, and
not less the vigorous frame which fitted the peasant-preacher for the
hard life he had chosen.

"Never did man die of hunger who served God faithfully," he would say,
when nightfall found them supperless in the waste. "Look at the eagle
overhead! God can feed us through him if he will"--and once at least he
owed his meal to a fish that the scared bird let fall.

In 664 he was made prior of Lindisfarne. "Gentle with others, he was
severe with himself, and was unsparing in his acts of mortification and
devotion."

In 676 he retired, first to a cave near Howburn, and later to Fame
Island, where he remained in strict seclusion for nine years.

He was elected bishop of Hexham in 684, and with much difficulty was
persuaded to undertake the duties. He soon exchanged Hexham for
Lindisfarne.

As bishop, Cuthbert was diligent in preaching, protected the poor from
their oppressors, lived on very little, and fed and clothed the poor.

Towards the end of 686 he gave up his bishopric and returned to his
beloved Fame Island, where he died in March 687.

  ST. CUTHBERT

  1.  Her Cuthbert was forbid layks and plays
      As S. Bede i' hys story says.

  2.  Her the angel did hym eale
      And made hys grievous sore to hele.

  3.  Her saw he Aydan's sawl up go
      to hevyn bliss w^{th} angels two.

  4.  Her to hym and hys palfray
      God send hem fude in hys jornay.

  5.  Her on Melross for to converse
      W^{th} h[~y] Bosle and laws reherse.

  6.  The angel he did as gest refreshe
      With met and drynk and hys fete weshe

  7.  Her Basel told hy yt he must de
      And after yt bysshop should be

  8.  Her to hys breder and pepyl eke
      He preched godys word myld and mek

  9.  Her stude he naked in y^e see
      till all David psalms sayd had he.

  10. He was gydyd by ye egle fre
      And fed w^{th} ye delfyne as ye see

  11. Fresh water god sent owt of ye ston
      to hym in Farn and befor was noon

  12. Consecrate byshop yai made h[~y] her
      off Lyndisfarne both far and nere.

  13. Her by prayers fendys out Farne glad
      and w^{th} angel h[~a]ds hys hous made

  14. To thys child god grace (here gave) he
      Thro hys prayers as ye may se.

  15. Byshop two yerys when he had beyn
      In Farne he died both holy and clene

  16. The crowys yt did his hous unthek
      This for full low fell at hys fete

  17. xi yere after yt beryd was he
      Yai fan hym hole as red may ye.


St. Anthony, one of the primitive hermits, and the founder of
monasticism, was born at Coma, in Upper Egypt, in A.D. 251. Before he
was twenty years old he lost his parents, and inherited great riches
from them, but within a year he sold all that he had and gave the money
to the poor. He then retired into solitude near Coma, passing his time
in manual labour, prayer, and study. Later, he went farther into the
wilderness, and lived in a cave. Satan is said to have tempted him by
sending spirits to him, disguised as beautiful women. Finding this
ineffectual, it is related that the Evil One made a violent attack on
him, and beat him so severely that he left him for dead. At the age of
ninety he heard of another hermit (St. Paul the Hermit), and made a
journey to visit him. St. Paul died soon after this meeting, and St.
Anthony, aided by two lions, buried him. In his 105th year he told some
of his disciples that he was going to die; then, accompanied by a few
monks, he retired deeper into the wilderness, where he died, having
first obtained a promise that they would keep the place of his burial
secret.

(In the time of Innocent IV. all hermits who lived under no recognised
discipline were incorporated and reduced under the rule of St.
Augustine.)


  THE LEGEND OF ST. ANTHONY

  1.  Of Anton story who lyste to here
      In Egypt was he bornt as doyth aper.

  2.  Her is he babtyd, Anton they hym call
      Gret landes and renttes to hym doeth fawl.

  3.  As scoler to the kyrk here is he gayn
      To here the sermontt and aftyr itt he's tayn.

  4.  Here geyffith he to the kyrk boith land and rent
      To leve in povert is hys intent.

  5.  Here in Agello to oon oulde man he wentt
      To lerne perfeccion is hys intent.

  6.  Here makyth he breder as men of relig',
      And techyth them vertu to leve in perfecco.

  7.  Here to the wyldernes as armet geon he
      And thus temptyth hym covytice with oon gold dyshie.

  8.  The sprytt of fornycacon to h[~y] her doth apper
      And thus he chastith his body with thorne and brer.

  9.  The devill thus hat h[~y] wounded w_t lance and staf
      And levyth h[~y] for deyd lyying at his cayf

  10. Here Crist haith hym helyd the devill he doth away
      And comfortyd his confessor deyd as he lay

  11. Here comands he y^{is} bests and ffast away th_a flie
      Y^e bor h[~y] obbays and w^{th} h[~y] bydeds he.

  12. Here makyth he a well and water hath uptayne
      And comforted hys breder thyrst was nere slayn.

  13. Here commandith he best to make h[~y] a cayf
      And thus he berys Paulyn and lay h[~y] in graf

  14. Thus walked he over the flode water doth h[~y] no der
      Theodor h[~y] se and dare nou c[~u] h[~y] nere

  15. Here departith Anton, to hevyn his saul is gone
      Betwixt his two breder in wilder's th[~e] alone.

  16. Here in wilderns they bery hym that no man shud him knaw
      For soo he comanded syne hom first tha draw.

  17. Thus levyth he i wildern's xx^{ii} yere and more
      Without any company bot the wylde boore.


St. Augustine, the first great saint of the Order, and patron of the
canons of the cathedral. He was born at Tagaste, in Numidia, A.D. 354.
His father, Patricius, was a Pagan, while his mother, Monica, was a
Christian. Patricius, perceiving the ability of his son, "spared
nothing to breed him up a scholar." When quite young he had a severe
illness, and expressed a wish to be baptized, but on his recovery the
wish vanished. Later, his morals grew corrupt, and he lived a profligate
life until he became a convert of the Manicheans at the age of nineteen.
After teaching grammar at Tagaste, and rhetoric at Carthage, he
proceeded to Rome, against the wish of Monica. He next became professor
of rhetoric at Milan. Ambrose was then archbishop, and through listening
to his preaching, St. Augustine abandoned the Manichean doctrines, and
was baptized at Easter the following year, A.D. 387. Monica, who had
prayed unceasingly for his conversion, now visited him at Milan, and was
greatly rejoiced at the answer to her prayers. His mother started to
return to Africa with her son, but died at Ostia. At a villa outside
Hippo, St. Augustine passed three years in the company of eleven pious
men. "They had all things in common as in the early Church; and fasting
and prayer, Scripture-reading and almsgiving, formed their regular
occupations. Their mode of life was not formally monastic according to
any special rule, but the experience of this time of seclusion was, no
doubt, the basis of that monastic system which St. Augustine afterwards
sketched, and which derived from him its name." He then entered the
priesthood, A.D. 390, and five years afterward was made coadjutor in the
bishopric of Hippo, and eventually became bishop. The rest of his life
he devoted to defending the Christian religion, both by preaching and by
writing. He died in Hippo, A.D. 430, while the Vandals were besieging
it. St. Augustine is called "the greatest of the Fathers." His great
work "De Civitate Dei," "the highest expression of his thought," engaged
him for seventeen years. In his well-known "Confessions" is given an
account of his spiritual progress, and of his state before he was
converted.

[Illustration: EAST END OF THE FRATRY AND SOUTH TRANSEPT. From
Billings.]

  ST. AUGUSTINE

  1.  Her fader and mod^r of sanct Austyne
      Fyrst put hym her to lerne doctryne

  2.  Her taught he gramor and rethorike
      Emongys all doctors non was h[~y] lyke

  3.  Her promysed he w^{th} hys moder to abide
      Bot he left her wepyng and stal y^e tyde grace de diu (on the
          ship's sail)

  4.  There taught he at rome the sevyn science
      Y^t was gret prece tyll hys presence

  5.  Her prechyd Ambrose and oft tymys previd
      Qd lettera occid_t wych Austin mevid

  6.  Her Poinciane hym tald ye lyffe of Sanct Anton
      And to Elipius he stonyshed said thus anone
      Q^r patim^r surgut indocti et Coelu^m rapiu't
      Et nos c[~u] doctrinis [~i] infer_r demergimur

  7.  Her sore wepying for hys gret syn
      He went to morne a garth wythin

  8.  Her wepyng and walyng as he lay
      Sodenly a voice thus herd he say
              Tolle lege Tolle lege

  9.  No word for tothewarke here myght he say
      But wrote to the pepil for him to pray

  10. Her of Sainct Ambrose chrysteyned was
      The gret doctor Austyne throgh Godes grace
              Te Deum laudamus Te Dom'm confitemur

  11. Her deyd his moder called Monica
      As thai were returning in to Affrica

  12. Her was he sacred prest and usyd
      Of Valery the Bishop thoffe he refusyt

  13. Her after (Godes word mylde and mek taught he)
      Hys (men of) religion as ye may see

  14. Her fortunate the heretyk concludit he
      Informyng the laws of Maneche

  15. Consecrate Byshop was this doctour
      By all the cuntre with gret honour

  16. As ys woman come to h[~y] for consolacion
      She saw hym wth the Trinite in meditacion

  17. When he Complyn had said and come to luke
      He was full cleyn owt of y^s knafys buke
              (Penitet me tibi ostendisse librum)

  18. They beried hys body wyth deligence
      her in hys aun kirk of Yponese.

  19. Her Lied-brand the kyng of L[~u]berdy
      Hym translate fr[~o] Sardyne to Pavye

  20. Thei shrynyd hys banes solemnly
      In sanct Peter kyrk thus at Pavye

  21. Thys prior he bad soon do evynsang her
      And helyd hym that was sek thre yer

  22. Her he apperyd unto these men thre
      And bad yam go to ... y^t hale

[Illustration: THE CRYPT UNDER THE FRATRY. _G.W. Wilson & Co. Ltd.,
Photo._]

Between the compartments devoted to the lives and deeds of St. Anthony
and St. Cuthbert are pictures of the twelve Apostles with the words
which, according to tradition, each one contributed to the Creed.

  APOSTLES AND CREED

  ST. PETER           I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of
                      heaven and earth

  ST. ANDREW          And in Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord

  ST. JAMES           Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
                      the Virgin Mary

  ST. JOHN            He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
                      dead, and buried

  ST. THOMAS          He descended into Hell: rose again the third day
                      from the dead

  ST. JAMES           And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father
                      Almighty

  ST. PHILIP          From whence He shall come to judge the quick and
                      the dead.

  ST. BARTHOLOMEW     I believe in the Holy Ghost

  ST. MATTHEW         The Communion of Saints

  ST. SIMON           The Forgiveness of Sins

  ST. THADDEUS        The Resurrection of the Body

  ST. MATTHIAS        And the Life Everlasting.

At the time of the Reformation these paintings were all whitewashed.
Dean Percy (1778) removed the whitewash from some of them, and they are
now all restored to their original condition as far as possible.

#Retro-choir.#--The extreme eastern bay of each aisle, and the passage
behind the altar, form the retro-choir, which is Late Decorated.

Its acutely-pointed windows are practically of identical pattern, the
mullions and side-mouldings having richly floriated capitals.

The last arch of the main arcade is supported by a bracket of foliage. A
fragment of rib still remaining was for the cross-groining of the aisle;
but as this would have interfered with the arch mouldings, the rib was
terminated higher up the wall upon a bracket in the form of a crouching
figure.

The wall-arcade has three divisions, the capitals of the columns are
foliated, and the point where the hood mouldings meet is ornamented with
the carving of a human head.

The low doorway forms the entrance to a staircase leading to the upper
part of the cathedral, and the belfry.

Beneath the great east window there is a plain tablet in memory of
Archdeacon Paley, and another in memory of his two wives and infant son.

Another tablet is in memory of Dean Cramer: "Apud Oxonienses Historiae
Profr. Regius," died 1848.

Opposite is a monument to Bishop Law, the work of T. Banks, R.A. A
figure of Religion leaning on a cross is above the tablet. This monument
was originally fixed on the pillar behind the pulpit ("Columnae hujus
sepultus est ad pedem"). It was removed to the north aisle because of
the weakening of the pillar through having been cut to receive the
memorial; and in 1894 was again removed and fixed here, about as far
away from the bishop's grave as it could possibly be placed.

Under the great window, a little to the south, is a tombstone, similar
to that of Bishop Bell in the choir, but the brass is missing.

On the south side the last arch of the main arcade is supported by a
bracket representing a human figure sustaining mouldings, resembling the
one at the end of the north aisle.

The small east window is in memory of John Heysham, M.D. (1753-1834). He
graduated at Edinburgh in 1777, and settled in Carlisle where he
practised till his death. He is famous for his statistical observations;
a record of the annual births, marriages, diseases, and deaths in
Carlisle (ten years to 1788); a census of the inhabitants in 1780 and
1788. The actuary of the Sun Life Assurance Office used these statistics
as the basis of the well-known "Carlisle Table of Mortality." Aided by
the dean and chapter he established the first dispensary for the poor at
Carlisle. He died in 1834, and was buried in St. Mary's Church.

One of the heads ornamenting the wall-arcade is said to represent Edward
I.

The #South Choir Aisle#