tn pursued
by persons interested in the continuance of the trade, of such witnesses
as had been examined against them; and whom, on account of their
dependent situation in life, it was most easy to oppress. As I had been
the means of bringing them forward on these occasions, they naturally
came to me, as the author of their miseries and their ruin.[3] These
different circumstances, by acting together, had at length brought me
into the situation just mentioned; and I was, therefore, obliged, though
very reluctantly, to be borne out of the field where I had placed the
great honour and glory of my life.'"

    [3] The father of the late Samuel Whitbread, Esq., generously
    undertook, in order to make Mr. Clarkson's mind easy upon the
    subject, "to make good all injuries which any individuals might
    suffer from such persecution;" and he honourably and nobly
    fulfilled his engagement.

It was while thus recruiting the energies exhausted in the conflict,
that Clarkson, and the compatriot band with which he had been associated
in the long and arduous struggle, were crowned with victory, and
received the grateful reward of their honourable toil in the final
abolition of the slave-trade by the British nation, in 1807, the last
but most glorious act of the Grenville administration.

The preceding shows something of the career of Clarkson while labouring
to convince the people of Great Britain of the iniquity of _their own_
trade, a trade which they had the power to abolish. During all this
time, Clarkson, Wilberforce, and their associates avoided touching the
matter of _slavery_. They knew that one thing must be gained at a time,
and they as a matter of expediency, avoided discussing the duty of the
British nation in regard to the system of slavery in their Colonies
which was entirely under their own control. During all the time that was
employed in efforts to end the slave-trade, slavery was existing in the
control of the British people, and yet Clarkson and Wilberforce decided
that it was right to let that matter entirely alone.

The following shows Clarkson's proceedings after the British nation had
abolished the slave-trade.

"By the publication of his Thoughts on the Abolition of Slavery, Mr.
Clarkson showed that neither he nor those connected with him, considered
their work as accomplished, when the laws of his country clasped with
its felons those engaged in the nefarious traffic of slaves. But the
efforts of Mr. Clarkson were not confined to his pen. In 1818, he
proceeded to Aix la Chapelle, at the time when the sovereigns of Europe
met in congress. He was received with marked attention by the Emperor of
Russia, who listened to his statements (respecting the _slave-trade_,)
and promised to use his influence with the assembled monarchs, to secure
the entire suppression of the trade in human beings, as speedily as
possible. Describing his interview with this amiable monarch, in which
the subject of peace societies, as well as the abolition of the
slave-trade was discussed, Mr. Clarkson, in a letter to a friend, thus
writes:

"'It was about nine at night, when I was shown into the emperor's
apartment. I found him alone. He met me at the door, and shaking me by
the hand, said, 'I had the pleasure of making your acquaintance at
Paris.' He then led me some little way into the room, and leaving me
there, went forward and brought me a chair with his own hand, and
desired me to sit down. This being done, he went for another chair, and
bringing it very near to mine, placed himself close to me, so that we
sat opposite to each other.

"'I began the conversation by informing the emperor that as I supposed
the congress of Aix la Chapelle might possibly be the last congress of
sovereigns for settling the affairs of Europe, its connexions and
dependencies, I had availed myself of the kind permission he gave me at
Paris, of applying to him in behalf of the oppressed Africans, being
unwilling to lose the last opportunity of rendering him serviceable to
the cause.

"'The emperor replied, that he had read both my letter and my address to
the sovereigns, and that what I asked him and the other sovereigns to
do, was only reasonable.

"'Here I repeated the two great propositions in the address--the
necessity of bringing the Portuguese time for continuing the trade
(which did not expire till 1825, and then only with a condition,) down
to the Spanish time, which expired in 1820; and secondly, when the two
times should legally have expired, (that is, both of them in 1820,) then
to make any farther continuance _piracy_. I entreated him not to be
deceived by any other propositions; for that Mr. Wilberforce, myself,
and others, who had devoted our time to this subject, were sure that no
other measure would be effectual.

"'He then said very feelingly in these words, 'By the providence of God,
I and my kingdom have been saved from a merciless tyranny, (alluding to
the invasion of Napoleon,) and I should but ill repay the blessing, if I
were not to do every thing in my power to protect the poor Africans
against their oppression also.'

"'The emperor then asked if he could do any thing else for our cause. I
told him he could; and that I should be greatly obliged to him if he
would present one of the addresses to the Emperor of Austria, and
another to the King of Prussia, _with his own hand_. I had brought two
of them in my pocket for the purpose. He asked me why I had not
presented them before. I replied that I had not the honour of knowing
either of those sovereigns as I knew him; nor any of their ministers;
and that I was not only fearful lest these addresses would not be
presented to them, but even if they were, that coming into their hands
without any recommendation, they would be laid aside and not read; on
the other hand, if he (the emperor,) would condescend to present them,
I was sure they would be read, and that coming from him, they would come
with a weight of influence, which would secure an attention to their
contents. Upon this, the emperor promised, in the most kind and affable
manner, that he would perform the task I had assigned to him.

"'We then rose from our seats to inspect some articles of manufacture,
which I had brought with me as a present to him, and which had been laid
upon the table. We examined the articles in leather first, one by one,
with which he was uncommonly gratified. He said they exhibited not only
genius but taste. He inquired if they tanned their own leather, and how:
I replied to his question. He said he had never seen neater work, either
in Petersburg or in London. He then looked at a dagger and its scabbard
or sheath. I said the sheath was intended as a further, but more
beautiful specimen of the work of the poor Africans in leather; and the
blade of their dagger as a specimen of their work in iron. Their works
in cotton next came under our notice. There was one piece which
attracted his particular notice, and which was undoubtedly very
beautiful. It called from him this observation, 'Manchester,' said he,
'I think is your great place for manufactures of this sort--do you think
they could make a better piece of cotton there?' I told him I had never
seen a better piece of workmanship of the kind any where. Having gone
over all the articles, the emperor desired me to inform him whether he
was to understand that these articles were made by the Africans in their
own country, that is, in their native villages, or _after they had
arrived in America_, where they would have an opportunity of seeing
European manufactures, and experienced workmen in the arts? I replied
that such articles might be found in every African village, both on the
coast and in the interior, and that they were samples of their own
ingenuity, without any connexion with Europeans. 'Then,' said the
emperor, 'you astonish me--you have given me a new idea of the state of
these poor people. I was not aware that they were so advanced in
society. The works you have shown me are not the works of brutes--but of
men, endued with rational and intellectual powers, and capable of being
brought to as high a degree of proficiency as any other men. _Africa
ought to have a fair chance of raising her character in the scale of the
civilized world._' I replied that it was this cruel traffic alone, which
had prevented Africa from rising to a level with other nations; and that
it was only astonishing to me that the natives there had, under its
impeding influence, arrived at the perfection which had displayed itself
in the specimens of workmanship he had just seen.'"

Animated by a growing conviction of the righteousness of the cause in
which he was engaged, and encouraged by the success with which past
endeavours had been crowned, Mr. Clarkson continued his efficient
co-operation with the friends of Abolition, advocating its claims on all
suitable occasions.

It would be superfluous to recount the steps by which, even before the
venerated Wilberforce was called to his rest, this glorious event was
realized, and Clarkson beheld the great object of his own life, and
those with whom he had acted, triumphantly achieved. The gratitude
cherished towards the Supreme Ruler for the boon thus secured to the
oppressed--the satisfaction which a review of past exertions afforded,
were heightened by the joyous sympathy of a large portion of his
countrymen.[4]

    [4] This account of Clarkson, and the preceding one of Wilberforce,
    are taken from the Christian Keepsake of 1836 and 1837.

The History of the Abolition of the Slave-trade, by Clarkson himself,
presents a more detailed account of his own labours and of the labours
of others, and whoever will read it, will observe the following
particulars in which this effort differed from the Abolition movement
in America.

In the first place, it was conducted by some of the wisest and most
talented statesmen, as well as the most pious men, in the British
nation. Pitt, Fox, and some of the highest of the nobility and bishops
in England, were the firmest friends of the enterprise from the first.
It was conducted by men who had the intellect, knowledge, discretion,
and wisdom demanded for so great an enterprise.

Secondly. It was conducted slowly, peaceably, and by eminently judicious
influences.

Thirdly. It included, to the full extent, the doctrine of expediency
denounced by Abolitionists.

One of the first decisions of the "Committee for the Abolition of the
Slave-trade," which conducted all Abolition movements, was that
_slavery_ should not be attacked, but only the _slave-trade_; and
Clarkson expressly says, that it was owing to this, more than to any
other measure, that success was gained.

Fourthly. Good men were not divided, and thrown into contending
parties.--The opponents to the measure, were only those who were
personally interested in the perpetuation of slavery or the slave-trade.

Fifthly. This effort was one to convince men of their _own_ obligations,
and not an effort to arouse public sentiment against the sinful
practices of another community over which they had no control.

I would now ask, why could not some southern gentleman, such for example
as Mr. Birney, whose manners, education, character, and habits give him
abundant facilities, have acted the part of Clarkson, and quietly have
gone to work at the South, collecting facts, exhibiting the impolicy and
the evils, to good men at the South, by the fire-side of the planter,
the known home of hospitality and chivalry. Why could he not have
commenced with the most vulnerable point, the _domestic slave-trade_,
leaving emancipation for a future and more favourable period? What right
has any one to say that there was no southern Wilberforce that would
have arisen, no southern Grant, Macaulay or Sharpe, who, like the
English philanthropists, would have stood the fierce beating of angry
billows, and by patience, kindness, arguments, facts, eloquence, and
Christian love, convinced the skeptical, enlightened the ignorant,
excited the benevolent, and finally have carried the day at the South,
by the same means and measures, as secured the event in England? All
experience is in favour of the method which the Abolitionists have
rejected, because it involves _danger to themselves_. The cause they
have selected is one that stands alone.--No case parallel on earth can
be brought to sustain it, with probabilities of good results. No
instance can be found, where exciting the public sentiment of one
community against evil practices in another, was ever made the means of
eradicating those evils. All the laws of mind, all the records of
experience, go against the measures that Abolitionists have taken, and
in favour of the one they have rejected. And when we look still farther
ahead, at results which time is to develope, how stand the probabilities,
when we, in judging, again take, as data, the laws of mind and the
records of experience?

What are the plans, hopes, and expectations of Abolitionists, in
reference to their measures? They are now labouring to make the North a
great Abolition Society,--to convince every northern man that slavery at
the South is a great sin, and that it ought immediately to cease.
Suppose they accomplish this to the extent they hope,--so far as we have
seen, the more the North is convinced, the more firmly the South rejects
the light, and turns from the truth.

While Abolition Societies did not exist, men could talk and write, at
the South, against the evils of slavery, and northern men had free
access and liberty of speech, both at the South and at the North. But
now all is changed. Every avenue of approach to the South is shut. No
paper, pamphlet, or preacher, that touches on that topic, is admitted in
their bounds. Their own citizens, that once laboured and remonstrated,
are silenced; their own clergy, under the influence of the exasperated
feelings of their people, and their own sympathy and sense of wrong,
either entirely hold their peace, or become the defenders of a system
they once lamented, and attempted to bring to an end. This is the record
of experience as to the tendencies of Abolitionism, as thus far
developed. The South are now in just that state of high exasperation, at
the sense of wanton injury and impertinent interference, which makes the
influence of truth and reason most useless and powerless.

But suppose the Abolitionists succeed, not only in making northern men
Abolitionists, but also in sending a portion of light into the South,
such as to form a body of Abolitionists there also. What is the thing
that is to be done to end slavery at the South? It is to _alter the
laws_, and to do this, a small minority must begin a long, bitter,
terrible conflict with a powerful and exasperated majority. Now if, as
the Abolitionists hope, there will arise at the South such a minority,
it will doubtless consist of men of religious and benevolent
feelings,--men of that humane, and generous, and upright spirit, that
most keenly feel the injuries inflicted on their fellow men. Suppose
such a band of men begin their efforts, sustained by the northern
Abolitionists, already so odious. How will the exasperated majority act,
according to the known laws of mind and of experience? Instead of
lessening the evils of slavery, they will increase them. The more they
are goaded by a sense of aggressive wrong without, or by fears of
dangers within, the more they will restrain their slaves, and diminish
their liberty, and increase their disabilities. They will make laws so
unjust and oppressive, not only to slaves, but to their Abolitionist
advocates, that by degrees such men will withdraw from their bounds.
Laws will be made expressly to harass them, and to render them so
uncomfortable that they must withdraw. Then gradually the righteous will
flee from the devoted city. Then the numerical proportion of whites will
decrease, and the cruelty and unrestrained wickedness of the system will
increase, till a period will come when the physical power will be so
much with the blacks, their sense of suffering so increased, that the
volcano will burst,--insurrection and servile wars will begin. Oh, the
countless horrors of such a day! And will the South stand alone in that
burning hour? When she sends forth the wailing of her agonies, shall not
the North and the West hear, and lift up together the voice of wo? Will
not fathers hear the cries of children, and brothers the cries of
sisters? Will the terrors of insurrection sweep over the South, and no
Northern and Western blood be shed? Will the slaves be cut down, in such
a strife, when they raise the same paean song of liberty and human
rights, that was the watchword of our redemption from far less dreadful
tyranny, and which is now thrilling the nations and shaking monarchs on
their thrones--will this be heard, and none of the sons of liberty be
found to appear on their side? This is no picture of fancied dangers,
which are not near. The day has come, when already the feelings are so
excited on both sides, that I have heard intelligent men, good men,
benevolent and pious men, in moments of excitement, declare themselves
ready to take up the sword--some for the defence of the master, some for
the protection and right of the slave. It is my full conviction, that if
insurrection does burst forth, and there be the least prospect of
success to the cause of the slave, there will be men from the North and
West, standing breast to breast, with murderous weapons, in opposing
ranks.

Such apprehensions many would regard as needless, and exclaim against
such melancholy predictions. But in a case where the whole point of
duty and expediency turns upon the probabilities as to results, those
probabilities ought to be the chief subjects of inquiry. True, no one
has a right to say with confidence what will or what will not be; and it
has often amazed and disturbed my mind to perceive how men, with so
small a field of vision,--with so little data for judging,--with so few
years, and so little experience, can pronounce concerning the results of
measures bearing upon the complicated relations and duties of millions,
and in a case where the wisest and best are dismayed and baffled. It
sometimes has seemed to me that the prescience of Deity alone should
dare to take such positions as are both carelessly assumed, and
pertinaciously defended, by the advocates of Abolitionism.

But if we are to judge of the wisdom or folly of any measures on this
subject, it must be with reference to future results. One course of
measures, it is claimed, tends to perpetuate slavery, or to end it by
scenes of terror and bloodshed. Another course tends to bring it to an
end sooner, and by safe and peaceful influences. And the whole
discussion of duty rests on these probabilities. But where do the laws
of mind and experience oppose the terrific tendencies of Abolitionism
that have been portrayed? Are not the minds of men thrown into a
ferment, and excited by those passions which blind the reason, and warp
the moral sense? Is not the South in a state of high exasperation
against Abolitionists? Does she not regard them as enemies, as reckless
madmen, as impertinent intermeddlers? Will the increase of their numbers
tend to allay this exasperation? Will the appearance of a similar body
in their own boundaries have any tendency to soothe? Will it not still
more alarm and exasperate? If a movement of a minority of such men
attempt to alter the laws, are not the probabilities strong that still
more unjust and oppressive measures will be adopted?--measures that will
tend to increase the hardships of the slave, and to drive out of the
community all humane, conscientious and pious men? As the evils and
dangers increase, will not the alarm constantly diminish the proportion
of whites, and make it more and more needful to increase such
disabilities and restraints as will chafe and inflame the blacks? When
this point is reached, will the blacks, knowing, as they will know, the
sympathies of their Abolition friends, refrain from exerting their
physical power? _The Southampton insurrection occurred with far less
chance of sympathy and success._

If that most horrible of all scourges, a servile war, breaks forth, will
the slaughter of fathers, sons, infants, and of aged,--will the cries of
wives, daughters, sisters, and kindred, suffering barbarities worse than
death, bring no fathers, brothers, and friends to their aid, from the
North and West?

And if the sympathies and indignation of freemen can already look such
an event in the face, and feel that it would be the slave, rather than
the master, whom they would defend, what will be the probability, after
a few years' chafing shall have driven away the most christian and
humane from scenes of cruelty and inhumanity, which they could neither
alleviate nor redress? I should like to see any data of past experience,
that will show that these results are not more probable than that the
South will, by the system of means now urged upon her, finally be
convinced of her sins, and voluntarily bring the system of slavery to an
end. I claim not that the predictions I present will be fulfilled. I
only say, that if Abolitionists go on as they propose, such results are
_more_ probable than those they hope to attain.

I have not here alluded to the probabilities of the severing of the
Union by the present mode of agitating the question. This may be one of
the results, and, if so, what are the probabilities for a Southern
republic, that has torn itself off for the purpose of excluding foreign
interference, and for the purpose of perpetuating slavery? Can any
Abolitionist suppose that, in such a state of things, the great cause of
emancipation is as likely to progress favourably, as it was when we were
one nation, and mingling on those fraternal terms that existed before
the Abolition movement began?

The preceding are some of the reasons which, on the general view, I
would present as opposed to the proposal of forming Abolition Societies;
and they apply equally to either sex. There are some others which seem
to oppose peculiar objections to the action of females in the way you
would urge.

To appreciate more fully these objections, it will be necessary to recur
to some general views in relation to the place woman is appointed to
fill by the dispensations of heaven.

It has of late become quite fashionable in all benevolent efforts, to
shower upon our sex an abundance of compliments, not only for what they
have done, but also for what they can do; and so injudicious and so
frequent, are these oblations, that while I feel an increasing respect
for my countrywomen, that their good sense has not been decoyed by these
appeals to their vanity and ambition, I cannot but apprehend that there
is some need of inquiry as to the just bounds of female influence, and
the times, places, and manner in which it can be appropriately exerted.

It is the grand feature of the Divine economy, that there should be
different stations of superiority and subordination, and it is
impossible to annihilate this beneficent and immutable law. On its first
entrance into life, the child is a dependent on parental love, and of
necessity takes a place of subordination and obedience. As he advances
in life these new relations of superiority and subordination multiply.
The teacher must be the superior in station, the pupil a subordinate.
The master of a family the superior, the domestic a subordinate--the
ruler a superior, the subject a subordinate. Nor do these relations at
all depend upon superiority either in intellectual or moral worth.
However weak the parents, or intelligent the child, there is no
reference to this, in the immutable law. However incompetent the
teacher, or superior the pupil, no alteration of station can be allowed.
However unworthy the master or worthy the servant, while their mutual
relations continue, no change in station as to subordination can be
allowed. In fulfilling the duties of these relations, true dignity
consists in conforming to all those relations that demand subordination,
with propriety and cheerfulness. When does a man, however high his
character or station, appear more interesting or dignified than when
yielding reverence and deferential attentions to an aged parent, however
weak and infirm? And the pupil, the servant, or the subject, all equally
sustain their own claims to self-respect, and to the esteem of others,
by equally sustaining the appropriate relations and duties of
subordination. In this arrangement of the duties of life, Heaven has
appointed to one sex the superior, and to the other the subordinate
station, and this without any reference to the character or conduct of
either. It is therefore as much for the dignity as it is for the
interest of females, in all respects to conform to the duties of this
relation. And it is as much a duty as it is for the child to fulfil
similar relations to parents, or subjects to rulers. But while woman
holds a subordinate relation in society to the other sex, it is not
because it was designed that her duties or her influence should be any
the less important, or all-pervading. But it was designed that the mode
of gaining influence and of exercising power should be altogether
different and peculiar.

It is Christianity that has given to woman her true place in society.
And it is the peculiar trait of Christianity alone that can sustain her
therein. "Peace on earth and good will to men" is the character of all
the rights and privileges, the influence, and the power of woman. A man
may act on society by the collision of intellect, in public debate; he
may urge his measures by a sense of shame, by fear and by personal
interest; he may coerce by the combination of public sentiment; he may
drive by physical force, and he does not outstep the boundaries of his
sphere. But all the power, and all the conquests that are lawful to
woman, are those only which appeal to the kindly, generous, peaceful and
benevolent principles.

Woman is to win every thing by peace and love; by making herself so
much respected, esteemed and loved, that to yield to her opinions and to
gratify her wishes, will be the free-will offering of the heart. But
this is to be all accomplished in the domestic and social circle. There
let every woman become so cultivated and refined in intellect, that her
taste and judgment will be respected; so benevolent in feeling and
action, that her motives will be reverenced;--so unassuming and
unambitious, that collision and competition will be banished;--so
"gentle and easy to be entreated," as that every heart will repose in
her presence; then, the fathers, the husbands, and the sons, will find
an influence thrown around them, to which they will yield not only
willingly but proudly. A man is never ashamed to own such influences,
but feels dignified and ennobled in acknowledging them. But the moment
woman begins to feel the promptings of ambition, or the thirst for
power, her aegis of defence is gone. All the sacred protection of
religion, all the generous promptings of chivalry, all the poetry of
romantic gallantry, depend upon woman's retaining her place as
dependent and defenceless, and making no claims, and maintaining no
right but what are the gifts of honour, rectitude and love.

A woman may seek the aid of co-operation and combination among her own
sex, to assist her in her appropriate offices of piety, charity,
maternal and domestic duty; but whatever, in any measure, throws a woman
into the attitude of a combatant, either for herself or others--whatever
binds her in a party conflict--whatever obliges her in any way to exert
coercive influences, throws her out of her appropriate sphere. If these
general principles are correct, they are entirely opposed to the plan of
arraying females in any Abolition movement; because it enlists them in
an effort to coerce the South by the public sentiment of the North;
because it brings them forward as partisans in a conflict that has been
begun and carried forward by measures that are any thing rather than
peaceful in their tendencies; because it draws them forth from their
appropriate retirement, to expose themselves to the ungoverned violence
of mobs, and to sneers and ridicule in public places; because it leads
them into the arena of political collision, not as peaceful mediators to
hush the opposing elements, but as combatants to cheer up and carry
forward the measures of strife.

If it is asked, "May not woman appropriately come forward as a suppliant
for a portion of her sex who are bound in cruel bondage?" It is replied,
that, the rectitude and propriety of any such measure, depend entirely
on its probable results. If petitions from females will operate to
exasperate; if they will be deemed obtrusive, indecorous, and unwise, by
those to whom they are addressed; if they will increase, rather than
diminish the evil which it is wished to remove; if they will be the
opening wedge, that will tend eventually to bring females as petitioners
and partisans into every political measure that may tend to injure and
oppress their sex, in various parts of the nation, and under the various
public measures that may hereafter be enforced, then it is neither
appropriate nor wise, nor right, for a woman to petition for the relief
of oppressed females.

The case of Queen Esther is one often appealed to as a precedent. When a
woman is placed in similar circumstances, where death to herself and all
her nation is one alternative, and there is nothing worse to fear, but
something to hope as the other alternative, then she may safely follow
such an example. But when a woman is asked to join an Abolition Society,
or to put her name to a petition to congress, for the purpose of
contributing her measure of influence to keep up agitation in congress,
to promote the excitement of the North against the iniquities of the
South, to coerce the South by fear, shame, anger, and a sense of odium
to do what she has determined not to do, the case of Queen Esther is not
at all to be regarded as a suitable example for imitation.

In this country, petitions to congress, in reference to the official
duties of legislators, seem, IN ALL CASES, to fall entirely without the
sphere of female duty. Men are the proper persons to make appeals to
the rulers whom they appoint, and if their female friends, by arguments
and persuasions, can induce them to petition, all the good that can be
done by such measures will be secured. But if females cannot influence
their nearest friends, to urge forward a public measure in this way,
they surely are out of their place, in attempting to do it themselves.

There are some other considerations, which should make the American
females peculiarly sensitive in reference to any measure, which should
even _seem_ to draw them from their appropriate relations in society.

It is allowed by all reflecting minds, that the safety and happiness of
this nation depends upon having the _children_ educated, and not only
intellectually, but morally and religiously. There are now nearly two
millions of children and adults in this country who cannot read, and who
have no schools of any kind. To give only a small supply of teachers to
these destitute children, who are generally where the population is
sparse, will demand _thirty thousand teachers_; and _six thousand_ more
will be needed every year, barely to meet the increase of juvenile
population. But if we allow that we need not reach this point, in order
to save ourselves from that destruction which awaits a people, when
governed by an ignorant and unprincipled democracy; if we can weather
the storms of democratic liberty with only one-third of our ignorant
children properly educated, still we need _ten thousand_ teachers at
this moment, and an addition of _two thousand every year_. Where is this
army of teachers to be found? Is it at all probable that the other sex
will afford even a moderate portion of this supply? The field for
enterprise and excitement in the political arena, in the arts, the
sciences, the liberal professions, in agriculture, manufactures, and
commerce, is opening with such temptations, as never yet bore upon the
mind of any nation. Will men turn aside from these high and exciting
objects to become the patient labourers in the school-room, and for only
the small pittance that rewards such toil? No, they will not do it. Men
will be educators in the college, in the high school, in some of the
most honourable and lucrative common schools, but the _children_, the
_little children_ of this nation must, to a wide extent, be taught by
females, or remain untaught. The drudgery of education, as it is now too
generally regarded, in this country, will be given to the female hand.
And as the value of education rises in the public mind, and the
importance of a teacher's office is more highly estimated, women will
more and more be furnished with those intellectual advantages which they
need to fit them for such duties.

The result will be, that America will be distinguished above all other
nations, for well-educated females, and for the influence they will
exert on the general interests of society. But if females, as they
approach the other sex, in intellectual elevation, begin to claim, or to
exercise in any manner, the peculiar prerogatives of that sex, education
will prove a doubtful and dangerous blessing. But this will never be the
result. For the more intelligent a woman becomes, the more she can
appreciate the wisdom of that ordinance that appointed her subordinate
station, and the more her taste will conform to the graceful and
dignified retirement and submission it involves.

An ignorant, a narrow-minded, or a stupid woman, cannot feel nor
understand the rationality, the propriety, or the beauty of this
relation; and she it is, that will be most likely to carry her measures
by tormenting, when she cannot please, or by petulant complaints or
obtrusive interference, in matters which are out of her sphere, and
which she cannot comprehend.

And experience testifies to this result. By the concession of all
travellers, American females are distinguished above all others for
their general intelligence, and yet they are complimented for their
retiring modesty, virtue, and domestic faithfulness, while the other sex
is as much distinguished for their respectful kindness and attentive
gallantry. There is no other country where females have so much public
respect and kindness accorded to them as in America, by the concession
of all travellers. And it will ever be so, while intellectual culture in
the female mind, is combined with the spirit of that religion which so
strongly enforces the appropriate duties of a woman's sphere.

But it may be asked, is there nothing to be done to bring this national
sin of slavery to an end? Must the internal slave-trade, a trade now
ranked as piracy among all civilized nations, still prosper in our
bounds? Must the very seat of our government stand as one of the chief
slave-markets of the land; and must not Christian females open their
lips, nor lift a finger, to bring such a shame and sin to an end?

To this it may be replied, that Christian females may, and can say and
do much to bring these evils to an end; and the present is a time and an
occasion when it seems most desirable that they should know, and
appreciate, and _exercise_ the power which they do possess for so
desirable an end.

And in pointing out the methods of exerting female influence for this
object, I am inspired with great confidence, from the conviction that
what will be suggested, is that which none will oppose, but all will
allow to be not only practicable, but safe, suitable, and Christian.

To appreciate these suggestions, however, it is needful previously to
consider some particulars that exhibit the spirit of the age and the
tendencies of our peculiar form of government.

The prominent principle, now in development, as indicating the spirit of
the age, is the perfect right of all men to entire freedom of opinion.
By this I do not mean that men are coming to think that "it is no matter
what a man believes, if he is only honest and sincere," or that they are
growing any more lenient towards their fellow-men, for the evil
consequences they bring on themselves or on others for believing wrong.

But they are coming to adopt the maxim, that no man shall be forced by
pains and penalties to adopt the opinions of other minds, but that every
man shall be free to form his own opinions, and to propagate them by
all lawful means.

At the same time another right is claimed, which is of necessity
involved in the preceding,--the right to oppose, by all lawful means,
the opinions and the practices of others, when they are deemed
pernicious either to individuals or to the community. _Facts_,
_arguments_ and _persuasions_ are, by all, conceded to be lawful means
to employ in propagating our own views, and in opposing the opinions and
practices of others.

These fundamental principles of liberty have in all past ages been
restrained by coercive influences, either of civil or of ecclesiastical
power. But in this nation, all such coercive influences, both of church
and state, have ceased. Every man may think what he pleases about
government, or religion, or any thing else; he may propagate his
opinions, he may controvert opposite opinions, and no magistrate or
ecclesiastic can in any legal way restrain or punish.

But the form of our government is such, that every measure that bears
upon the public or private interest of every citizen, is decided by
_public sentiment_. All laws and regulations in civil, or religious, or
social concerns, are decided by the _majority of votes_. And the present
is a time when every doctrine, every principle, and every practice which
influences the happiness of man, either in this, or in a future life, is
under discussion. The whole nation is thrown into parties about almost
every possible question, and every man is stimulated in his efforts to
promote his own plans by the conviction that success depends entirely
upon bringing his fellow citizens to think as he does. Hence every man
is fierce in maintaining his own right of free discussion, his own right
to propagate his opinions, and his own right to oppose, by all lawful
means, the opinions that conflict with his own.

But the difficulty is, that a right which all men claim for themselves,
with the most sensitive and pertinacious inflexibility, they have not
yet learned to accord to their fellow men, in cases where their own
interests are involved. Every man is saying, "Let me have full liberty
to propagate my opinions, and to oppose all that I deem wrong and
injurious, but let no man take this liberty with my opinions and
practices. Every man may believe what he pleases, and propagate what he
pleases, provided he takes care not to attack any thing which belongs to
me."

And how do men exert themselves to restrain this corresponding right of
their fellow men? Not by going to the magistrate to inform, or to the
spiritual despot to obtain ecclesiastical penalties, but he resorts to
methods, which, if successful, are in effect the most severe pains and
penalties that can restrain freedom of opinion.

What is dearer to a man than _his character_, involving as it does, the
esteem, respect and affection of friends, neighbours and society, with
all the confidence, honour, trust and emolument that flow from general
esteem? How sensitive is every man to any thing that depreciates his
intellectual character! What torture, to be ridiculed or pitied for such
deficiencies! How cruel the suffering, when his moral delinquencies are
held up to public scorn and reprehension! Confiscation, stripes,
chains, and even death itself, are often less dreaded.

It is this method of punishment to which men resort, to deter their
fellow-men from exercising those rights of liberty which they so
tenaciously claim for themselves. Examine now the methods adopted by
almost all who are engaged in the various conflicts of opinion in this
nation, and you will find that there are certain measures which
combatants almost invariably employ.

They either attack the intellectual character of opponents, or they
labour to make them appear narrow-minded, illiberal and bigoted, or they
impeach their honesty and veracity, or they stigmatize their motives as
mean, selfish, ambitious, or in some other respect unworthy and
degrading. Instead of truth, and evidence, and argument, personal
depreciation, sneers, insinuations, or open abuse, are the weapons
employed. This method of resisting freedom of opinions, by pains and
penalties, arises in part from the natural selfishness of man, and in
part from want of clear distinctions as to the rights and duties
involved in freedom of opinion and freedom of speech.

The great fundamental principle that makes this matter clear, is this,
that a broad and invariable distinction should ever be preserved between
the _opinions_ and _practices_ that are discussed, and the _advocates_
of these opinions and practices.

It is a sacred and imperious duty, that rests on every human being, to
exert all his influence in opposing every thing that he believes is
dangerous and wrong, and in sustaining all that he believes is safe and
right. And in doing this, no compromise is to be made, in order to
shield country, party, friends, or even self, from any just censure.
Every man is bound by duty to God and to his country, to lay his finger
on every false principle, or injurious practice, and boldly say, "this
is wrong--this is dangerous--this I will oppose with all my influence,
whoever it may be that advocates or practises it." And every man is
bound to use his efforts to turn public sentiment against all that he
believes to be wrong and injurious, either in regard to this life, or
to the future world. And every man deserves to be respected and
applauded, just in proportion as he fearlessly and impartially, and in a
_proper spirit_, _time_ and _manner_, fulfils this duty.

The doctrine, just now alluded to, that it is "no matter what a man
believes, if he is only honest and sincere," is as pernicious, as it is
contrary to religion and to common sense. It is as absurd, and as
impracticable, as it would be to urge on the mariner the maxim, "no
matter which way you believe to be north, if you only steer aright." A
man's character, feelings, and conduct, all depend upon his opinions. If
a man can reason himself into the belief that it is right to take the
property of others and to deceive by false statements, he will probably
prove a thief and a liar. It is of the greatest concern, therefore, to
every man, that his fellow-men should _believe right_, and one of his
most sacred duties is to use all his influence to promote correct
opinions.

But the performance of this duty, does by no means involve the necessity
of attacking the character or motives of the _advocates_ of false
opinions, or of holding them up, individually, to public odium.

Erroneous opinions are sometimes the consequence of unavoidable
ignorance, or of mental imbecility, or of a weak and erring judgment, or
of false testimony from others, which cannot be rectified. In such
cases, the advocates of false opinions are to be pitied rather than
blamed; and while the opinions and their tendencies may be publicly
exposed, the men may be objects of affection and kindness.

In other cases, erroneous opinions spring from criminal indifference,
from prejudice, from indolence, from pride, from evil passions, or from
selfish interest. In all such cases, men deserve blame for their
pernicious opinions, and the evils which flow from them.

But, it maybe asked, how are men to decide, when their fellow-men are
guilty for holding wrong opinions; when they deserve blame, and when
they are to be regarded only with pity and commiseration by those who
believe them to be in the wrong? Here, surely, is a place where some
correct principle is greatly needed.

Is every man to sit in judgment upon his fellow-man, and decide what are
his intellectual capacities, and what the measure of his judgment? Is
every man to take the office of the Searcher of Hearts, to try the
feelings and motives of his fellow-man? Is that most difficult of all
analysis, the estimating of the feelings, purposes, and motives, which
every man, who examines his own secret thoughts, finds to be so complex,
so recondite, so intricate; is this to be the basis, not only of
individual opinion, but of public reward and censure? Is every man to
constitute himself a judge of the amount of time and interest given to
the proper investigation of truth by his fellow-man? Surely, this cannot
be a correct principle.

Though there may be single cases in which we can know that our
fellow-men are weak in intellect, or erring in judgment, or perverse in
feeling, or misled by passion, or biased by selfish interest, as a
general fact we are not competent to decide these matters, in regard to
those who differ from us in opinion.

For this reason it is manifestly wrong and irrelevant, when discussing
questions of duty or expediency, to bring before the public the
character or the motives of the individual advocates of opinions.

But, it may be urged, how can the evil tendencies of opinions or of
practices be investigated, without involving a consideration of the
character and conduct of those who advocate them? To this it may be
replied, that the tendencies of opinions and practices can never be
ascertained by discussing individual character. It is _classes_ of
persons, or large _communities_, embracing persons of all varieties of
character and circumstances, that are the only proper subjects of
investigation for this object. For example, a community of Catholics,
and a community of Protestants, may be compared, for the purpose of
learning the moral tendencies of their different opinions. Scotland and
New England, where the principles opposite to Catholicism have most
prevailed, may properly be compared with Spain and Italy, where the
Catholic system has been most fairly tried. But to select certain
individuals who are defenders of these two different systems, as
examples to illustrate their tendencies, would be as improper as it
would be to select a kernel of grain to prove the good or bad character
of a whole crop.

To illustrate by a more particular example. The doctrines of the Atheist
school are now under discussion, and Robert Owen and Fanny Wright have
been their prominent advocates.

In agreement with the above principles, it is a right, and the duty of
every man who has any influence and opportunity, to show the absurdity
of their doctrines, the weakness of their arguments, and the fatal
tendencies of their opinions. It is right to show that the _practical_
adoption of their principles indicates a want of common sense, just as
sowing the ocean with grain and expecting a crop would indicate the same
deficiency. If the advocates of these doctrines carry out their
principles into practice, in any such way as to offend the taste, or
infringe on the rights of others, it is proper to express disgust and
disapprobation. If the female advocate chooses to come upon a stage, and
expose her person, dress, and elocution to public criticism, it is right
to express disgust at whatever is offensive and indecorous, as it is to
criticize the book of an author, or the dancing of an actress, or any
thing else that is presented to public observation. And it is right to
make all these things appear as odious and reprehensible to others as
they do to ourselves.

But what is the private character of Robert Owen or Fanny Wright?
Whether they are ignorant or weak in intellect; whether they have
properly examined the sources of truth; how much they have been biased
by pride, passion, or vice, in adopting their opinions; whether they are
honest and sincere in their belief; whether they are selfish or
benevolent in their aims, are not matters which in any way pertain to
the discussion. They are questions about which none are qualified to
judge, except those in close and intimate communion with them. We may
inquire with propriety as to the character of a _community_ of Atheists,
or of a community where such sentiments extensively prevail, as compared
with a community of opposite sentiments. But the private character,
feelings, and motives of the individual advocates of these doctrines,
are not proper subjects of investigation in any public discussion.

If, then, it be true, that attacks on the character and motives of the
advocates of opinions are entirely irrelevant and not at all necessary
for the discovery of truth; if injury inflicted on character is the most
severe penalty that can be employed to restrain freedom of opinions and
freedom of speech, what are we to say of the state of things in this
nation?

Where is there a party which does not in effect say to every man, "if
you dare to oppose the principles or practices we sustain, you shall be
punished with personal odium?" which does not say to every member of the
party, "uphold your party, right or wrong; oppose all that is adverse to
your party, right or wrong, or else suffer the penalty of having your
motives, character, and conduct, impeached?"

Look first at the political arena. Where is the advocate of any measure
that does not suffer sneers, ridicule, contempt, and all that tends to
depreciate character in public estimation? Where is the partisan that is
not attacked, as either weak in intellect, or dishonest in principle, or
selfish in motives? And where is the man who is linked with any
political party, that dares to stand up fearlessly and defend what is
good in opposers, and reprove what is wrong in his own party?

Look into the religious world. There, even those who take their party
name from their professed liberality, are saying, "whoever shall adopt
principles that exclude us from the Christian church, and our clergy
from the pulpit, shall be held up either as intellectually degraded, or
as narrow-minded and bigoted, or as ambitious, partisan and persecuting
in spirit. No man shall believe a creed that excludes us from the pale
of Christianity, under penalty of all the odium we can inflict."

So in the Catholic controversy. Catholics and their friends practically
declare war against all free discussion on this point. The decree has
gone forth, that "no man shall appear for the purpose of proving that
Catholicism is contrary to Scripture, or immoral and anti-republican in
tendency, under penalty of being denounced as a dupe, or a hypocrite, or
a persecutor, or a narrow-minded and prejudiced bigot."

On the contrary, those who attack what is called liberal Christianity,
or who aim to oppose the progress of Catholicism, how often do they
exhibit a severe and uncharitable spirit towards the individuals whose
opinions they controvert. Instead of loving the men, and rendering to
them all the offices of Christian kindness, and according to them all
due credit for whatever is desirable in character and conduct, how often
do opposers seem to feel, that it will not answer to allow that there is
any thing good, either in the system or in those who have adopted it.
"Every thing about my party is right, and every thing in the opposing
party is wrong," seems to be the universal maxim of the times. And it
is the remark of some of the most intelligent foreign travellers among
us, and of our own citizens who go abroad, that there is no country to
be found, where freedom of opinion, and freedom of speech is more really
influenced and controlled by the fear of pains and penalties, than in
this land of boasted freedom. In other nations, the control is exercised
by government, in respect to a very few matters; in this country it is
party-spirit that rules with an iron rod, and shakes its scorpion whips
over every interest and every employment of man.

From this mighty source spring constant detraction, gossiping,
tale-bearing, falsehood, anger, pride, malice, revenge, and every evil
word and work.

Every man sets himself up as the judge of the intellectual character,
the honesty, the sincerity, the feelings, opportunities, motives, and
intentions, of his fellow-man. And so they fall upon each other, not
with swords and spears, but with the tongue, "that unruly member, that
setteth on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell."

Can any person who seeks to maintain the peaceful, loving, and gentle
spirit of Christianity, go out into the world at this day, without being
bewildered at the endless conflicts, and grieved and dismayed at the
bitter and unhallowed passions they engender? Can an honest, upright and
Christian man, go into these conflicts, and with unflinching firmness
stand up for all that is good, and oppose all that is evil, in whatever
party it may be found, without a measure of moral courage such as few
can command? And if he carries himself through with an unyielding
integrity, and maintains his consistency, is he not exposed to storms of
bitter revilings, and to peltings from both parties between which he may
stand?

What is the end of these things to be? Must we give up free discussion,
and again chain up the human mind under the despotism of past ages? No,
this will never be. God designs that every intelligent mind shall be
governed, not by coercion, but by reason, and conscience, and truth.
Man must reason, and experiment, and compare past and present results,
and hear and know all that can be said on _both_ sides of every question
which influences either private or public happiness, either for this
life or for the life to come.

But while this process is going on, must we be distracted and tortured
by the baleful passions and wicked works that unrestrained party-spirit
and ungoverned factions will bring upon us, under such a government as
ours? Must we rush on to disunion, and civil wars, and servile wars,
till all their train of horrors pass over us like devouring fire?

There is an influence that can avert these dangers--a spirit that can
allay the storm--that can say to the troubled winds and waters, "peace,
be still."

It is that spirit which is gentle and easy to be entreated, which
thinketh no evil, which rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the
truth, which is not easily provoked, which hopeth all things, which
beareth all things. Let this spirit be infused into the mass of the
nation, and then truth may be sought, defended, and propagated, and
error detected, and its evils exposed; and yet we may escape the evils
that now rage through this nation, and threaten us with such fiery
plagues.

And is there not a peculiar propriety in such an emergency, in looking
for the especial agency and assistance of females, who are shut out from
the many temptations that assail the other sex,--who are the appointed
ministers of all the gentler charities of life,--who are mingled
throughout the whole mass of the community,--who dwell in those
retirements where only peace and love ought ever to enter,--whose
comfort, influence, and dearest blessings, all depend on preserving
peace and good will among men?

In the present aspect of affairs among us, when everything seems to be
tending to disunion and distraction, it surely has become the duty of
every female instantly to relinquish the attitude of a partisan, in
every matter of clashing interests, and to assume the office of a
mediator, and an advocate of peace. And to do this, it is not necessary
that a woman should in any manner relinquish her opinion as to the
evils or the benefits, the right or the wrong, of any principle or
practice. But, while quietly holding her own opinions, and calmly
avowing them, when conscience and integrity make the duty imperative,
every female can employ her influence, not for the purpose of exciting
or regulating public sentiment, but rather for the purpose of promoting
a spirit of candour, forbearance, charity, and peace.

And there are certain prominent maxims which every woman can adopt as
peculiarly belonging to her, as the advocate of charity and peace, and
which it should be her especial office to illustrate, enforce, and
sustain, by every method in her power.

The first is, that every person ought to be sustained, not only in the
right of propagating his own opinions and practices, but in opposing all
those principles and practices which he deems erroneous. For there is no
opinion which a man can propagate, that does not oppose some adverse
interest; and if a man must cease to advocate his own views of truth and
rectitude, because he opposes the interest or prejudices of some other
man or party, all freedom of opinion, of speech, and of action, is gone.
All that can be demanded is, that a man shall not resort to falsehood,
false reasoning, or to attacks on character, in maintaining his own
rights. If he states things which are false, it is right to show the
falsehood,--if he reasons falsely, it is right to point out his
sophistry,--if he impeaches the character or motives of opponents, it is
right to express disapprobation and disgust; but if he uses only facts,
arguments, and persuasions, he is to be honoured and sustained for all
the efforts he makes to uphold what he deems to be right, and to put
down what he believes to be wrong.

Another maxim, which is partially involved in the first, is, that every
man ought to allow his own principles and practices to be freely
discussed, with patience and magnanimity, and not to complain of
persecution, or to attack the character or motives of those who claim
that he is in the wrong. If he is belied, if his character is impeached,
if his motives are assailed, if his intellectual capabilities are made
the objects of sneers or commiseration, he has a right to complain, and
to seek sympathy as an injured man; but no man is a consistent friend
and defender of liberty of speech, who cannot bear to have his own
principles and practices subjected to the same ordeal as he demands
should be imposed on others.

Another maxim of peace and charity is, that every man's own testimony is
to be taken in regard to his motives, feelings, and intentions. Though
we may fear that a fellow-man is mistaken in his views of his own
feelings, or that he does not speak the truth, it is as contrary to the
rules of good breeding as it is to the laws of Christianity, to assume
or even insinuate that this is the case. If a man's word cannot be taken
in regard to his own motives, feelings, and intentions, he can find no
redress for the wrong that may be done to him. It is unjust and
unreasonable in the extreme to take any other course than the one here
urged.

Another most important maxim of candour and charity is, that when we are
to assign motives for the conduct of our fellow-men, especially of
those who oppose our interests, we are obligated to put the best, rather
than the worst construction, on all they say and do. Instead of
assigning the worst as the probable motive, it is always a duty to
_hope_ that it is the best, until evidence is so unequivocal that there
is no place for such a hope.

Another maxim of peace and charity respects the subject of
_retaliation_. Whatever may be said respecting the literal construction
of some of the rules of the gospel, no one can deny that they do,
whether figurative or not, forbid retaliation and revenge; that they do
assume that men are not to be judges and executioners of their own
wrongs; but that injuries are to be borne with meekness, and that
retributive justice must be left to God, and to the laws. If a man
strikes, we are not to return the blow, but appeal to the laws. If a man
uses abusive or invidious language, we are not to return railing for
railing. If a man impeaches our motives and attacks our character, we
are not to return the evil. If a man sneers and ridicules, we are not to
retaliate with ridicule and sneers. If a man reports our weaknesses and
failings, we are not to revenge ourselves by reporting his. No man has a
right to report evil of others, except when the justification of the
innocent, or a regard for public or individual safety, demands it. This
is the strict law of the gospel, inscribed in all its pages, and meeting
in the face all those unchristian and indecent violations that now are
so common, in almost every conflict of intellect or of interest.

Another most important maxim of peace and charity imposes the obligation
to guard our fellow-men from all unnecessary temptation. We are taught
daily to pray, "lead us not into temptation;" and thus are admonished
not only to avoid all unnecessary temptation ourselves, but to save our
fellow-men from the danger. Can we ask our Heavenly Parent to protect us
from temptation, while we recklessly spread baits and snares for our
fellow-men? No, we are bound in every measure to have a tender regard
for the weaknesses and liabilities of all around, and ever to be ready
to yield even our just rights, when we can lawfully do it, rather than
to tempt others to sin. The generous and high-minded Apostle declares,
"if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
standeth;" and it is the spirit of this maxim that every Christian ought
to cultivate. There are no occasions when this maxim is more needed,
than when we wish to modify the opinions, or alter the practices of our
fellow-men. If, in such cases, we find that the probabilities are, that
any interference of ours will increase the power of temptation, and lead
to greater evils than those we wish to remedy, we are bound to forbear.
If we find that one mode of attempting a measure will increase the power
of temptation, and another will not involve this danger, we are bound to
take the safest course. In all cases we are obligated to be as careful
to protect our fellow-men from temptation, as we are to watch and pray
against it in regard to ourselves.

Another maxim of peace and charity requires a most scrupulous regard to
the reputation, character, and feelings of our fellow-men, and
especially of those who are opposed in any way to our wishes and
interests. Every man and every woman feels that it is wrong for others
to propagate their faults and weakness through the community. Every one
feels wounded and injured to find that others are making his defects and
infirmities the subject of sneers and ridicule. And what, then, is the
rule of duty? "As ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them." With this rule before his eyes and in his mind, can a man retail
his neighbour's faults, or sneer at his deficiencies, or ridicule his
infirmities, with a clear conscience? There are cases when the safety of
individuals, or public justice, demands that a man's defects of
character, or crimes, be made public; but no man is justified in
communicating to others any evil respecting any of his fellow-men, when
he cannot appeal to God as his witness that he does it from benevolent
interest in the welfare of his fellow-men--from a desire to save
individuals or the public from some evil--and not from a malevolent or
gossiping propensity. Oh, that this law of love and charity could find
an illustration and an advocate in every female of this nation! Oh, that
every current slander, and every injurious report, might stand abashed,
whenever it meets the notice of a woman!

These are the maxims of peace and charity, which it is in the power of
the females of our country to advocate, both by example and by
entreaties. These are the principles which alone can protect and
preserve the right of free discussion, the freedom of speech, and
liberty of the press. And with our form of government, and our
liabilities to faction and party-spirit, the country will be safe and
happy only in proportion to the prevalence of these maxims among the
mass of the community. There probably will never arrive a period in the
history of this nation, when the influence of these principles will be
more needed, than the present. The question of slavery involves more
pecuniary interests, touches more private relations, involves more
prejudices, is entwined with more sectional, party, and political
interests, than any other which can ever again arise. It is a matter
which, if discussed and controlled without the influence of these
principles of charity and peace, will shake this nation like an
earthquake, and pour over us the volcanic waves of every terrific
passion. The trembling earth, the low murmuring thunders, already
admonish us of our danger; and if females can exert any saving influence
in this emergency, it is time for them to awake.

And there are topics that they may urge upon the attention of their
friends, at least as matters worthy of serious consideration and
inquiry.

Is a woman surrounded by those who favour the Abolition measures? Can
she not with propriety urge such inquiries as these?

Is not slavery to be brought to an end by free discussion, and is it not
a war upon the right of free discussion to impeach the motives and
depreciate the character of the opposers of Abolition measures? When the
opposers of Abolition movements claim that they honestly and sincerely
believe that these measures tend to perpetuate slavery, or to bring it
to an end by servile wars, and civil disunion, and the most terrific
miseries--when they object to the use of their pulpits, to the embodying
of literary students, to the agitation of the community, by Abolition
agents--when they object to the circulation of such papers and tracts as
Abolitionists prepare, because they believe them most pernicious in
their influence and tendencies, is it not as much persecution to use
invidious insinuations, depreciating accusation and impeachment of
motive, in order to intimidate, as it is for the opposers of
Abolitionism to use physical force? Is not the only method by which the
South can be brought to relinquish slavery, a conviction that not only
her _duty_, but her highest _interest_, requires her to do it? And is
not _calm, rational Christian_ discussion the only proper method of
securing this end? Can a community that are thrown into such a state of
high exasperation as now exists at the South, ever engage in such
discussions, till the storm of excitement and passion is allayed? Ought
not every friend of liberty and of free discussion, to take every
possible means to soothe exasperated feelings, and to avoid all those
offensive peculiarities that in their nature tend to inflame and offend?

Is a woman among those who oppose Abolition movements? She can urge such
inquiries as these: Ought not Abolitionists to be treated as if they
were actuated by the motives of benevolence which they profess? Ought
not every patriot and every Christian to throw all his influence against
the impeachment of motives, the personal detraction, and the violent
measures that are turned upon this body of men, who, however they may
err in judgment or in spirit, are among the most exemplary and
benevolent in the land? If Abolitionists are censurable for taking
measures that exasperate rather than convince and persuade, are not
their opponents, who take exactly the same measures to exasperate
Abolitionists and their friends, as much to blame? If Abolitionism
prospers by the abuse of its advocates, are not the authors of this
abuse accountable for the increase of the very evils they deprecate?

It is the opinion of intelligent and well informed men, that a very
large proportion of the best members of the Abolition party were placed
there, not by the arguments of Abolitionists, but by the abuse of their
opposers. And I know some of the noblest minds that stand there, chiefly
from the influence of those generous impulses that defend the injured
and sustain the persecuted, while many others have joined these ranks
from the impression that Abolitionism and the right of free discussion
have become identical interests. Although I cannot perceive why the
right of free discussion, the right of petition, and other rights that
have become involved in this matter, cannot be sustained without joining
an association that has sustained such injurious action and such
erroneous principles, yet other minds, and those which are worthy of
esteem, have been led to an opposite conclusion.

The South, in the moments of angry excitement, have made unreasonable
demands upon the non-slave-holding States, and have employed overbearing
and provoking language. This has provoked re-action again at the North,
and men, who heretofore were unexcited, are beginning to feel
indignant, and to say, "Let the Union be sundered." Thus anger begets
anger, and unreasonable measures provoke equally unreasonable returns.

But when men, in moments of excitement rush on to such results, little
do they think of the momentous consequences that may follow. Suppose the
South in her anger unites with Texas, and forms a Southern slave-holding
republic, under all the exasperating influences that such an avulsion
will excite? What will be the prospects of the slave then, compared with
what they are while we dwell together, united by all the ties of
brotherhood, and having free access to those whom we wish to convince
and persuade?

But who can estimate the mischiefs that we must encounter while this
dismemberment, this tearing asunder of the joints and members of the
body politic, is going on? What will be the commotion and dismay, when
all our sources of wealth, prosperity, and comfort, are turned to
occasions for angry and selfish strife?

What agitation will ensue in individual States, when it is to be decided
by majorities which State shall go to the North and which to the South,
and when the discontented minority must either give up or fight! Who
shall divide our public lands between contending factions? What shall be
done with our navy and all the various items of the nation's property?
What shall be done when the post-office stops its steady movement to
divide its efforts among contending parties? What shall be done when
public credit staggers, when commerce furls her slackened sail, when
property all over the nation changes its owners and relations? What
shall be done with our canals and railways, now the bands of love to
bind us, then the causes of contention and jealousy? What umpire will
appear to settle all these questions of interest and strife, between
communities thrown asunder by passion, pride, and mutual injury?

It is said that the American people, though heedless and sometimes
reckless at the approach of danger, are endowed with a strong and
latent principle of common sense, which, when they fairly approach the
precipice, always brings them to a stand, and makes them as wise to
devise a remedy as they were rash in hastening to the danger. Are we not
approaching the very verge of the precipice? Can we not already hear the
roar of the waters below? Is not now the time, if ever, when our stern
principles and sound common sense must wake to the rescue?

Cannot the South be a little more patient under the injurious action
that she feels she has suffered, and cease demanding those concessions
from the North, that never will be made? For the North, though slower to
manifest feeling, is as sensitive to her right of freedom of speech, as
the South can be to her rights of property.

Cannot the North bear with some unreasonable action from the South, when
it is remembered that, as the provocation came from the North, it is
wise and Christian that the aggressive party should not so strictly
hold their tempted brethren to the rules of right and reason?

Cannot the South bear in mind that at the North the colour of the skin
does not take away the feeling of brotherhood, and though it is a badge
of degradation in station and intellect, yet it is oftener regarded with
pity and sympathy than with contempt? Cannot the South remember their
generous feelings for the Greeks and Poles, and imagine that some such
feelings may be awakened for the African race, among a people who do not
believe either in the policy or the right of slavery?

Cannot the North remember how jealous every man feels of his domestic
relations and rights, and how sorely their Southern brethren are tried
in these respects? How would the husbands and fathers at the North
endure it, if Southern associations should be formed to bring forth to
the world the sins of Northern men, as husbands and fathers? What if the
South should send to the North to collect all the sins and neglects of
Northern husbands and fathers, to retail them at the South in tracts
and periodicals? What if the English nation should join in the outcry,
and English females should send forth an agent, not indeed to visit the
offending North, but to circulate at the South, denouncing all who did
not join in this crusade, as the defenders of bad husbands and bad
fathers? How would Northern men conduct under such provocations? There
is indeed a difference in the two cases, but it is not in the nature and
amount of irritating influence, for the Southerner feels the
interference of strangers to regulate his domestic duty to his servants,
as much as the Northern man would feel the same interference in regard
to his wife and children. Do not Northern men owe a debt of forbearance
and sympathy toward their Southern brethren, who have been so sorely
tried?

It is by urging these considerations, and by exhibiting and advocating
the principles of charity and peace, that females may exert a wise and
appropriate influence, and one which will most certainly tend to bring
to an end, not only slavery, but unnumbered other evils and wrongs. No
one can object to such an influence, but all parties will bid God speed
to every woman who modestly, wisely and benevolently attempts it.

I do not suppose that any Abolitionists are to be deterred by any thing
I can offer, from prosecuting the course of measures they have adopted.
They doubtless will continue to agitate the subject, and to form
voluntary associations all over the land, in order to excite public
sentiment at the North against the moral evils existing at the South.
Yet I cannot but hope that some considerations may have influence to
modify in a degree the spirit and measures of some who are included in
that party.

Abolitionists are men who come before the public in the character of
_reprovers_. That the gospel requires Christians sometimes to assume
this office, cannot be denied; but it does as unequivocally point out
those qualifications which alone can entitle a man to do it. And no man
acts wisely or consistently, unless he can satisfy himself that he
possesses the qualifications for this duty, before he assumes it.

The first of these qualifications is more than common exemption from the
faults that are reproved. The inspired interrogatory, "thou therefore
which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?" enforces this
principle; and the maxim of common sense, that "reprovers must have
clean hands," is no less unequivocal. Abolitionists are reprovers for
the violation of duties in the domestic relations. Of course they are
men who are especially bound to be exemplary in the discharge of all
their domestic duties. If a man cannot govern his temper and his tongue;
if he inflicts that moral castigation on those who cross his will, which
is more severe than physical stripes; if he is overbearing or exacting
with those under his control; if he cannot secure respect for a kind and
faithful discharge of all his social and relative duties, it is as
unwise and improper for him to join an Abolition Society, as it would be
for a drunkard to preach temperance, or a slave-holder Abolitionism.

Another indispensable requisite for the office of reprover is a
character distinguished for humility and meekness. There is nothing more
difficult than to approach men for the purpose of convincing them of
their own deficiencies and faults; and whoever attempts it in a
self-complacent and dictatorial spirit, always does more evil than good.
However exemplary a man may be in the sight of men, there is abundant
cause for the exercise of humility. For a man is to judge of himself,
not by a comparison with other men, but as he stands before God, when
compared with a perfect law, and in reference to all his peculiar
opportunities and restraints. Who is there that in this comparison,
cannot find cause for the deepest humiliation? Who can go from the
presence of Infinite Purity after such an investigation, to "take his
brother by the throat?" Who rather, should not go to a brother, who may
have sinned, with the deepest sympathy and love, as one who, amid
greater temptations and with fewer advantages, may be the least offender
of the two? A man who goes with this spirit, has the best hope of doing
good to those who may offend. And yet even this spirit will not always
save a man from angry retort, vexatious insinuation, jealous suspicion,
and the misconstruction of his motives. A reprover, therefore, if he
would avoid a quarrel and do the good he aims to secure, must be
possessed of that meekness which can receive evil for good, with patient
benevolence. And a man is not fitted for the duties of a reprover, until
he can bring his feelings under this control.

The last, and not the least important requisite for a reprover, is
_discretion_. This is no where so much needed as in cases where the
domestic relations are concerned, for here is the place above all
others, where men are most sensitive and unreasonable. There are none
who have more opportunities for learning this, than those who act as
teachers, especially if they feel the responsibility of a Christian and
a friend, in regard to the moral interests of pupils. A teacher who
shares with parents the responsibilities of educating their children,
whose efforts may all be rendered useless by parental influences at
home; who feels an affectionate interest in both parent and child, is
surely the one who might seem to have a right to seek, and a chance of
success in seeking, some modifications of domestic influences. And yet
teachers will probably testify, that it is a most discouraging task, and
often as likely to result in jealous alienation and the loss of
influence over both parent and child, as in any good. It is one of the
greatest compliments that can be paid to the good sense and the good
feeling of a parent to dare to attempt any such measure. This may show
how much discretion, and tact, and delicacy, are needed by those who aim
to rectify evils in the domestic relations of mankind.

The peculiar qualifications, then, which make it suitable for a man to
be an Abolitionist are, an exemplary discharge of all the domestic
duties; humility, meekness, delicacy, tact, and discretion, and these
should especially be the distinctive traits of those who take the place
of _leaders_ in devising measures.

And in performing these difficult and self-denying duties, there are no
men who need more carefully to study the character and imitate the
example of the Redeemer of mankind. He, indeed, was the searcher of
hearts, and those reproofs which were based on the perfect knowledge of
"all that is in man," we may not imitate. But we may imitate him, where
he with so much gentleness, patience, and pitying love, encountered the
weakness, the rashness, the selfishness, the worldliness of men. When
the young man came with such self-complacency to ask what more he could
do, how kindly he was received, how gently convinced of his great
deficiency! When fire would have been called from heaven by his angry
followers, how forbearing the rebuke! When denied and forsaken with
oaths and curses by one of his nearest friends, what was it but a look
of pitying love that sent the disciple out so bitterly to weep? When, in
his last extremity of sorrow, his friends all fell asleep, how gently
he drew over them the mantle of love! Oh blessed Saviour, impart more of
thy own spirit to those who profess to follow thee!


                                THE END.


    +------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |Transcriber's Notes.                                              |
    |                                                                  |
    |                                                                  |
    |The following changes were made to the original text (correction  |
    |in brackets):                                                     |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page   3: to this request, MISS GRIMKE's(Grimke) Address was      |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page  19: associated CLARKSON, SHARPE, MACAULEY(Macaulay), and    |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page  44: (than) it is with "sheep-stealer." But Abolitionists    |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page  53: Secondly,(.) To make them willing to relinquish         |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page  59: sustained this trafic(traffic), in that nation. What    |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page  71: visiter's(visitor's) intention to devote himself to this|
    |                                                                  |
    |Page  77: Footnote 3: suffer from such persecution;(") and he     |
    |honourably and nobly                                              |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page  84: Mr. Clarkson continued his efficient                    |
    |co-opetion(co-operation)                                          |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page 101: so benevolent in feeling and action;(,) that her        |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page 108: when she cannot please, or by petulent(petulant)        |
    |complaints                                                        |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page 112: Every man is saying, "let(Let) me have                  |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page 124: and prejudiced bigot.(")                                |
    |                                                                  |
    |Page 134: tempation(temptation), and lead to greater evils than   |
    +------------------------------------------------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of An Essay on Slavery and Abolitionism, by
Catharine E. Beecher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAY - SLAVERY AND ABOLITIONISM ***

***** This file should be named 26123.txt or 26123.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/1/2/26123/

Produced by K Nordquist, Emanuela Piasentini and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
ee*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 11181 ***

CAPTAINS ALL

By W.W. Jacobs



CAPTAINS ALL

[Illustration: "Captains All."]

Every sailorman grumbles about the sea, said the night-watchman,
thoughtfully.  It's human nature to grumble, and I s'pose they keep on
grumbling and sticking to it because there ain't much else they can do.
There's not many shore-going berths that a sailorman is fit for, and
those that they are--such as a night-watchman's, for instance--wants such
a good character that there's few as are to equal it.

Sometimes they get things to do ashore.  I knew one man that took up
butchering, and 'e did very well at it till the police took him up.
Another man I knew gave up the sea to marry a washerwoman, and they
hadn't been married six months afore she died, and back he 'ad to go to
sea agin, pore chap.

A man who used to grumble awful about the sea was old Sam Small--a man
I've spoke of to you before.  To hear 'im go on about the sea, arter he
'ad spent four or five months' money in a fortnight, was 'artbreaking.
He used to ask us wot was going to happen to 'im in his old age, and when
we pointed out that he wouldn't be likely to 'ave any old age if he
wasn't more careful of 'imself he used to fly into a temper and call us
everything 'e could lay his tongue to.

One time when 'e was ashore with Peter Russet and Ginger Dick he seemed
to 'ave got it on the brain.  He started being careful of 'is money
instead o' spending it, and three mornings running he bought a newspaper
and read the advertisements, to see whether there was any comfortable
berth for a strong, good-'arted man wot didn't like work.

He actually went arter one situation, and, if it hadn't ha' been for
seventy-nine other men, he said he believed he'd ha' had a good chance of
getting it.  As it was, all 'e got was a black eye for shoving another
man, and for a day or two he was so down-'arted that 'e was no company at
all for the other two.

For three or four days 'e went out by 'imself, and then, all of a sudden,
Ginger Dick and Peter began to notice a great change in him.  He seemed
to 'ave got quite cheerful and 'appy.  He answered 'em back pleasant when
they spoke to 'im, and one night he lay in 'is bed whistling comic songs
until Ginger and Peter Russet 'ad to get out o' bed to him.  When he
bought a new necktie and a smart cap and washed 'imself twice in one day
they fust began to ask each other wot was up, and then they asked him.

"Up?" ses Sam; "nothing."

"He's in love," ses Peter Russet.

"You're a liar," ses Sam, without turning round.

"He'll 'ave it bad at 'is age," ses Ginger.

Sam didn't say nothing, but he kept fidgeting about as though 'e'd got
something on his mind.  Fust he looked out o' the winder, then he 'ummed
a tune, and at last, looking at 'em very fierce, he took a tooth-brush
wrapped in paper out of 'is pocket and began to clean 'is teeth.

"He is in love," ses Ginger, as soon as he could speak.

"Or else 'e's gorn mad," ses Peter, watching 'im.  "Which is it, Sam?"

Sam made believe that he couldn't answer 'im because o' the tooth-brush,
and arter he'd finished he 'ad such a raging toothache that 'e sat in a
corner holding 'is face and looking the pictur' o' misery.  They couldn't
get a word out of him till they asked 'im to go out with them, and then
he said 'e was going to bed.  Twenty minutes arterwards, when Ginger Dick
stepped back for 'is pipe, he found he 'ad gorn.

He tried the same game next night, but the other two wouldn't 'ave it,
and they stayed in so long that at last 'e lost 'is temper, and, arter
wondering wot Ginger's father and mother could ha' been a-thinking about,
and saying that he believed Peter Russet 'ad been changed at birth for a
sea-sick monkey, he put on 'is cap and went out.  Both of 'em follered
'im sharp, but when he led 'em to a mission-hall, and actually went
inside, they left 'im and went off on their own.

They talked it over that night between themselves, and next evening they
went out fust and hid themselves round the corner.  Ten minutes
arterwards old Sam came out, walking as though 'e was going to catch a
train; and smiling to think 'ow he 'ad shaken them off.  At the corner of
Commercial Road he stopped and bought 'imself a button-hole for 'is coat,
and Ginger was so surprised that 'e pinched Peter Russet to make sure
that he wasn't dreaming.

Old Sam walked straight on whistling, and every now and then looking down
at 'is button-hole, until by-and-by he turned down a street on the right
and went into a little shop.  Ginger Dick and Peter waited for 'im at the
corner, but he was inside for so long that at last they got tired o'
waiting and crept up and peeped through the winder.

It was a little tobacconist's shop, with newspapers and penny toys and
such-like; but, as far as Ginger could see through two rows o' pipes and
the Police News, it was empty.  They stood there with their noses pressed
against the glass for some time, wondering wot had 'appened to Sam, but
by-and-by a little boy went in and then they began to 'ave an idea wot
Sam's little game was.

As the shop-bell went the door of a little parlour at the back of the
shop opened, and a stout and uncommon good-looking woman of about forty
came out.  Her 'ead pushed the _Police News_ out o' the way and her 'and
came groping into the winder arter a toy.

Ginger 'ad a good look at 'er out o' the corner of one eye, while he
pretended to be looking at a tobacco-jar with the other.  As the little
boy came out 'im and Peter Russet went in.

"I want a pipe, please," he ses, smiling at 'er; "a clay pipe--one o' your
best."  The woman handed 'im down a box to choose from, and just then
Peter, wot 'ad been staring in at the arf-open door at a boot wot wanted
lacing up, gave a big start and ses, "Why!  Halloa!"

"Wot's the matter?" ses the woman, looking at 'im.

"I'd know that foot anywhere," ses Peter, still staring at it; and the
words was hardly out of 'is mouth afore the foot 'ad moved itself away
and tucked itself under its chair.  "Why, that's my dear old friend Sam
Small, ain't it?"

"Do you know the captin?" ses the woman, smiling at 'im.

"Cap----?" ses Peter.  "Cap----?  Oh, yes; why, he's the biggest friend
I've got."  "'Ow strange!" ses the woman.

"We've been wanting to see 'im for some time," ses Ginger.  "He was kind
enough to lend me arf a crown the other day, and I've been wanting to pay
'im."

"Captin Small," ses the woman, pushing open the door, "here's some old
friends o' yours."

Old Sam turned 'is face round and looked at 'em, and if looks could ha'
killed, as the saying is, they'd ha' been dead men there and then.

"Oh, yes," he ses, in a choking voice; "'ow are you?"

"Pretty well, thank you, captin," ses Ginger, grinning at 'im; "and 'ow's
yourself arter all this long time?"

He held out 'is hand and Sam shook it, and then shook 'ands with Peter
Russet, who was grinning so 'ard that he couldn't speak.

"These are two old friends o' mine, Mrs. Finch," ses old Sam, giving 'em
a warning look; "Captin Dick and Captin Russet, two o' the oldest and
best friends a man ever 'ad."

"Captin Dick 'as got arf a crown for you," ses Peter Russet, still
grinning.

"There now," ses Ginger, looking vexed, "if I ain't been and forgot it;
I've on'y got arf a sovereign."

"I can give you change, sir," ses Mrs. Finch.  "P'r'aps you'd like to sit
down for five minutes?"

Ginger thanked 'er, and 'im and Peter Russet took a chair apiece in front
o' the fire and began asking old Sam about 'is 'ealth, and wot he'd been
doing since they saw 'im last.

"Fancy your reckernizing his foot," ses Mrs. Finch, coming in with the
change.

"I'd know it anywhere," ses Peter, who was watching Ginger pretending to
give Sam Small the 'arf-dollar, and Sam pretending in a most lifelike
manner to take it.

Ginger Dick looked round the room.  It was a comfortable little place,
with pictures on the walls and antimacassars on all the chairs, and a row
of pink vases on the mantelpiece.  Then 'e looked at Mrs. Finch, and
thought wot a nice-looking woman she was.

"This is nicer than being aboard ship with a crew o' nasty, troublesome
sailormen to look arter, Captin Small," he ses.

"It's wonderful the way he manages 'em," ses Peter Russet to Mrs. Finch.
"Like a lion he is."

"A roaring lion," ses Ginger, looking at Sam.  "He don't know wot fear
is."

Sam began to smile, and Mrs. Finch looked at 'im so pleased that Peter
Russet, who 'ad been looking at 'er and the room, and thinking much the
same way as Ginger, began to think that they was on the wrong tack.

"Afore 'e got stout and old," he ses, shaking his 'ead, "there wasn't a
smarter skipper afloat."

"We all 'ave our day," ses Ginger, shaking his 'ead too.

"I dessay he's good for another year or two afloat, yet," ses Peter
Russet, considering.  "With care," ses Ginger.

Old Sam was going to say something, but 'e stopped himself just in time.
"They will 'ave their joke," he ses, turning to Mrs. Finch and trying to
smile.  "I feel as young as ever I did."

Mrs. Finch said that anybody with arf an eye could see that, and then she
looked at a kettle that was singing on the 'ob.

"I s'pose you gentlemen wouldn't care for a cup o' cocoa?" she ses,
turning to them.

Ginger Dick and Peter both said that they liked it better than anything
else, and, arter she 'ad got out the cups and saucers and a tin o' cocoa,
Ginger held the kettle and poured the water in the cups while she stirred
them, and old Sam sat looking on 'elpless.

"It does seem funny to see you drinking cocoa, captin," ses Ginger, as
old Sam took his cup.

"Ho!" ses Sam, firing up; "and why, if I might make so bold as to ask?"

"'Cos I've generally seen you drinking something out of a bottle," ses
Ginger.

"Now, look 'ere," ses Sam, starting up and spilling some of the hot cocoa
over 'is lap.

"A ginger-beer bottle," ses Peter Russet, making faces at Ginger to keep
quiet.

"Yes, o' course, that's wot I meant," ses Ginger.

Old Sam wiped the cocoa off 'is knees without saying a word, but his
weskit kept going up and down till Peter Russet felt quite sorry for 'im.

"There's nothing like it," he ses to Mrs. Finch.  "It was by sticking to
ginger-beer and milk and such-like that Captain Small 'ad command of a
ship afore 'e was twenty-five."

"Lor'!" ses Mrs. Finch.

She smiled at old Sam till Peter got uneasy agin, and began to think
p'r'aps 'e'd been praising 'im too much.

"Of course, I'm speaking of long ago now," he ses.

"Years and years afore you was born, ma'am," ses Ginger.

Old Sam was going to say something, but Mrs. Finch looked so pleased that
'e thought better of it.  Some o' the cocoa 'e was drinking went the
wrong way, and then Ginger patted 'im on the back and told 'im to be
careful not to bring on 'is brownchitis agin.  Wot with temper and being
afraid to speak for fear they should let Mrs. Finch know that 'e wasn't a
captin, he could 'ardly bear 'imself, but he very near broke out when
Peter Russet advised 'im to 'ave his weskit lined with red flannel.  They
all stayed on till closing time, and by the time they left they 'ad made
theirselves so pleasant that Mrs. Finch said she'd be pleased to see them
any time they liked to look in.

Sam Small waited till they 'ad turned the corner, and then he broke out
so alarming that they could 'ardly do anything with 'im.  Twice policemen
spoke to 'im and advised 'im to go home afore they altered their minds;
and he 'ad to hold 'imself in and keep quiet while Ginger and Peter
Russet took 'is arms and said they were seeing him 'ome.

He started the row agin when they got in-doors, and sat up in 'is bed
smacking 'is lips over the things he'd like to 'ave done to them if he
could.  And then, arter saying 'ow he'd like to see Ginger boiled alive
like a lobster, he said he knew that 'e was a noble-'arted feller who
wouldn't try and cut an old pal out, and that it was a case of love at
first sight on top of a tram-car.

"She's too young for you," ses Ginger; "and too good-looking besides."

"It's the nice little bisness he's fallen in love with, Ginger," ses
Peter Russet.  "I'll toss you who 'as it."

Ginger, who was siting on the foot o' Sam's bed, said "no" at fust, but
arter a time he pulled out arf a dollar and spun it in the air.

That was the last 'e see of it, although he 'ad Sam out o' bed and all
the clothes stripped off of it twice.  He spent over arf an hour on his
'ands and knees looking for it, and Sam said when he was tired of playing
bears p'r'aps he'd go to bed and get to sleep like a Christian.

They 'ad it all over agin next morning, and at last, as nobody would
agree to keep quiet and let the others 'ave a fair chance, they made up
their minds to let the best man win.  Ginger Dick bought a necktie that
took all the colour out o' Sam's, and Peter Russet went in for a collar
so big that 'e was lost in it.

They all strolled into the widow's shop separate that night.  Ginger Dick
'ad smashed his pipe and wanted another; Peter Russet wanted some
tobacco; and old Sam Small walked in smiling, with a little silver brooch
for 'er, that he said 'e had picked up.

It was a very nice brooch, and Mrs. Finch was so pleased with it that
Ginger and Peter sat there as mad as they could be because they 'adn't
thought of the same thing.

"Captain Small is very lucky at finding things," ses Ginger, at last.

"He's got the name for it," ses Peter Russet.

"It's a handy 'abit," ses Ginger; "it saves spending money.  Who did you
give that gold bracelet to you picked up the other night, captin?" he
ses, turning to Sam.

"Gold bracelet?" ses Sam.  "I didn't pick up no gold bracelet.  Wot are
you talking about?"

"All right, captin; no offence," ses Ginger, holding up his 'and.  "I
dreamt I saw one  on your mantelpiece, I s'pose.  P'r'aps I oughtn't to
ha' said anything about it."

Old Sam looked as though he'd like to eat 'im, especially as he noticed
Mrs. Finch listening and pretending not to.  "Oh! that one," he ses,
arter a bit o' hard thinking.  "Oh! I found out who it belonged to.  You
wouldn't believe 'ow pleased they was at getting it back agin."

Ginger Dick coughed and began to think as 'ow old Sam was sharper than he
'ad given 'im credit for, but afore he could think of anything else to
say Mrs. Finch looked at old Sam and began to talk about 'is ship, and to
say 'ow much she should like to see over it.

"I wish I could take you," ses Sam, looking at the other two out o' the
corner of his eye, "but my ship's over at Dunkirk, in France.  I've just
run over to London for a week or two to look round."

"And mine's there too," ses Peter Russet, speaking a'most afore old Sam
'ad finished; "side by side they lay in the harbour."

"Oh, dear," ses Mrs. Finch, folding her 'ands and shaking her 'cad.  "I
should like to go over a ship one arternoon.  I'd quite made up my mind
to it, knowing three captins."

She smiled and looked at Ginger; and Sam and Peter looked at 'im too,
wondering whether he was going to berth his ship at Dunkirk alongside o'
theirs.

"Ah, I wish I 'ad met you a fortnight ago," ses Ginger, very sad.  "I
gave up my ship, the High flyer, then, and I'm waiting for one my owners
are 'aving built for me at New-castle.  They said the High flyer wasn't
big enough for me.  She was a nice little ship, though.  I believe I've
got 'er picture somewhere about me!"

He felt in 'is pocket and pulled out a little, crumpled-up photograph of
a ship he'd been fireman aboard of some years afore, and showed it to
'er.

"That's me standing on the bridge," he ses, pointing out a little dot
with the stem of 'is pipe.

"It's your figger," ses Mrs. Finch, straining her eyes.  "I should know
it anywhere."

"You've got wonderful eyes, ma'am," ses old Sam, choking with 'is pipe.

"Anybody can see that," ses Ginger.  "They're the largest and the bluest
I've ever seen."

Mrs. Finch told 'im not to talk nonsense, but both Sam and Peter Russet
could see 'ow pleased she was.

"Truth is truth," ses Ginger.  "I'm a plain man, and I speak my mind."

"Blue is my fav'rit' colour," ses old Sam, in a tender voice.  "True
blue."

Peter Russet began to feel out of it.  "I thought brown was," he ses.

"Ho!" ses Sam, turning on 'im; "and why?"

"I 'ad my reasons," ses Peter, nodding, and shutting 'is mouth very firm.

"I thought brown was 'is fav'rit colour too," ses Ginger.  "I don't know
why.  It's no use asking me; because if you did I couldn't tell you."

"Brown's a very nice colour," ses Mrs. Finch, wondering wot was the
matter with old Sam.

"Blue," ses Ginger; "big blue eyes--they're the ones for me.  Other
people may 'ave their blacks and their browns," he ses, looking at Sam
and Peter Russet, "but give me blue."

They went on like that all the evening, and every time the shop-bell went
and the widow 'ad to go out to serve a customer they said in w'ispers wot
they thought of each other; and once when she came back rather sudden
Ginger 'ad to explain to 'er that 'e was showing Peter Russet a scratch
on his knuckle.

Ginger Dick was the fust there next night, and took 'er a little chiney
teapot he 'ad picked up dirt cheap because it was cracked right acrost
the middle; but, as he explained that he 'ad dropped it in hurrying to
see 'er, she was just as pleased.  She stuck it up on the mantelpiece,
and the things she said about Ginger's kindness and generosity made Peter
Russet spend good money that he wanted for 'imself on a painted
flower-pot next evening.

With three men all courting 'er at the same time Mrs. Finch had 'er hands
full, but she took to it wonderful considering.  She was so nice and kind
to 'em all that even arter a week's 'ard work none of 'em was really
certain which she liked best.

They took to going in at odd times o' the day for tobacco and such-like.
They used to go alone then, but they all met and did the polite to each
other there of an evening, and then quarrelled all the way 'ome.

Then all of a sudden, without any warning, Ginger Dick and Peter Russet
left off going there.  The fust evening Sam sat expecting them every
minute, and was so surprised that he couldn't take any advantage of it;
but on the second, beginning by squeezing Mrs. Finch's 'and at ha'-past
seven, he 'ad got best part of his arm round 'er waist by a quarter to
ten.  He didn't do more that night because she told him to be'ave
'imself, and threatened to scream if he didn't leave off.

He was arf-way home afore 'e thought of the reason for Ginger Dick and
Peter Russet giving up, and then he went along smiling to 'imself to such
an extent that people thought 'e was mad.  He went off to sleep with the
smile still on 'is lips, and when Peter and Ginger came in soon arter
closing time and 'e woke up and asked them where they'd been, 'e was
still smiling.

"I didn't 'ave the pleasure o' seeing you at Mrs. Finch's to-night," he
ses.

"No," ses Ginger, very short.  "We got tired of it."

"So un'ealthy sitting in that stuffy little room every evening," ses
Peter.

Old Sam put his 'ead under the bedclothes and laughed till the bed shook;
and every now and then he'd put his 'ead out and look at Peter and Ginger
and laugh agin till he choked.

"I see 'ow it is," he ses, sitting up and wiping his eyes on the sheet.
"Well, we cant all win."

"Wot d'ye mean?" ses Ginger, very disagreeable.

"She wouldn't 'ave you, Sam, thats wot I mean. And I don't wonder at
it.  I wouldn't 'ave you if I was a gal."

"You're dreaming, ses Peter Russet, sneering at 'im.

"That flower-pot o' yours'll come in handy," ses Sam, thinking 'ow he 'ad
put 'is arm round the widow's waist; "and I thank you kindly for the
teapot, Ginger.

"You don't mean to say as you've asked 'er to marry you?" ses Ginger,
looking at Peter Russet.

"Not quite; but I'm going to," ses Sam, "and I'll bet you even arf-crowns
she ses 'yes.'"

Ginger wouldn't take 'im, and no more would Peter, not even when he raised
it to five shillings; and the vain way old Sam lay there boasting and
talking about 'is way with the gals made 'em both feel ill.

"I wouldn't 'ave her if she asked me on 'er bended knees," ses Ginger,
holding up his 'ead.

"Nor me," ses Peter.  "You're welcome to 'er, Sam.  When I think of the
evenings I've wasted over a fat old woman I feel----"

"That'll do," ses old Sam, very sharp; "that ain't the way to speak of a
lady, even if she 'as said 'no.'"

"All right, Sam," ses Ginger.  "You go in and win if you think you're so
precious clever."

Old Sam said that that was wot 'e was going to do, and he spent so much
time next morning making 'imself look pretty that the other two could
'ardly be civil to him.

He went off a'most direckly arter breakfast, and they didn't see 'im agin
till twelve o'clock that night.  He 'ad brought a bottle o' whisky in
with 'im, and he was so 'appy that they see plain wot had 'appened.

"She said 'yes' at two o'clock in the arternoon," ses old Sam, smiling,
arter they had 'ad a glass apiece.  "I'd nearly done the trick at one
o'clock, and then the shop-bell went, and I 'ad to begin all over agin.
Still, it wasn't unpleasant."

"Do you mean to tell us you've asked 'er to marry you?" ses Ginger,
'olding out 'is glass to be filled agin.

"I do," ses Sam; "but I 'ope there's no ill-feeling.  You never 'ad a
chance, neither of you; she told me so."

Ginger Dick and Peter Russet stared at each other.

"She said she 'ad been in love with me all along," ses Sam, filling their
glasses agin to cheer 'em up.  "We went out arter tea and bought the
engagement-ring, and then she got somebody to mind the shop and we went
to the Pagoda music-'all."

"I 'ope you didn't pay much for the ring, Sam," ses Ginger, who always
got very kind-'arted arter two or three glasses o' whisky.  "If I'd known
you was going to be in such a hurry I might ha' told you before."

"We ought to ha' done," ses Peter, shaking his 'ead.

"Told me?" ses Sam, staring at 'em.  "Told me wot?"

"Why me and Peter gave it up," ses Ginger; "but, o' course, p'r'aps you
don't mind."

"Mind wot?" ses Sam.

"It's wonderful 'ow quiet she kept it," ses Peter.

Old Sam stared at 'em agin, and then he asked 'em to speak in plain
English wot they'd got to say, and not to go taking away the character of
a woman wot wasn't there to speak up for herself.

"It's nothing agin 'er character," ses Ginger.  "It's a credit to her,
looked at properly," ses Peter Russet.

"And Sam'll 'ave the pleasure of bringing of 'em up," ses Ginger.

"Bringing of 'em up?" ses Sam, in a trembling voice and turning pale;
"bringing who up?"

"Why, 'er children," ses Ginger.  "Didn't she tell you?  She's got nine
of 'em."

Sam pretended not to believe 'em at fust, and said they was jealous; but
next day he crept down to the greengrocer's shop in the same street,
where Ginger had 'appened to buy some oranges one day, and found that it
was only too true.  Nine children, the eldest of 'em only fifteen, was
staying with diff'rent relations owing to scarlet-fever next door.

Old Sam crept back 'ome like a man in a dream, with a bag of oranges he
didn't want, and, arter making a present of the engagement-ring to
Ginger--if 'e could get it--he took the fust train to Tilbury and signed
on for a v'y'ge to China.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Captains All, by W.W. Jacobs

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 11181 ***
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of John Gabriel Borkman, by Henrik Ibsen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: John Gabriel Borkman

Author: Henrik Ibsen

Translator: Odd Tangerud

Release Date: December 23, 2006 [EBook #20178]

Language: Esperanto

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN GABRIEL BORKMAN ***




Produced by Andrew Sly and Will Wurzel





HENRIK IBSEN

JOHN GABRIEL BORKMAN

(1896)

Tradukis
1997
Odd Tangerud

ISBN 82-91707-59-6



JOHN GABRIEL BORKMAN

ROLOJ:

  JOHN GABRIEL BORKMAN, eksa bankestro.
  SINJORINO GUNHILD BORKMAN, lia edzino.
  ERHART BORKMAN, studento, ilia filo.
  FRAŬLINO ELLA RENTHEJM, ĝemelfratino de sinjorino Borkman.
  SINJORINO FANNY WILTON.
  VILHELM FOLDAL, kromoficisto en ministeria oficejo.
  FRIDA FOLDAL, lia filino.
  LA ĈAMBRISTINO de sinjorino Borkman.


(La dramo okazas iun vintran vesperon ekster la ĉefurbo en la
bieno de la familio Renthejm.)




UNUA AKTO


(La sidĉambro de _sinjorino Borkman_, ekipita de malnovmoda,
paliĝinta gloro. Malferma ŝovpordo kondukas malsupren en ĝardena
ĉambro kun fenestroj kaj vitra pordo en la fono. Tra ĝi estas
elvidaĵo al la ĝardeno, kie la neĝa vetero bloviĝas en la
krepusko. Sur la dekstre-flanka muro estas enireja pordo de la
antaŭĉambro. Pli antaŭe estas granda, malnova ferforno en kiu
estas ekbruligita. Maldekstre, iom pli malantaŭe, estas unu pli
malgranda pordo. Antaŭe en la sama flanko estas fenestro, kovrita de
dikaj kurtenoj. Inter la fenestro kaj la pordo estas kanapo kun
ĉevalhara kovraĵo kaj kun tapiŝkovrita tablo antaŭe. Sur la tablo
estas eklumigita lampo kun ŝirmilo. Apud la forno estas altdorsa
apogseĝo.)

(_Sinjorino Gunhild Borkman_ sidas sur la kanapo kun sia
kroĉtrikaĵo. Ŝi estas iom aĝa virino kun malvarma, distingita
aspekto, kun rigida staturo kaj neŝanĝiĝantaj vizaĝtrajtoj. Ŝia
densa hararo estas ege griza. La manoj maldikaj, diafanaj. Vestita en
dika, malhela silkvestaĵo, kiu origine estis eleganta, sed nun estas
uzita. Lana ŝalo sur la ŝultroj.)

(Ŝi sidas momenton rekta kaj senmova kun la kroĉaĵo. Jen
aŭdiĝas de ekstere sonorigado de preterpasanta sledo.)

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ekaŭskultas; brilas ĝojo en ŝiaj okuloj, kaj senpere ŝi
flustras:) Erhart! Fine!

(Ŝi ekstaras kaj rigardas elen tra la kurteno. Aspektas
seniluziigita, kaj reen eksidas sur la kanapo por sia laboro.)

(La _ĉambristino_ iom poste envenas de la enireja ĉambro kun
vizitkarto sur pleto.)

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(rapide) Ĉu la studento tamen venis?

ĈAMBRISTINO
Ne, sinjorino. Sed ekstere estas sinjorino —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(flankenmetas la kroĉaĵon) Nu, do sinjorino Wilton —

ĈAMBRISTINO
(proksimiĝas) Ne; estas _fremda_ sinjorino —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(etendas manon por la karto) Ke mi vidu — (legas; rapide ekstaras
kaj rigardas la knabinon rigide) Ĉu vi estas certa, ke estas por
mi?

ĈAMBRISTINO
Jes, mi komprenis, ke estus por la sinjorino.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉu ŝi demandis por paroli kun sinjorino Borkman?

ĈAMBRISTINO
Jes ja, tion ŝi faris.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(abrupte; decidite) Bone. Do diru ke mi estas hejme.

(La _ĉambristino_ malfermas la pordon por la fremda sinjorino kaj
mem eliras.)

(_Fraŭlino Ella Renthejm_ venas en la ĉambron. Ŝi similas al la
fratino laŭ ekstero; sed ŝia vizaĝo havas pli suferan ol akran
esprimon. Ĝi ankoraŭ portas stampon de granda, karakterplena beleco
de pasintaj jaroj. La riĉa hararo estas kombita en naturajn buklojn
de la frunto, kaj estas tute arĝentoblanka. Ŝi estas vestita en
nigra veluro kun ĉapelo kaj mantelo kun pelta subŝtofo el la sama
materialo.)

(Ambaŭ fratinoj staras momenton en silento, prove rigardantaj unu
la alian. Ĉiu el ili aspekte atendas, ke la alia parolu la unua.)

ELLA RENTHEJM
(kiu estas sin tenanta apud la pordo) Jes, vi certe rigardas min en
surprizo, vi, Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(staras senmova, rekta, inter la kanapo kaj la tablo, apogante la
fingropintojn sur la tapiŝo.) Ĉu vi ne iras erare? La administranto
ja loĝas en la flanka domo, vi scias.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ne estas kun la administranto ke mi parolu hodiaŭ.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉu estas al mi, ke vi ion volas?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes. Mi devas paroli kelkajn vortojn kun vi.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(venas antaŭen sur la planko) Nu, — do eksidu.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Dankon; mi bone povas stari dume.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Tute kiel plaĉas al vi. Sed tamen iom malligu la
supervestaĵojn.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(malbutonumas la mantelon) Jes, estas tre varme ĉi tie —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Mi ĉiam frostas.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(staras momenton ŝin rigardante, kun la brako ripozanta sur la dorso
de la brakseĝo) Jes, — Gunhild, estas nun baldaŭ ok jaroj post
kiam ni laste vidis unu la alian.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(malvarme) Almenaŭ post kiam ni interparolis.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ĝuste dirite, interparolis, jes. — Ĉar vi certe foje vidis min, —
kiam mi devis fari mian jaran vojaĝon ĉi tien al la administranto.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Unu aŭ du fojojn, mi opinias.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ankaŭ mi kelkajn fojojn ekvidetis vin. En la fenestro _tie_.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Estus malantaŭ la kurtenoj. Vi havas bonajn okulojn, vi. (akre kaj
ŝire) Sed la lastan fojon kiun ni _kunparolis_, — tio okazis ĉi
tie en la ĉambro ĉe mi —

ELLA RENTHEJM
(deturnante) Jes, jes, mi scias, Gunhild!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
— la semajnon antaŭ ol li, — antaŭ ol li liberiĝis.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(iras trans la planko) Ho, ne tuŝu do _tion_!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(firme sed mallaŭte) Estis la semajno antaŭ ol li, — la bankestro
denove liberiĝis.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(antaŭen sur la planko) Ho jes, jes, jes! Mi certe ne forgesas tiun
momenton! Sed pri tio pensi estas tro preme. Eĉ nur en pensoj resti
momenton je tio — oh!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(obtuze) Kaj tamen la pensoj ne permesiĝas turniĝi ĉirkaŭ ion
alian! (ekdire; kunfrapante la manojn) Ne, mi ne komprenas! Neniam en
la mondo! Mi ne komprenas, ke tiaĵo, — io tiel terura povu trafi
solan familion! Kaj imagu, — _nian_ familion! Altrangan familion,
kiel la nian! Imagu ke tio trafis ĝuste _ĝin_!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ho Gunhild, — estas ja pli, pli multaj ol _nia_ familio, kiujn tio
frapis.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Nu jes; sed pri ĉiuj tiuj aliuloj mi ne multe atentas. Ĉar estis ja
nur iom da arĝento — aŭ kelkaj paperoj, — kiuj perdiĝis por
_ili_. Sed por ni —! Por mi! Kaj por Erhart! Infano kia li tiam
estis! (en kreskanta ekscito) La honto por ni du senkulpuloj! La
senhonorigo! La malbela, terura senhonorigo! Kaj aldone esti tute
ruinigata!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(singarde) Diru al mi, Gunhild, — kiel li portas tion?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Erhart, vi aludas?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ne, — li mem. Kiel li portas tion?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(spirblovas moke) Ĉu vi imagas, ke mi demandas pri _tio_?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Demandas? Vi do ne bezonas demandi —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(mire rigardas ŝin) Vi do ne kredas, ke mi interrilatas kun li?
Estas kune kun li? Foje serĉas lin?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Eĉ ne tio!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kiel antaŭe) _Li_, kiu devis sidi enŝlosata kvin jarojn! (frapas
la manojn antaŭ la vizaĝon) Ho, kia frakasanta honto! (ekrektigas
sin) Kaj imagu kiom la nomo John Gabriel Borkman signifis pasinte! —
Ne, ne, ne, — neniam plu vidi lin! — Neniam!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(rigardas ŝin momenton) Vi havas malmolan animon, Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Kontraŭ _li_, jes.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Li tamen estas via edzo.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉu li ne diris en la tribunalo, ke estis _mi_, kiu komencis ruinigi
lin? Ke mi disipis tro da mono —?

ELLA RENTHEJM
(singardeme) Sed ĉu ne _estis_ ia vero en tio?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Sed ĉu ne estis li mem, kiu volis tion tiel havi! Ĉio devus ja esti
tiel sensence abunda —

ELLA RENTHEJM
Tion mi ja scias. Sed ĝuste tial vi estus devinta reteni. Kaj tion
vi ja ne faris.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉu mi tiam scius, ke ne estas lia propra mono, tiu kiun li donis al
mi por disponi? Kaj kiun li ankaŭ mem disponis? Dek fojojn pli
disipe ol mi!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(silente) Nu, tio sekvis de lia pozicio, mi pensas. _Grandparte_
tamen.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(rikane) Jes, diriĝis ja ĉiam, ke ni devis “reprezenti”. Kaj sekve
li reprezentis kiel efikis! Veturis per kvar-jungitaro — kvazaŭ li
estus reĝo. Igis homojn kapklini kaj humilskrapi antaŭ li kvazaŭ
antaŭ reĝo. (ridas) Kaj ili nomis lin per antaŭnomo, — tra la
tuta lando — ĝuste kvazaŭ li estus la reĝo mem. “John Gabriel”,
“John Gabriel”. Ĉiuj sciis kia grandegulo “John Gabriel” estas!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(firme kaj varme) Tiam li ja _estis_ grandegulo.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, aspektis ja tiel. Sed neniam per unu sola vorto li informis min,
kia estas lia stato. Neniam li sugestis, el kio li prenis la
rimedojn.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ne, ne, — tion scietis ankaŭ ne aliuloj.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ne gravis pri la aliuloj. Sed al _mi_ li devis diri la veron. Sed
tion li neniam faris! Li nur mensogis, — mensogis tiel senfunde por
mi —

ELLA RENTHEJM
(interrompante) Tion li certe ne faris, Gunhild! Li eble prisilentis.
Sed li certe ne mensogis.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Nu jes, nomu tion kiel vi volas. Tio estas ja tute la sama. — Sed
fine renversiĝis la tuto. Ĉio. La tuta gloro.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(antaŭ si) Jes, ĉio renversiĝis — por _li_ — kaj por
aliuloj.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(rektigas sin minace) Sed tion mi diras al vi, Ella, — mi ankoraŭ
ne cedas! Mi sciu havigi al mi rehonorigon. Pri tio vi konfidu!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(streĉita) Rehonorigon? Kion vi pensas pri _tio_?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Rehonorigon por nomo kaj honoro kaj bonstato! Rehonorigon por mia
tuta mistraktita vivosorto, pri tio mi pensas! Mi havas iun rezerve,
mi, vi sciu. — Iun, kiu lavu _pura_ ĉion, kion — kion la bankestro
ĵetis en la koton.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Gunhild! Gunhild!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kreskante) Vivas venĝanto, sciu! Iu kiu rebonigos ĉion, pri kio
lia patro estas kulpa al mi!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Do Erhart.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, Erhart, — mia mirinda knabo! _Li_ scios restarigi la
parencaron, la domon, la nomon. Ĉion, kio _eblas_ restariĝi. —
eble ankoraŭ pli.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Kaj laŭ vi kiel _tio_ okazus?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Tio venu kiel ĝi povos. Mi ne scias _kiel_ tio venos. Sed mi scias,
ke ĝi _venos_ kaj _devos_ iam veni. (rigardas ŝin demande) Ĉu —
Ella, — ĉu ne estas funde la sama, kion vi estas pripensadanta de
post kiam li estis etulo?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ne, tion mi vere ne povas diri.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉu ne? Kial vi do zorgis pri li? Tiam kiam la ŝtormo estis
ekfuriozinta super — super ĉi tiu domo.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Tiam vi ja ne mem kapablis, Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ho ne, — mi ja ne povis. Kaj lia patro, — li estis leĝe ekskuzita,
— tie kie li sidis, — tiel bone gardata —

ELLA RENTHEJM
(en ekscito) Ho, ke vi kapablas eldiri tiajn vortojn —! Vi!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kun venena esprimo) Kaj ke _vi_ povus decidigi vin zorgi pri iu, —
iu infano de John Gabriel! Tute kvazaŭ tiu infano estus via propra
— Forpreni ĝin de _mi_, — kaj vojaĝi hejmen kun ĝi. Kaj reteni
ĝin ĉe vi, jaron post jaro. Ĝis la knabo preskaŭ estis
plenkreska. (rigardas ŝin suspekte) Kial vi vere faris tion, Ella?
Kial vi retenis lin?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Okazis ke mi tre kore ŝatis lin —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Pli ol mi, — lia patrino!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(evite) Tion mi ne scias. Kaj aldone Erhart estis malforteca dum la
kreskado —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Erhart — malforteca!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, ŝajnis al mi, — almenaŭ tiam. Kaj la aero tie fore ĉe la
okcidenta marbordo estas multe pli milda ol ĉi tie, vi ja scias.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ridetas amare) Hm. Ĉu? (interrompante) Jes, vi certe estas multe
farinta por Erhart, vi. (ŝanĝas tonon) Nu, estas ja kompreneble;
vi havas ja rimedojn por tio. (ridetas) Vi estis ja bonŝanca, vi,
Ella. Vi sukcesis savi tion, kio estis la via.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(ofendita) Por tio _mi_ ne faris paŝon, — povas mi certigi al vi.
Mi ne havis — antaŭ longe longe poste — iun suspekton, ke la
paperoj, kiuj estis en deponio en la banko por mia konto, — ke ili
estis netuŝitaj —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Nu ja; tiaĵon mi ne komprenas! Mi nur diras, ke vi estis bonŝanca.
(rigardas ŝin demande) Sed kiam vi tiel meminiciate komencis
prizorgi Erhart por mi —? Kiu do estis via celo pri tio?

ELLA RENTHEJM
(rigardas ŝin) Mia celo —?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Nu ja, intencon vi ja devus havi. Kia vi volis fari lin? Kion fari
el li, mi pensas?

ELLA RENTHEJM
(malrapide) Mi volis faciligi al Erhart la vojon por fariĝi feliĉa
homo en nia mondo.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(spirblovas) Puh, — homoj en nia ekonomia stato havas sufiĉe por
pripensi ol pensi pri feliĉo.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Kion do, — vi pensas?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(rigardas ŝin malferme kaj serioze) Erhart devas antaŭ ĉio atenti,
ke li estos lumanta tiel alte kaj tiel vaste, ke neniu homo en la
lando plu videtas la ombron, kiun lia patro ĵetis super min — kaj
super sian filon.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(esplore) Diru al mi, Gunhild, — ĉu _tio_ estas postulo, kiun
Erhart _mem_ metas por sia vivo —?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(mire) Jes, tion ni do esperu!

ELLA RENTHEJM
— aŭ ĉu ĝi pli estas postulo, kiun _vi_ metas al li?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(mallonge) Mi kaj Erhart ĉiam metas la samajn postulojn al ni
mem.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(peze kaj malrapide) Tiel certa vi do estas pri via knabo, vi,
Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kaŝe triumfe) Jes, laŭdo kaj danko al Dio, — mi estas. Pri tio vi
fidu!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Vi sekve funde tamen devas senti vin feliĉa. Spite al ĉiuj
aliaĵoj.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Mi ja faras. Pro tio. Sed jen, — ĉiun momenton, vidu, — venas
drivanta tiu aliaĵo kiel kruda vetero super min.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(kun ŝanĝita tono) Diru al mi —. Pli bone tuj. Ĉar vere estas pro
_tio_, ke mi venis ĉi tien al vi —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Kion?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ion pri kio mi opiniis, ke mi devas paroli kun vi, — Diru al mi,
Erhart ja ne plu loĝas ĉi tie ĉe — ĉe vi aliuloj.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(malmole) Erhart ja ne _povas_ loĝi ĉi tie ĉe mi. Li devas loĝi
en la urbo —

ELLA RENTHEJM
Tion li skribis al mi.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Tion li devas pro la studoj. Sed li vizitas min ioman tempon ĉiun
vesperon.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, eble mi povus vidi lin? Kaj tuj paroli kun li?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Li ankoraŭ ne venis. Sed mi atendas lin ĉiun momenton.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, Gunhild, — li certe estas veninta. Ĉar mi aŭdas lin
supre.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kun rapida okulĵeto) Supre en la granda salono?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes. Mi ja aŭdas lin paŝadi tie supre de post kiam mi venis.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(turnas la okulojn for de ŝi) Ne estas li, tio, Ella.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(surprize) Ĉu ne estas Erhart? (suspekte) Kiu tiu do _estas_?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
La bankestro.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(malrapide, en subpremita doloro) Borkman. John Gabriel Borkman!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Tiel li paŝadas tien kaj reen. Antaŭen kaj malantaŭen. De mateno
al vespero. Tagon post tago.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Mi vere aŭdis iun aludeton pri io —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Kredeblas. Aludiĝas certe ĉiaĵoj pri ni en la distrikto.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Erhart aludis pri tio. En la leteroj. Ke lia patro tenas sin pleje
ĉe si mem, — tie supre. Kaj vi ĉe vi mem ĉi tie malsupre.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, — tiel la stato estas estinta por ni, Ella. Tute de kiam ili
liberigis lin. Kaj sendis lin hejmen al mi. — Dum ĉiuj tiuj longaj
ok jaroj.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Sed mi neniam havis la penson, ke tio efektive povus esti vero. Ke
estus ebla —!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kapsignas) Estas vero. Kaj neniam povos fariĝi alimaniera.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(rigardas ŝin) Tio ĉi tamen estas terura vivo, Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Pli ol terura, sciu. Baldaŭ ne plu eltenebla.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Mi bone komprenas.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉiame aŭdi liajn paŝojn tie supre. Ek de la frua mateno ĝis
malfrue en la nokto. — Kaj tiel aŭdeble kiel estas ĉi tie
malsupre.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, estas intense aŭdeble ĉi tie.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Multfoje ŝajnas al mi, ke mi havas malsanan lupon paŝadanta en
kaĝo tie supre en la salono. Ĝuste rekte super mia kapo.
(aŭskultas kaj flustras) Aŭdu nur, vi! Aŭdu! Tien kaj reen, —
tien kaj reen iras la lupo.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(gardeme) Ĉu ne povus ŝanĝiĝi, Gunhild?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(rifuzante) Li neniam faris alpaŝon por tio.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Sed ĉu vi ne povus fari la unuan paŝon?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ekagitiĝas) Mi! Post ĉio kion li pekis kontraŭ mi! — Ne dankon!
Prefere lasu la lupon daŭrigi sian paŝadon tie supre.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Fariĝas tro varme por mi nun. Mi tamen devas ekhavi permeson por
demeti la vestaĵojn.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, mi ja demandis al vi antaŭ —

(_Ella Renthejm_ demetas de si mantelon kaj ĉapelon sur seĝon
ĉe la enireja pordo.)

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ĉu vi neniam okaze renkontas lin ekstere de la domo?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ridas amare) En socia rondo, vi aludas?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Mi pensas kiam li eliras en la freŝan aeron. Ene sur la vojetoj en
la arbaro, aŭ —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
La bankestro neniam eliras.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Eĉ ne en la krepusko?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Neniam.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(kortuŝata) Al tio li do ne povas devigi sin?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Eble ne povas. Li havas sian grandan pelerinon pendanta en la
murŝranko. En la antaŭĉambro, vi scias —

ELLA RENTHEJM
(al si mem) — tiu ŝranko en kiu ni ludis, kiam ni estis etuloj —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kapsignas) Kaj foje, — malfrue vespere, — mi povas aŭdi lin
malsuprenveni — por vesti sin kaj eliri. Sed kutime li haltas meze
en la ŝtuparo, — kaj returnas. Kaj jen li reen supreniras al la
salono.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(silente) Ĉu neniam iu el liaj malnovaj amikoj venas supren tie por
viziti lin?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Li _ne havas_ malnovajn amikojn.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Li do havis multajn — foje.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Hm! De ili li ja bele kvitigis sin. Li fariĝis por siaj amikoj
multekosta amiko, — li, John Gabriel.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Nu jes, vi eble pravas en tio, Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(impete) Cetere mi devas diri, ke estas malnoble, fie, malvirte,
malgrandanime insisti tiom sur la perdo, kiun ili suferis pro li.
Estis ja nur mona perdo. Nenio alia.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(ne respondante) Kaj nun li do vivas tie supre tute sola. Tiel tute
sola.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, li eble tion faras. Efektive mi sciiĝas, ke maljuna kopiisto
aŭ kromskribisto foje venas supren al li.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Nu tiel; certe estas iu, kiu nomiĝas Foldal. Ĉar mi scias ke tiuj
du estis amikoj en la juneco.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, ili certe estis, mi kredas. Cetere mi ne scias ion pri li. Ĉar
li neniam kunvenis en nia socia rondo. Kiam ni iun _havis_ —

ELLA RENTHEJM
Sed _nun_ li do venas al Borkman?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, li ne estas pli selektema ol tia. Sed tio kompreniĝas; li nur
venas en la krepusko.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Tiu Foldal, — ankaŭ _li_ estis unu el tiuj, kiuj suferis perdojn,
je la bankroto.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(pase rimarkante) Jes, ŝajnas al mi, ke mi memoras, ke li perdis iom
da mono, ankaŭ li. Sed certe estis tute bagatela —

ELLA RENTHEJM
(kun facila emfazo) Estis ĉio kion li posedis.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ridetas) Nu, sed pro Dio, — tio kion _li_ posedis, estis do certe
tiel sensignife malmulta, sciu. Nenio por priparoli.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Eĉ ne paroliĝis pri tio, — de Foldal, — dum la proceso.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Kaj cetere, mi povas rakonti al vi, ke Erhart estas doninta abundan
rekompencon por tiu sensignifaĵo.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(mire) Ĉu Erhart? Kiel povus Erhart _tion_?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Li zorgis pri la plej juna filino de Foldal. Li instruis ŝin, —
tiel ke ŝi eble povos _fariĝi_ io, kaj iam zorgi pri si mem. Vidu,
— _tio_ certe estas multe pli ol tio, kion la patro estus povinta
fari por ŝi.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, la patro, li eble havas mizeran ekonomian staton, li, mi
opinias.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Kaj Erhart ankaŭ aranĝis, ke ŝi povas lerni muzikon. Ŝi jam estas
tiel lerta, ke ŝi povas veni supren al — al li tie supre en la
salono, kaj ludi por li.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Do li daŭre ŝatas muzikon?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ho jes, li do faras. Li havas ja la pianon, kiun vi alsendis — kiam
li estis atendata —

ELLA RENTHEJM
Kaj sur tiu ŝi ludas por li?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, tiel foje. En la vesperoj. Ankaŭ tion Erhart aranĝis.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Sed ĉu la bedaŭrinda knabino devas iri tiun longan vojon ĉi tien?
Kaj poste hejmen al la urbo?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ne, tion ŝi ne bezonas. Erhart aranĝis, ke ŝi povas esti ĉe
sinjorino, kiu loĝas ĉi tie najbare. Estas iu sinjorino Wilton —

ELLA RENTHEJM
(vigle) Sinjorino Wilton!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Iu tre riĉa sinjorino. Iu kiun vi ne konas.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Mi aŭdis la nomon. Sinjorino Fanny Wilton, mi kredas —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, tute ĝuste.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Erhart plurajn fojojn skribis pri ŝi. — Ĉu ŝi loĝas ĉi tie
nun?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, ŝi luprenis vilaon ĉi tie. Kaj nun ŝi transloĝis el la urbo
antaŭ iom da tempo.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(iom hezitante) Laŭ onidiro ŝi eksedziĝis.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
La edzo eble mortis antaŭ pluraj jaroj.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, sed ili eksedziĝis —. Li lasis sin eksedziĝi —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Li forvojaĝis de ŝi, tion li faris. La kulpo certe ne estis
ŝia.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ĉu vi konas ŝin iom pli proksime, Gunhild?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ho jes, certe. Ŝi loĝas ja tute proksime. Kaj ŝi foje faras etajn
vizitojn.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Kaj vi eble iom ŝatas ŝin?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ŝi estas nekutime komprenema. Rimarkinde klara en sia juĝo.

ELLA RENTHEJM
En sia juĝo pri homoj, vi aludas?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, pleje pri homoj. Ŝi ja efektive studis Erhart. Tiel vere funde,
— la animon. Kaj tial ŝi vere adoras lin, — kiel kompreneble
estas.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(iom ruze) Do ŝi eble konas Erhart ankoraŭ pli bone ol ŝi konas
vin?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, Erhart ofte renkontis ŝin en la urbo. Antaŭ ol ŝi transloĝis
ĉi tien.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(senpripense) Kaj ŝi tamen transloĝis el la urbo?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ekmiras kaj rigardas ŝin akre) _Tamen!_ Kion vi pensas
pri tio?

ELLA RENTHEJM
(evite) Nu, Dio, — pensas —?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Vi diris tion en iu stranga maniero. Estis io kion vi pripensis per
tio, Ella!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(rigardas ŝin firme en la okulojn) Jes, efektive estis, Gunhild.
Vere estis io, kion mi pensis pri tio.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Nu, do diru malkaŝe!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Unue mi volas diri _tion_ al vi, ke mi trovas, ke ankaŭ _mi_ kvazaŭ
havas rajton al Erhart. Aŭ ĉu vi tion ne trovas?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(rigardas aeren) Je Dio. Post la sumoj, kiujn vi pagis por li,
ja —

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ho, tute ne tial, Gunhild. Sed ĉar mi ŝatas lin —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ridetas moke) Mian filon? Ĉu vi povas? Vi? Spite el ĉio?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, mi povas. Spite al ĉio. Kaj mi faras. Mi ŝatas Erhart. Tiom,
kiom _mi_ entute _povas_ ŝati homon — nuntempe. En mia aĝo.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Nu jes, jes, tiel estu; sed —

ELLA RENTHEJM
Kaj tial, vidu, mi fariĝas maltrankvila, kiam mi rimarkas, ke io
minacas lin.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Minacas Erhart! Jes, sed _kio_ minacas lin? Aŭ _kiu_ do minacas
lin?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Tion faras unue _vi_, — en _via_ maniero —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ekkrie) Mi!

ELLA RENTHEJM
— kaj jen ankaŭ tiu sinjorino Wilton, — mi timas.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(momenton rigardas ŝin konsternite) Kaj tiaĵon vi povas kredi pri
Erhart! Pri mia propra filo! _Li_, kiu havas sian grandan mision por
plenumi!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(supraĵe pasante diri) Ho kion, mision —!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ekscitite) Kaj tion vi kuraĝas diri tiel moke!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ĉu vi opinias ke juna homo en la aĝo de Erhart, — sana kaj ĝoja,
— ĉu vi opinias, ke _li_ akceptas oferi sin por tiaĵo kiel
“misio”!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(forte kaj firme) Erhart faras! Tion mi certe scias!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(agitas la kapon) Vi nek scias nek kredas tion, Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉu mi ne kredas!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Estas nur io, kion vi prirevadas. Ĉar se vi ne havis _tion_ por
alkroĉi vin, vi pensus certe ke vi tute malesperus.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, tiam mi vere devus malesperi. (impete) Kaj eble estas _tio_,
kion vi pleje atendus, vi, Ella!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(kun levita kapo) Jes, mi tion pleje atendus — se vi ne povas
liberigi vin alimaniere ol premegi Erhart per tio.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(minace) Vi volas enpremi vin inter _ni_! Inter patrino kaj filo!
_Vi!_

ELLA RENTHEJM
Mi volas liberigi lin el via potenco, — via superrego.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(triumfe) Tion vi ne plu povas! Vi havis lin en viaj retoj — Ĝis
lia dekkvina jaro. Sed nun mi regajnis lin, vidu!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Do mi volas regajni lin de vi! (raŭke; duone flustre) Ni du, ni
luktis antaŭe je vivo kaj morto pri homo, ni, Gunhild!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(rigardas ŝin triumfe) Jes, kaj _mi_ venkis.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(mokride) Ĉu vi daŭre opinias, ke tiu venko fariĝis gajno por
vi?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(sombre) Ne; — pri tio vi sange pravas.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Eĉ ne ĉi tiun fojon fariĝos gajno por vi.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉu neniu gajno, tio, gardi patrinan potencon super Erhart!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ne; ĉar estas nur la _potenco_ super li, kiun vi volas havi!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Kaj nun _vi!_

ELLA RENTHEJM
(varme) Mi volas havi lian internan animon, — lian menson, — lian
tutan koron —!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ekdire) Al tio vi neniam plu atingos en tiu ĉi mondo!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(rigardas ŝin) Ĉu vi eble prizorgis _tion?_

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ridetas) Jes, tion mi efektive permesis al mi. Ĉu vi ne povis legi
tion el liaj leteroj?

ELLA RENTHEJM
(kapjesas malrapide) Jes. Vi tuta fine estis en liaj leteroj.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(incite) Mi profitis de tiuj ĉi ok jaroj — kiam mi havis lin sub
miaj okuloj, vidu.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(sinrege) Kion vi diris al Erhart pri mi? Ĉu eblas rakonti tion al
mi?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Jes, tio bone eblas.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Do faru!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Mi nur diris al li tion, kio estas vero.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Nu?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Mi ripete kaj ĉiame enplantis en li, ke li absolute memoru, ke estas
al vi ke ni povas danki, ke ni povas vivi tiel kontentige, kiel ni
faras. Ke ni entute _kapablas_ vivi.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ne pli ol tio!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ho, tiaĵo mordas, sciu. Tion mi mem sentas.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Sed tio estas ja proksimume tio, kion li sciis antaŭe.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Kiam li revenis hejmen al mi, li imagis, ke vi faris ĉion el bona
koro. (rigardas ŝin en malica ĝojo) Nun li ne plu kredas tion,
Ella.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Kion li do nun kredas?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Li kredas tion, kio vera estas. Mi demandis lin, kiel li klarigas al
si, ke onklino Ella neniam vojaĝas ĉi tien por viziti nin —

ELLA RENTHEJM
(interrompante) Tion li sciis antaŭe!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Li scias tion pli bone nun. Vi kredigis al li, ke estas por indulgi
min kaj — kaj tiun paŝadanton tie supre en la salono —

ELLA RENTHEJM
Tiel ankaŭ estis.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
El tio Erhart _nun_ ne kredas eron.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Kion vi do nun igis lin kredi pri mi?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Li kredas tion, kio vera estas, ke vi hontas pri ni, malestimas nin.
Aŭ ĉu eble vi ne faras? Ĉu vi ne iam kovis penson tiri lin tute
for de mi? Pripensu nun, Ella. Vi certe memoras.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(repuŝante) Estis en la plej fia tempo de la skandalo. Kiam la afero
estis antaŭ la tribunalo. — Mi ne plu nutras tiujn pensojn.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Eĉ ne utilus al vi. Ĉar kio alie restus el lia misio! Ho ne dankon
al vi! Estas _mi_, kiun Erhart bezonas, — ne _vi_. Ĉar tial li
estas kvazaŭ morta por _vi_! Kaj vi por li!

ELLA RENTHEJM
(malvarme, decide) Ni vidos. Ĉar nun mi restos ĉi tie.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(fiksrigardas ŝin) Ĉi tie en la bieno?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, ĉi tie.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉi tie — ĉe ni? Tute tranokte?

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ĉi tie mi pasigos la reston de miaj tagoj, se tiel estu.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(regas sin) Jes, jes, Ella, — la bieno estas ja via.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Ho jeno —!

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ĉio estas ja via. La seĝo sur kiu mi sidas, estas via. La lito en
kiu mi turnas min sendorma, ĝi apartenas al vi. La manĝaĵo kiun ni
manĝas, ĝin ni ricevas pere de vi.

ELLA RENTHEJM
Tio ne povas esti alimaniere aranĝita. Borkman ne povas havi propran
posedaĵon. Ĉar tuj iu venus forpreni ĝin de li.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Mi ja scias. Ni devas rezignacii kaj vivi je via graco kaj
indulgo.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(malvarme) Mi ne povas malhelpi vin rigardi tion de tiu flanko,
Gunhild.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Ne, tion vi ne povas. — Kiam vi deziros, ke ni forloĝiĝu?

ELLA RENTHEJM
(rigardas ŝin) Forloĝiĝu?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(ekscitite) Jes, vi do neniam imagas al vi, ke mi volas resti
loĝanta sub la sama tegmento kiel vi! — Ne, do prefere al la
malriĉulejo aŭ eksteren sur la vojon!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Bone. Do sendu kun mi Erhart —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Erhart! Mia propra filo! Mia infano!

ELLA RENTHEJM
Jes, — ĉar tiam mi tuj revojaĝos hejmen.

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(post mallonga pripensado, firme) Erhart mem elektu inter ni.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(rigardas ŝin dube kaj necerte) _Li_ elektu? Jes, — ĉu vi tion
_kuraĝas_, Gunhild?

SINJORINO BORKMAN
(kun malmola rido) Ĉu mi _kuraĝas_! Igi mian filon elekti inter sia
patrino kaj vi! Jes, tion mi efektive kuraĝas.

ELLA RENTHEJM
(aŭskultante) Ĉu iu venas? Ŝajnas al mi, ke mi aŭdas —

SINJORINO BORKMAN
Do certe estas Erhart —

(Iu frapas rapide sur la antaŭĉambra pordo, kiu poste senpere
malfermiĝas. _Sinjorino Wilton_, festene vestita kaj kun
supervestaĵoj, envenas. Malantaŭ ŝi la _ĉambristino_, kiu ne
ekhavis tempon por anonci, kaj aspektas iom konfuzita. La pordo
restas duone malferma. _Sinjorino Wilton_ estas iu frapante bela,
ŝvelbrusta sinjorino en la tridekaj jaroj. Larĝaj, ruĝaj, ridantaj
lipoj. Viglaj okuloj. Riĉa, malhela har