oeâid a sheet of coarse paper, two faded
roses, fragrant,--for they were cinnamon roses, whose fragrance never
dies,--but yellow and crumpled, for they had journeyed many days to reach
her. They were tied together by a bit of blue yarn; and on the paper was
written, in ill-spelt words, "I wanted to send you something; and these
were all I had. I am an old woman, and very poor. You've helped me ever so
much."

Another gift was a moss basket filled with arbutus blossoms. Hid away in
the leaves was a tiny paper, on which were written some graceful verses,
evidently by a not unpractised hand. The signature was in initials unknown
to Mercy; but she hazarded a guess as to the authorship, and sent the
following verses in reply:--

  TO E.B.

  At night, the stream came to the sea.
    "Long leagues," it cried, "this drop I bring,
  O beauteous, boundless sea!
    What is the meagre, paltry thing
      In thine abundance unto thee?
  No ripple, in thy smallest wave, of me
  Will know! No thirst its suffering
  Shall better slake for my surrendering
      My life! O sea, in vain
      My leagues of toil and pain!"

  At night, wayfarers reached the sea.
    "Long weary leagues we came," they cried,
  "O beauteous, boundless sea!
    The swelling waves of thy swift tide
  Break on the shores where souls are free:
  Through lonely wildernesses, unto thee
  One tiny stream has been our guide,
  And in the desert we had died,
      If its oases sweet
      Had not refreshed our feet."

  O tiny stream, lost in the sea,
    Close symbol of a lifetime's speech!
  O beauteous, boundless sea,
    Close fitting symbol of the reach,
      Of measureless Eternity!
  Be glad, O stream, O sea, blest equally!
  And thou whose words have helped to teach
  Me this,--my unknown friend,--for each
  Kind thought, warm thanks.
                  Only the stream can know
  How at such words the long leagues lighter grow.

All these new interests and occupations, while they did not in the least
weaken her loyalty to Stephen, filled her thoughts healthfully and
absorbingly, and left her no room for any such passionate longing and
brooding as Stephen poured out to her in his letters. He looked in vain
for any response to these expressions. Sometimes, unable to bear the
omission any longer, he would ask her pathetically why she did not say
that she longed to see him. Her reply was characteristic:--

"You ask me, dear, why I do not say that I long to see you. I am not sure
that I ever do long, in the sense in which you use the word. I know that I
cannot see you till next winter, just as I used to know every morning that
I could not see you until night; and the months between now and then seem
to me one solid interval of time to be filled up and made the most of,
just as the interval of the daytime between your going away in the morning
and coming home at night used to seem to me. I do not think, dear Stephen,
there is a moment of any day when I have not an under current of
consciousness of you; but it is not a longing for the sight of you. Are
you sure, darling, that the love which takes perpetual shape in such
longings is the strongest love?"

Little by little, phrases like this sank into Stephen's mind, and
gradually crystallized into a firm conviction that Mercy was being weaned
from him. It was not so. It was only that separation and its surer tests
were adjusting to a truer level the relation between them. She did not
love him one whit less; but she was taking the position which belonged to
her stronger and finer organization. If she had ever lived by his side as
his wife, the same change would have come; but her never-failing
tenderness would have effectually covered it from his recognition, and hid
it from her own, so long as he looked into her eyes with pleading love,
and she answered with woman's fondness. No realization of inequality could
ever have come. It is, after all, the flesh and blood of the loved one
which we idealize. There is in love's sacraments a "real presence," which
handling cannot make us doubt. It is when we go apart and reflect that our
reason asks questions. Mercy did not in the least know that she was
outgrowing Stephen White. She did not in the least suspect that her
affection and her loyalty were centring around an ideal personality, to
which she gave his name, but which had in reality never existed. She
believed honestly that she was living for and in Stephen all this time;
that she was his, as he was hers, inalienably and for ever. If it had been
suggested to her that it was unnatural that she should be so content in a
daily life which he did not share, so busy and glad in occupations and
plans and aspirations into which he did not enter, she would have been
astonished. She would have said, "How foolish of me to do otherwise! We
have our lives to lead, our work to do. It would be a sin to waste one's
life, to leave one's work undone, because of the mere lack of seeing any
one human being, however dear." Stephen knew love better than this: he
knew that life without the daily sight of Mercy was a blank drudgery;
that, day by day, month by month, he was growing duller and duller, and
more and more lifeless, as if his very blood were being impoverished by
lack of nourishment. Surely it was a hard fate which inflicted on this
man, already so overburdened, the perpetual pain of a love denied,
thwarted, unhappy. Surely it was a brave thing in him to bear the double
load uncomplainingly, to make no effort to throw it off, and never by a
word or a look to visit his own sufferings on the head of the helpless
creature, who seemed to be the cause of them all. If there were any change
in his manner toward his mother during these months, it was that he grew
tenderer and more demonstrative to her. There were even times when he
kissed her, solely from the yearning need he felt to kiss something human,
he so longed for one touch of Mercy's hand. He would sometimes ask her
wistfully, "Do I make you happy, mother?" And she would be won upon and
softened by the words; when in reality they were only the outcry of the
famished heart which needed some reassurance that its sacrifices had not
been all in vain.

Month after month went on, and no tenants came for the "wing." Stephen
even humiliated himself so far as to offer it to Jane Barker's husband at
a lowered rent; but his offer was surlily rejected, and he repented having
made it. Very bitterly he meditated on the strange isolation into which he
and his mother were forced. His sympathies were not broad and general
enough to comprehend it. He did not know how quickly all people feel an
atmosphere of withdrawal, an air of indifference. If Stephen had been rich
and powerful, the world would have forgiven him these traits, or have
smothered its dislike of them; but in a poor man, and an obscure one, such
"airs" were not to be tolerated. Nobody would live in the "wing." And so
it came to pass that one day Stephen wrote to Mercy the following
letter:--

"You will be sorry to hear that I have had to foreclose the mortgage on
this house. It was impossible to get a tenant for the other half of it,
and there was nothing else to be done. The house must be sold, but I doubt
if it brings the full amount of the loan. I should have done this three
months ago, except for your strong feeling against it. I am very sorry for
old Mrs. Jacobs; but it is her misfortune, not my fault. I have my mother
to provide for, and my first duty is to her. Of course, Mrs. Jacobs will
now have to go to the alms-house but I am not at all sure that she will
not be more comfortable there than she has made herself in the cottage.
She has starved herself all these years. Some people say she must have a
hoard of money there somewhere, that she cannot have spent even the little
she has received.

"I shall move out of the house at once, into the little cottage you liked
so much, farther up on the hill. That is for rent, only fifty dollars a
year. I shall put this house into good repair, run a piazza around it as
you suggested, and paint it; and then I think I shall be sure of finding a
purchaser. It can be made a very pretty house by expending a little money
on it; and I can sell it for enough more to repay me. I am sure nobody
would buy it as it is."

Mercy replied very briefly to this part of Stephen's letter. She had
discussed the question with him often before, and she knew the strict
justice of his claim; but her heart ached for the poor friendless old
woman, who was thus to lose her last dollar. If it had been possible for
Mercy to have continued to pay the rent of the wing herself, she would
gladly have done so; but, at her suggestion of such a thing, Stephen had
been so angry that she had been almost frightened.

"I am not so poor yet, Mercy," he had exclaimed, "as to take charity from
you! I think I should go to the alms-house myself first. I don't see why
old Granny Jacobs is so much to you, any way."

"Only because she is so absolutely friendless, Stephen," Mercy had replied
gently. "I never before knew of anybody who had not a relative or a friend
in the world; and I am afraid they are cruel to the poor people at the
alms-house. They all look so starved and wretched!"

"Well, it will be no more than she deserves," said Stephen; "for she was
cruel to her husband's brother's wife. I used to hear horrid stories, when
I was a boy, about how she drove them out of the house; and she was cruel
to her son too, and drove him away from home. Of course, I am sorry to be
the instrument of punishing her, and I do have a certain pity for the old
woman; but it is really her own fault. She might be living now in comfort
with her son, perhaps, if she had treated him well."

"We can't go by such 'ifs' in this world, Steve," said Mercy, earnestly.
"We have to take things as they are. I don't want to be judged way back in
my life. Only God knows all the 'ifs.'" Such conversations as these had
prepared Mercy for the news which Stephen now wrote her; but they had in
no wise changed her feeling in regard to it. She believed in the bottom of
her heart that Stephen might have secured a tenant, if he had tried. He
had once, in speaking of the matter, dropped a sentence which had shocked
her so that she could never forget it.

"It would be a great deal better for me," he had said, "to have the money
invested in some other way. If the house does fall into my hands, I shall
sell it; and, even if I don't get the full amount of what father loaned, I
shall make it bring us in a good deal more than it does this way."

This sentence rang in Mercy's ears, as she read in Stephen's letter all
his plans for improving the house; but the thing was done, and it was not
Mercy's habit to waste effort or speech over things which could not be
altered.

"I am very sorry," she wrote, "that you have been obliged to take the
house. You know how I always felt for poor old Granny Jacobs. Perhaps we
can do something to make her more comfortable in the alms-house. I think
Lizzy could manage that for us."

And in her own mind Mercy resolved that the old woman should never lack
for food and fire, however unwilling the overseers might be to permit her
to have unusual comforts.

Stephen's next letter opened with these words: "O Mercy, I have such a
strange thing to tell you. I am so excited I can hardly find words. I have
found a lot of money in your old fireplace. Just think of our having sat
there so quietly night after night, within hands' reach of it, all last
winter! And how lucky that I found it, instead of any of the workmen!
They'd have pocketed it, and never said a word."

"To be sure they would," thought Mercy, "and poor old Granny Jacobs would
have been"--she was about to think, "cheated out of her rights again,"
but with a pang she changed the phrase into "none the better off for it.
Oh, how glad I am for the poor old thing! People always said her husband
must have hid money away somewhere."

Mercy read on. "I was in such a hurry to get the house done before the
snow came that I took hold myself, and worked every night and morning
before the workmen came; and, after they had gone, I found this last
night, and I declare, Mercy, I haven't shut my eyes all night long. It
seems to me too good to be true. I think there must be as much as three
thousand dollars, all in solid gold. Some of the coins I don't know the
value of; but the greater proportion of them are English sovereigns. Of
course rich people wouldn't think this such a very big sum, but you and I
know how far a little can go for poor people."

"Yes, indeed," thought Mercy. "Why, it will make the poor old woman
perfectly comfortable all her life: it will give her more than she had
from the house." And Mercy laid the letter in her lap and fell into a
reverie, thinking how strange it was that this good fortune should have
come about by means of an act which had seemed to her cruel on Stephen's
part.

She took the letter up again. It continued: "O Mercy, my darling, do you
suppose you can realize what this sudden lift is to me? All my life I have
found our poverty so hard to bear, and these latter years I have bitterly
felt the hardship of being unable to go out into the world and make my
fortune as other men do, as I think I might, if I were free. But this sum,
small as it is, will be a nucleus, I feel sure it will, of a competency at
least. I know of several openings where I can place it most
advantageously. O Mercy! dear, dear Mercy! what hopes spring up in my
heart! The time may yet come when we shall build up a lovely home
together. Bless old Jacobs's miserliness! How little he knew what he was
hoarding up his gold for!"

At this point, Mercy dropped the letter,--dropped it as if it had been a
viper that stung her. She was conscious of but two things: a strange,
creeping cold which seemed to be chilling her to the very marrow of her
bones; and a vague but terrible sense of horror, mentally. The letter fell
to the floor. She did not observe it. A half-hour passed, and she did not
know that it had been a moment. Gradually, her brain began to rouse into
activity again, and strove confusedly with the thoughts which crowded on
it.

"That would be stealing. He can't mean it. Stephen can't be a thief."
Half-formed, incoherent sentences like these floated in her mind, seemed
to be floating in the air, pronounced by hissing voices.

She pressed her hands to her temples, and sprang to her feet. The letter
rustled on the floor, as her gown swept over it. She turned and looked at
it, as if it were a living thing she would kill. She stooped to pick it
up, and then recoiled from it. She shrank from the very paper. All the
vehemence of her nature was roused. As in the moment of drowning people
are said to review in one swift flash of consciousness their whole lives,
so now in this moment did Mercy look back over the months of her life with
Stephen. Her sense of the baseness of his action now was like a lightning
illuming every corner of the past: every equivocation, every concealment,
every subterfuge he had practised, stood out before her, bare, stripped of
every shred of apology or excuse. "He lies; he has always lied. Why should
he not steal?" she exclaimed. "It is only another form of the same thing.
He stole me, too; and he made me steal him. He is dishonest to the very
core. How did I ever love such a man? What blinded me to his real nature?"

Then a great revulsion of feeling, of tenderness toward Stephen, would
sweep over her, and drown all these thoughts. "O my poor, brave, patient
darling! He never meant to do any thing wrong in his life. He does not see
things as I do: no human soul could see clearly, standing where he stands.
There is a moral warp in his nature, for which he is no more responsible
than a tree is responsible for having grown into a crooked shape when it
was broken down by heavy stones while it was a sapling. Oh, how unjust I
am to him! I will never think such thoughts of him again. My darling, my
darling! He did not stop to think in his excitement that the money was
not his. I daresay he has already seen it differently."

Like waves breaking on a beach, and rolling back again to meet higher
waves and be swallowed up in them, these opposing thoughts and emotions
struggled with each other in Mercy's bosom. Her heart and her judgment
were at variance, and the antagonism was irreconcilable. She could not
believe that her lover was dishonest. She could not but call his act a
theft. The night came and went, and no lull had come to the storm by which
her soul was tossed. She could not sleep. As the morning dawned, she rose
with haggard and weary eyes, and prepared to write to Stephen. In some of
her calmer intervals, she had read the remainder of his letter. It was
chiefly filled with the details of the manner in which the gold had been
hidden. A second fireplace had been built inside the first, leaving a
space of several inches between the two brick walls. On each side two
bricks had been so left that they could be easily taken out and replaced;
and the bags of gold hung upon iron stanchions in the outer wall. What a
strange picture it must have been in the silent night hours,--the old
miser bending above the embers of the dying fire on the hearth, and
reaching down the crevice to his treasures! The bags were of leather,
curiously embossed; they were almost charred by the heat, and the gold was
dull and brown.

"I wonder which old fellow put it there?" said Stephen, at the end of his
letter. "Captain John would have been more likely to have foreign gold;
but why should he hide it in his brother's fireplace? At any rate, to
whichever of them I am indebted for it, I am most profoundly grateful. If
ever I meet him in any world, I'll thank him."

Suddenly the thought occurred to Mercy, "Perhaps old Mrs. Jacobs is dead.
Then there would be nobody who had any right to the money. But no: Stephen
would have told me if she had been."

Still she clung to this straw of a hope; and, when she sat down to write
to Stephen, these words came first to her pen:--

"Is Mrs. Jacobs dead, Stephen? You do not say any thing about her; but I
cannot imagine your thinking for a moment of keeping that money for
yourself, unless she is dead. If she is alive, the money is hers. Nobody
but her husband or his brother could have put it there. Nobody else has
lived in the house, except very poor people. Forgive me, dear, but perhaps
you had not thought of this when you first wrote: it has very likely
occurred to you since then, and I may be making a very superfluous
suggestion." So hard did she cling to the semblance of a trust that all
would yet prove to be well with her love and her lover.

Stephen's reply came by the very next mail. It was short: it ran thus:--

"DEAR DARLING,--I do not know what to make of your letter. Your sentence,
'I cannot imagine your thinking for a moment of keeping that money for
yourself,' is a most extraordinary one. What do you mean by 'keeping it
for myself'? It is mine: the house was mine and all that was in it. Old
Mrs. Jacobs is alive still, at least she was last week; but she has no
more claim on that money than any other old woman in town. I can't suppose
you would think me a thief, Mercy; but your letter strikes me as a very
strange one. Suppose I were to discover that there is a gold mine in the
orchard,--stranger things than that have happened,--would you say that
that also belonged to Mrs. Jacobs and not to me? The cases are precisely
parallel. You have allowed your impulsive feeling to run away with your
judgment; and, as I so often tell you, whenever you do that, you are
wrong. I never thought, however, it would carry you so far as to make you
suspect me of a dishonorable act."

Stephen was deeply wounded. Mercy's attempted reticence in her letter had
not blinded him. He felt what had underlain the words, and it was a hard
blow to him. His conscience was as free from any shadow of guilt in the
matter of that money as if it had been his by direct inheritance from his
own father. Feeling this, he had naturally the keenest sense of outrage at
Mercy's implied accusation.

Before Stephen's second letter came, Mercy had grown calm. The more she
thought the thing over, the more she felt sure that Mrs. Jacobs must be
dead, and that Stephen in his great excitement had forgotten to mention
the fact. Therefore the second letter was even a greater blow to her than
the first: it was a second and a deeper thrust into a wound which had
hardly begun to heal. There was also a tone of confident, almost
arrogant, assumption in the letter, it seemed to Mercy, which irritated
her. She did not perceive that it was the inevitable confidence of a
person so sure he is right that he cannot comprehend any doubt in
another's mind on the subject. There was in Mercy's nature a vein of
intolerance, which was capable of the most terrible severity. She was as
blinded, to Stephen's true position in the matter as he was to hers. The
final moment of divergence had come: its seeds were planted in her nature
and in Stephen's when they were born. Nothing could have hindered their
growth, nothing could have forestalled their ultimate result. It was only
a question of time and of occasion, when the two forces would be arrayed
against each other, and would be found equally strong.

Mercy took counsel with herself now, and delayed answering this second
letter. She was resolved to be just to Stephen.

"I will think this thing over and over," she said to herself, "till I am
sure past all doubt that I am right, before I say another word."

But her long thinking did not help Stephen. Each day her conviction grew
deeper, her perception clearer, her sense of alienation from Stephen
profounder. If a moral antagonism had grown up between them in any other
shape, it would have been less fatal to her love. There were many species
of wrong-doing which would have been less hateful in her sight. It seemed
to her sometimes that there could be no crime in the world which would
appear to her so odious as this. Her imagination dwelt on the picture of
the lonely old woman in the alms-house. She had been several times to see
Mrs. Jacobs, and had been much moved by a certain grim stoicism which gave
almost dignity to her squalor and wretchedness.

"She always had the bearing of a person who knew she was suffering
wrongly, but was too proud to complain," thought Mercy. "I wonder if she
did not all along believe there was something wrong about the mortgage?"
and Mercy's suspicious thoughts and conjectures ran far back into the
past, fastening on the beginnings of all this trouble. She recollected old
Mr. Wheeler's warnings about Stephen, in the first weeks of her stay in
Penfield. She recollected Parson Dorrance's expression, when he found out
that she had paid her rent in advance. She tortured herself by reviewing
minutely every little manoeuvre she had known of Stephen's practising to
conceal his relation with her.

Let Mercy once distrust a person in one particular, and she distrusted him
in all. Let one act of his life be wrong, and she believed that his every
act was wrong in motive, or in relation to others, however specious and
fair it might be made to appear. All the old excuses and apologies she had
been in the habit of making for Stephen's insincerities to his mother and
to the world seemed to her now less than nothing; and she wondered how she
ever could have held them as sufficient. In vain her heart pleaded. In
vain tender memories thrilled her, by their vivid recalling of hours, of
moments, of looks and words. It was with a certain sense of remorse that
she dwelt on them, of shame that she was conscious of clinging to them
still. "I shall always love him, I am afraid," she said to herself; "but I
shall never trust him again,--never!"

And hour by hour Stephen was waiting and looking for his letter.




Chapter XII.



Stephen took Mercy's letter from the post-office at night. It was one week
past the time at which it would have reached him, if it had been written
immediately on the receipt of his. Only too well he knew what the delay
meant. He turned the letter over and over in his hand, and noted without
surprise it was very light. The superscription was written with unusual
care. Mercy's handwriting was free and bold, but illegible, unless she
made a special effort to write with care; and she never made that effort
in writing to Stephen. How many times he had said to her: "Never mind how
you write to me, dear. I read your sentences by another sense than the
sense of sight." This formally and neatly written, superscription smote
him, as a formal bow and a chilling glance from Mercy would, if he had
passed her on the street.

He carried the letter home unopened. All through the evening it lay like a
leaden weight in his bosom, as he sat by his mother's side. He dared not
read it until he was sure of being able to be alone for hours. At last he
was free. As he went upstairs to his room, he thought to himself, "This is
the hour at which I used to fly to her, and find such welcome. A year ago
to-night how happy we were!" With a strange disposition to put off the
opening of the letter, he moved about his room, rearranged the books,
lighted an extra lamp, and finally sat down in an arm-chair, and leaning
both his arms on the table looked at the letter lying there so white, so
still. He felt a preternatural consciousness of what was in it; and he
shrank from looking at the words, as a condemned prisoner might shrink
from reading his own death-warrant. The room was bitterly cold. Fires in
bed-rooms were a luxury Stephen had never known. As he sat there, his body
and heart seemed to be growing numb together. At last he said, "I may as
well read it," and took the letter up. As he opened it and read the first
words, "My darling Stephen," his heart gave a great bound. She loved him
still. What a reprieve in that! He had yet to learn that love can be
crueller than any friendship, than any indifference, than any hate:
nothing is so exacting, so inexorable, as love. The letter was full of
love; but it was, nevertheless, hard and pitiless in its tone. Stephen
read it again and again: then he held it in the flame of the lamp, and let
it slowly burn, until only a few scorched fragments remained. These he
folded in a small paper, and put into his pocket-book. Why he did this, he
could not tell, and wondered at himself for doing it. Then he walked the
room for an hour or two, revolving in his mind what he should say to
Mercy. His ideas arranged themselves concisely and clearly. He had been
stung by Mercy's letter into a frame of feeling hardly less inexorable
than her own. He said to himself, "She never truly loved me, or nothing
under heaven could make her believe me capable of a dishonesty;" and, in
midst of all his pain at this thought, he had an indignant resentment, as
if Mercy herself had been in some way actively responsible for all this
misery.

His letter was shorter than Mercy's. They were sad, strange letters to
have passed between lovers. Mercy's ran as follows:--

"MY DARLING STEPHEN,--Your letters have shocked me so deeply that I find
myself at a loss for words in which to reply. I cannot understand your
present position at all. I have waited all these days, hoping that some
new light would come to me, that I could see the whole thing differently;
but I cannot. On the contrary, each hour that I think of it (and I have
thought of nothing else since your second letter came) only makes my
conviction stronger. Darling, that money is Mrs. Jacobs's money, by every
moral right. You may be correct in your statement as to the legal rights
of the case. I take it for granted that you are. At any rate, I know
nothing about that; and I rest no argument upon it at all. But it is clear
as daylight to me that morally you are bound to give her the money.
Suppose you had had permission from her to make those changes in the
house, while you were still her tenant, and had found the money, then you
would have handed it to her unhesitatingly. Why? Because you would have
said, 'This woman's husband built this house. No one except his brother
who could possibly have deposited this money here has lived in the house.
One of those two men was the owner of that gold. In either case, she is
the only heir, and it is hers. I am sure you would have felt this, had we
chanced to discover the money on one of those winter nights you refer to.
Now in what has the moral obligation been changed by the fact that the
house has come into your hands? Not by ordinary sale, either; but simply
by foreclosure of a mortgage, under conditions which were certainly very
hard for Mrs. Jacobs, inasmuch as one-half the interest has always been
paid. This money which you have found would have paid nearly the whole of
the original loan. It was hers, only she did not know where it lay. O
Stephen, my darling, I do implore you not to do this great wrong. You will
certainly come to see, sooner or later, that it was a dishonest act; and
then it will be too late to undo it. If I thought that by talking with you
I could make you see it as I do, I would come to you at once. But I keep
clinging to the hope that you will see it of yourself, that a sudden
realization of it will burst upon you like a great light. Don't speak so
angrily to me of calling you a thief. I never used the word. I never
could. I know the act looks to you right, or you would not commit it. But
it is terrible to me that it should look so to you. I feel, darling, as if
you were color-blind, and I saw you about to pick a most deadly fruit,
whose color ought to warn every one from touching it; but you, not seeing
the color, did not know the danger; and I must save you at all hazards, at
all costs. Oh, what shall I say, what shall I say! How can I make you see
the truth? God help us if I do not; for such an act as this on your part
would put an impassable gulf between our souls for ever. Your loving,

"MERCY."

Stephen's letter was in curter phrase. Writing was not to him a natural
form of expression. Even of joyous or loving words he was chary, and much
more so of their opposites. His life-long habit of repression of all signs
of annoyance, all complaints, all traces of suffering, told still more on
his written words than on his daily speech and life. His letter sounded
harder than it need for this reason; seemed to have been written in
antagonism rather than in grief, and so did injustice to his feeling.

"MY DEAR MERCY,--It is always a mistake for people to try to impose their
own standards of right and wrong on others. It gives me very great pain to
wound you in any way, you know that; and to wound you in such a way as
this gives me the greatest possible pain. But I cannot make your
conscience mine. If this money had not seemed to me to be justly my own, I
should never have thought of taking it. As it does seem to me to be justly
my own, your believing it to be another's ought not to change my action.
If I had only my own future to consider, I might give it up, for the sake
of your peace of mind. But it is not so. I have a helpless invalid
dependent on me; and one of the hardest things in my life to bear has
always been the fear that I might lose my health, and be unable to earn
even the poor living we now have. This sum, small as it is, will remove
that fear, will enable me to insure for my mother a reasonable amount of
comfort as long as she lives; and I cannot give it up. I do not suppose,
either, that it would make any difference in your feeling if I gave it up
solely to please you, and not because I thought it wrong to keep it. How
any act which I honestly believe to be right, and which you know I
honestly believe to be right, can put 'an impassable gulf between our
souls for ever,' I do not understand. But, if' it seems so to you, I can
only submit; and I will try to forget that you ever said to me, 'I shall
trust you till I die!' O Mercy, Mercy, ask yourself if you are just!

"STEPHEN."

Mercy grasped eagerly at the intimation in this letter that Stephen might
possibly give the money up because she desired it.

"Oh, if he will only not keep it, I don't care on what grounds he gives it
up!" she exclaimed. "I can bear his thinking it was his, if only the money
goes where it belongs. He will see afterwards that I was right." And she
sat down instantly, and wrote Stephen a long letter, imploring him to do
as he had suggested.

"Darling," she said, "this last letter of yours has given me great
comfort." As Stephen read this sentence, he uttered an ejaculation of
surprise. What possible comfort there could have been in the words he
remembered to have written he failed to see; but it was soon made clear to
him.

"You say," she continued, "that you might possibly give the money up for
sake of my peace of mind, if it were not for the fear that your mother
might suffer. O Stephen, then give it up! give it up! Trust to the
future's being at least as kind as the past. I will not say another word
about the right or wrong of the thing. Think that my feeling is all morbid
and overstrained about it, if you will. I do not care what you think of
me, so that I do not have to think of you as using money which is not your
own. And, darling, do not be anxious about the future: if any thing
happens to you, I will take care of your mother. It is surely my right
next to yours. I only wish you would let me help you in it even now. I am
earning more and more money. I have more than I need. Oh, if you would
only take some of it, darling! Why should you not? I would take it from
you, if you had it and I had not. I could give you in a very few years as
much as this you have found and never miss it. Do let me atone to you in
this way for your giving up what you think is your right in the matter of
this ill-fated money. O Stephen, I could be almost happy again, if you
would do this! You say it would make no difference in my feeling about it,
if you gave the money up only to please me, and not because you thought it
wrong to keep it. No, indeed! that is not so. I would be happier, if you
saw it as I do, of course; but, if you cannot, then the next best thing,
the only thing left for my happiness, is to have you yield to my wish.
Why, Stephen, I have even felt so strongly about it as this: that
sometimes, in thinking it over, I have had a wild impulse to tell you that
if you did not give the money to Mrs. Jacobs I would inform the
authorities that you had it, and so test the question whether you had the
right to keep it or not. Any thing, even your humiliation, has at times
seemed to me better than that you should go on living in the possession of
stolen money. You can see from this how deeply I felt about the thing. I
suppose I really never could have done this. At the last moment, I should
have found it impossible to array myself against you in any such public
way; but, oh, my darling, I should always have felt as if I helped steal
the money, if I kept quiet about it. You see I use a past tense already, I
feel so certain that you will give it up now. Dear, dear Stephen, you will
never be sorry: as soon as it is done, you will be glad. I wish that gold
had been all sunk in the sea, and never seen light again, the sight of it
has cost us so dear. Darling, I can't tell you what a load has rolled off
my heart. Oh, if you could know what it has been to me to have this cloud
over my thoughts of you! I have always been so proud of you,
Stephen,--your patience, your bravery. In my thought, you have stood
always for my ideal of the beautiful alliance of gentleness and strength.
Darling, we owe something to those who love us: we owe it to them not to
disappoint them. If I were to be tempted to do some dishonorable thing, I
should say to myself: 'No, for I must be what Stephen believes me. It is
not only that I will not grieve him: still more, I will not disappoint
him.'"

Mercy wrote on and on. The reaction from the pent-up grief, the prolonged
strain, was great. In her first joy at any, even the least, alleviation of
the horror she had felt at the thought of Stephen's dishonesty, she
over-estimated the extent of the relief she would feel from his
surrendering the money at her request. She wrote as buoyantly, as
confidently, as if his doing that would do away with the whole wrong from
the beginning. In her overflowing, impetuosity, also, she did not consider
what severe and cutting things were implied as well as said in some of her
sentences. She closed the letter without rereading it, hastened to send it
by the first mail, and then began to count the days which must pass before
Stephen's answer could reach her.

Alas for Mercy! this was a sad preparation for the result which was to
follow her hastily written words. It seems sometimes as if fate delighted
in lifting us up only to cast us down, in taking us up into a high
mountain to show us bright and goodly lands, only to make our speedy
imprisonment in the dark valley the harder to bear.

Stephen read this last letter of Mercy's with an ever-increasing sense of
resentment to the very end. For the time being it seemed to actually
obliterate every trace of his love for her. He read the words as
wrathfully as if they had been written by a mere acquaintance.

"Good heavens!" he exclaimed. "'Stolen money! Inform the authorities!'
Let her do it if she likes and see how she would come out at the end of
that.' And Stephen wrote Mercy very much such a letter as he would have
written to a man under the same circumstances. Luckily, he kept it a day,
and, rereading it in a cooler moment was shocked at its tone, destroyed
it, and wrote another. But the second one was no less hard, only more
courteous, than the first. It ran thus:--

"MERCY,--I am sorry that any thing in my last letter should have led you
to suppose that under the existing circumstances you could control my
actions. All I said was that I might, for the sake of your peace of mind,
give up this money, if it were not for my obligations to my mother. It was
a foolish thing to say, since those obligations could not be done away
with. I ought to have known that in your overwrought frame of mind you
would snatch at the suggestion, and make it the basis of a fresh appeal.

"Now let me say, once for all, that my mind is firmly made up on this
subject, and that it must be dropped between us. The money is mine, and I
shall keep it. If you think it your duty to 'inform the authorities,' as
you say, you must do so; and I would not say one word to hinder you. I
would never, as you do in this case, attempt to make my own conscience the
regulator of another's conduct. If you do regard me as the possessor of
'stolen money,' it is undoubtedly your duty to inform against me. I can
only warn you that all you would gain by it would be a most disagreeable
exposure of your own and my private affairs, and much mortification to
both of us. The money is mine beyond all question. I shall not reply to
any more letters from you on this subject. There is nothing more to be
said; and all prolonging of the discussion is a needless pain, and is
endangering the very foundations of our affection for each other. I want
to say one thing more, however; and I hope it will impress you as it
ought. Never forget that the strongest proof that my conscience was
perfectly clear in regard to that money is that I at once told you of its
discovery. It would have been perfectly easy for me to have accounted to
you in a dozen different ways for my having come into possession of a
little money, or even to have concealed from you the fact that I had done
so; and, if I had felt myself a thief, I should certainly have taken good
care that you did not know it.

"I must also thank you for your expressions of willingness to take care of
my mother, in case of any thing's happening to me. Until these last
letters of yours, I had often thought, with a sense of relief, that, if I
died, you would never see my mother suffer; but now any such thought is
inseparably associated with bitter memories. And my mother will not, in
any event, need your help; for the money I shall have from the sale of the
house, together with this which I have found, will give her all she will
require.

"You must forgive me if this letter sounds hard, Mercy. I have not your
faculty of mingling endearing epithets with sharp accusations and
reproaches. I cannot be lover and culprit at once, as you are able to be
lover and accuser, or judge. I love you, I think, as deeply and tenderly
as ever; but you yourself have made all expression of it impossible.
STEPHEN."

This letter roused in Mercy most conflicting emotions. Wounded feeling at
its coldness, a certain admiration for its tone of immovable resolution,
anger at what seemed to her Stephen's unjustifiable resentment of her
effort to influence his action,--all these blended in one great pain which
was well-nigh unbearable. For the time being, her distress in regard to
the money seemed cast into shadow and removed by all this suffering in her
personal relation with Stephen; but the personal suffering had not so deep
a foundation as the other. Gradually, all sense of her own individual
hurts in Stephen's words, in his acts, in the weakening of the bond which
held them together, died out, and left behind it only a sense of
bereavement and loss; while the first horror of Stephen's wrong-doing, of
the hopeless lack in his moral nature, came back with twofold intensity.
This had its basis in convictions,--in convictions which were as strong as
the foundations of the earth: the other had its basis in emotions, in
sensibilities which might pass away or be dulled.

Spite of Stephen's having forbidden all reference to the subject, Mercy
wrote letter after letter upon it, pleading sometimes humbly, sometimes
vehemently. It seemed to her that she was fighting for Stephen's very
life, and she could not give way. To all these out-pourings Stephen made
no reply. He answered the letters punctually, but made no reference to the
question of the money, save by a few short words at the end of his letter,
or in a postscript: such as, "It grieves me to see that you still dwell on
that matter of which I said we must speak no more;" or, "Pray, dear Mercy,
do not prolong that painful discussion. I have nothing more to say to you
about it."

For the rest, his letters were faithful transcripts of the little events
of his uneventful life, warm comments on any of Mercy's writings which he
read, and gentle assurances of his continued affection. The old longings,
broodings, and passionate yearnings, which he used to pour out, ceased.
Stephen was wounded to the very quick; and the wound did not heal. Yet he
felt no withdrawal from Mercy: probably nothing she could do would ever
drive him from her. He would die, if worst came to worst, lying by her
side and looking up in her eyes, like a dog at the feet of its master who
had shot him.

Mercy was much moved by this tone of patience in his letters: it touched
her, as the look of patient endurance on his face used to touch her. It
also irritated her, it was so foreign to her own nature.

"How can he help answering these things I say?" she would exclaim. "He has
no right to refuse to talk with me about such a vital matter." If any one
had said to Mercy, "He has as much right to refuse to discuss the question
as you have to force it upon him," she could not have seen the point
fairly.

But all Stephen's patience, gentleness, and firmness did not abate one jot
or tittle of Mercy's conviction that he was doing a dishonest thing. Oh
the contrary, his quiet appeared to her more and more like a callous
satisfaction; and his occasional cheerfulness, like an exultation over his
ill-gotten gains. Slowly there crept into her feeling towards him a
certain something which was akin to scorn,--the most fatal of deaths to
love. The hateful word "thief" seemed to be perpetually ringing in her
ears. When she read accounts of robberies, of defalcations, of breaches of
trust, she found herself always drawing parallels between the conduct of
these criminals and Stephen's. The secrecy, the unassailable safety of his
crime, seemed to her to make it inexpressibly more odious.

"I do believe," she thought to herself again and again, "that if he had
been driven by his poverty to knocking men down on the highway, and
robbing them of their pocket-books, I should not have so loathed it!"

As the weeks went on, Mercy's unhappiness increased rather than
diminished. There seemed an irreconcilible conflict between her love and
every other emotion in her soul. She seemed to herself to be, as it were,
playing the hypocrite to her own heart in thinking thus of a man and
loving him still; for that she still loved Stephen, she did not once
doubt. At this time, she printed a little poem, which set many of her
friends to vondering from what experience of hers it could possibly have
been drawn. Mercy's poems were so largely subjective in tone that it was
hard for her readers to believe that they were not all drawn from her own
individual experience.

  A WOMAN'S BATTLE.

    Dear foe, I know thou'lt win the fight;
    I know thou hast the stronger bark,
    And thou art sailing in the light,
    While I am creeping in the dark.
  Thou dost not dream that I am crying,
  As I come up with colors flying.

    I clear away my wounded, slain,
    With strength like frenzy strong and swift;
    I do not feel the tug and strain,
    Though dead are heavy, hard to lift.
  If I looked on their faces dying,
  I could not keep my colors flying.

    Dear foe, it will be short,--our fight,--
    Though lazily thou train'st thy guns:
    Fate steers us,--me to deeper night,
    And thee to brighter seas and suns;
  But thou'lt not dream that I am dying,
  As I sail by with colors flying!

There was great injustice to Stephen in this poem. When he read it, he
groaned, and exclaimed aloud, "O Mercy! O Mercy!" Then, as he read it over
again, he said, "Surely she could not have meant herself in this: it is
only dramatic. She could never call me her foe." Mercy had often said to
him of some of her most intense poems, "Oh, it was purely dramatic. I just
fancied how anybody would feel under such circumstances;" and he clung to
the hope that it was true in this case. But it was not. Already Mercy had
a sense of antagonism, of warfare, with Stephen, or rather with her love
for him. Already her pride was beginning to array itself in reticence, in
withdrawal, in suppression. More than once she had said to herself "I can
live without him! I could bear that pain better than this." More than once
she had asked herself with a kind of terror, "Do I really wish ever to see
Stephen again?" and had been forced to own in her secret thought that she
shrank from meeting him. She began even to consider the possibility of
deferring the visit to Lizzy Hunter, which she had promised to make in the
spring. As the time drew nearer, her unwillingness to go increased, and
she would no doubt have discovered some way of escape; but one day early
in March a telegram came to her, which left her no longer any room for
choice.

It ran:--

"Uncle Dorrance is not expected to live. He wishes to see you. He is at my
house. Come immediately.

"LIZZY HUNTER."




Chapter XIII.



Within six hours after the receipt of this telegram, Mercy was on her way
to Penfield. Her journey would take a night and part of a day. As the
morning dawned, and she drew near the old familiar scenes, her heart was
wrung with conflicting memories and hopes and fears. The whole landscape
was dreary: the fields were dark and sodden, with narrow banks of
discolored snow lying under the fences, and thin rims of ice along the
edges of the streams and pools. The sky was gray; the bare trees were
gray: all life looked gray and hopeless to Mercy. She had had an
over-mastering presentiment from the moment when she read the telegram
that she should reach Penfield too late to see Parson Dorrance alive. A
strange certainty that he had died in the night settled upon her mind as
soon as she waked from her troubled sleep; and when she reached Lizzy's
door, and saw standing before it the undertaker's wagon, which she so well
remembered, there was no shock of surprise to her in the sight. At the
first sound of Mercy's voice, Lizzy came swiftly forward, and fell upon
her neck in a passion of crying.

"O Mercy, Mercy, he"--

"Yes, dear, I know it," interrupted Mercy, in a calm tone. "I know he is
dead."

"Why, who told you, Mercy?" exclaimed Lizzy. "He only died a few hours
ago,--about daybreak,"

"Oh, I thought he died in the night!" said Mercy, in a strange tone, as if
trying to recollect something accurately about which her memory was not
clear. Her look and her tone filled Lizzy with terror, and banished her
grief for the time being.

"Mercy, Mercy, don't look so!" she exclaimed. "Speak to me! Oh, do cry,
can't you?" And Lizzy's tears flowed afresh.

"No, Lizzy, I don't think I can cry," said Mercy, in the same strange, low
voice. "I wish I could have spoken to him once, though. Did he leave any
word for me? Perhaps there is something he wanted me to do."

Mercy's face was white, and her lips trembled; but her look was hardly the
look of one in sorrow: it was a rapt look, as of one walking on dizzy
heights, breathless with some solemn purpose. Lizzy was convulsed with
grief, sobbing like a child, and pouring out one incoherent sentence after
another. Mercy soothed her and comforted her as a mother might have done,
and finally compelled her to be more calm. Mercy's magnetic power over
those whom she loved was almost unlimited. She forestalled their very
wills, and made them desire what she desired.

"O Mercy, don't make me glad he is dead! You frighten me, darling. I don't
want to stop crying; but you have sealed up all my tears," cried Lizzy,
later in the day, when Mercy had been talking like a seer, who could look
into the streets of heaven, and catch the sound of the songs of angels.

Mercy smiled sadly. "I don't want to prevent your crying, dear," she said,
"if it does you any good. But I am very sure that Mr. Dorrance sees us at
this moment, and longs to tell us how glad he is, and that we must be glad
for him." And Mercy's eyes shone as they looked steadfastly across the
room, as if the empty space were, to her vision, peopled with spirits.
This mood of exalted communion did not leave her. Her face seemed
transfigured by it. When she stood by the body of her loved teacher and
friend, she clasped her hands, and, bending over the face, exclaimed,--

"Oh, how good God was!" Then, turning suddenly to Lizzy, she exclaimed,--

"Lizzy, did you know that he loved me, and asked me to be his wife? This
is why I am thanking God for taking him to heaven."

Lizzy's face paled. Astonishment, incredulity, anger, grief, all blended
in the sudden look she turned upon Mercy. "I thought so! I thought so! But
I never believed you knew it. And you did not love him! Mercy, I will
never forgive you!"

"He forgave me," said Mercy, gently; "and so you might. But I shall never
forgive myself!"

"Mercy Philbrick!" exclaimed Lizzy, "how could you help loving that man?"
And, in her excitement, Lizzy stretched out her right hand towards the
rigid, motionless figure under the white pall. "He was the most glorious
man God ever made."

The two women stood side by side, looking into the face of the dead. It
was a strange place for these words to be spoken. It was as solemn as
eternity.

"I did not help loving him," said Mercy, in a lower tone, her white face
growing whiter as she spoke. "But"--she paused. No words came to her lips,
for the bitter consciousness which filled her heart.

Lizzy's voice sank to a husky whisper.

"But what?" she said. "O Mercy, Mercy! is it Stephen White you love?" And
Lizzy's face, even in that solemn hour, took a look of scorn. "Are you
going to marry Stephen White?" she continued.

"Never, Lizzy,--never!" said Mercy, in a tone as concentrated as if a
lifetime ended there; and, stooping low, she kissed the rigid hands which
lay folded on the heart of the man she ought to have loved, but had not.
Then, turning away, she took Lizzy's hands in hers, and kissing, her
forehead said earnestly,--

"We will never speak again of this, Lizzy, remember." Lizzy was overawed
by her tone, and made no reply.

Parson Dorrance's funeral was a scene which will never be forgotten by
those who saw it. It was on one of the fiercest days which the fierce New
England March can show. A storm of rain and sleet, with occasional
softened intervals of snow, raged all day. The roads were gullies of
swift-running water and icy sloughs; the cold was severe; and the cutting
wind at times drove the sleet and rain in slanting scourges, before which
scarce man or beast could stand. The funeral was held in the village
church, which was larger than the college chapel. Long before the hour at
which the services were to begin, every pew was filled, and the aisles
were crowded with those who could not find seats. From every parish within
twenty miles the mourners had come. There was not one there who had not
heard words of help or comfort from Parson Dorrance's lips. The students
of the college filled the body of the church; the Faculty and
distinguished strangers sat in the front pews. The pews under one of the
galleries had been reserved for the negroes from "The Cedars." Early in
the morning the poor creatures had begun to flock in. Not a seat was
empty: old women, women with babies, old men, boys and girls, wet,
dripping, ragged, friendless, more than one hundred of them,--there they
were. They had walked all that distance in that terrible storm. Each one
had brought in his hand a green bough or a bunch of rock-ferns, something
of green beauty from the woods their teacher had taught them to love. They
sat huddled together, with an expression of piteous grief on every face,
which was enough to touch the stoniest heart. Now and then sobs would
burst from the women, and some old figure would be seen rocking to and fro
in uncontrollable sorrow.

The coffin stood on a table in front of the pulpit. It seemed to be
resting on an altar of cedar and ferns. Mercy had brought from her old
haunts in the woods masses of the glossy evergreen fern, and interwoven
them with the boughs of cedar. At the end of the services, it was
announced that all who wished could pass by the coffin and take one last
look at their friend.

Slowly and silently the congregation passed up the right aisle, looked on
the face, and passed out at the left door. It was a pathetic sight to see
the poor, outcast band wait patiently, humbly, till every one else had
gone: then, like a flock of stricken sheep, they rushed confusedly towards
the pulpit, and gathered round the coffin. Now burst out the grief which
had been pent up: with cries and ejaculations, they went tottering and
stumbling down the aisles. One old man, with hair as white as snow,--one
of the original fugitive slaves who had founded the settlement,--bent over
the coffin at its head, and clung with both hands to its edge, swaying
back and forth above it, crying aloud, till the sexton was obliged to
loosen his grasp and lead him away by force.

The college faculty still sat in the front pews. There were some of their
number, younger men, scholars and men of the world, who had not been free
from a disposition to make good-natured fun of Parson Dorrance's
philanthropies. They shrugged their shoulders sometimes at the mention of
his parish at "The Cedars;" they regarded him as old-fashioned and
unpractical. They sat conscience-stricken and abashed now; the tears of
these bereaved black people smote their philosophy and their worldliness,
and showed them how shallow they were. Tears answered to tears, and the
college professors and the negro slaves wept together.

"They have nobody left to love them now," exclaimed one of the youngest
and hitherto most cynical of Parson Dorrance's colleagues, as he stood
watching the grief-stricken creatures.

While the procession formed to bear the body to the grave, the blacks
stood in a group on the church-steps, watching it. After the last carriage
had fallen into line, they hurried down and followed on in the storm. In
vain some kindly persons tried to dissuade them. It was two miles to the
cemetery, two miles farther away from their homes; but they repelled all
suggestions of the exposure with indignant looks, and pressed on. When the
coffin was lowered into the grave, they pushed timidly forward, and began
to throw in their green boughs and bunches of ferns. Every one else
stepped back respectfully as soon as their intention was discovered, and
in a moment they had formed in solid ranks close about the grave, each one
casting in his green palm of crown and remembrance,--a body-guard such as
no emperor ever had to stand around him in his grave.

On the day after Mercy's arrival in town, Stephen had called to see her.
She had sent down to him a note with these words:--

"I cannot see you, dear Stephen, until after all is over. The funeral will
be to-morrow. Come the next morning, as early as you like."

The hours had seemed bitterly long to Stephen. He had watched Mercy at the
funeral; and, when he saw her face bowed in her hands, and felt rather
than saw that she was sobbing, he was stung by a new sense of loss and
wrong that he had no right to be by her side and comfort her. He forgot
for the time, in the sight of her grief, all the unhappiness of their
relation for the past few months. He had unconsciously felt all along
that, if he could but once look in her eyes, all would be well. How
could he help feeling so, when he recalled the expression of childlike
trust and devotion which her sweet face always wore when she lifted it to
his? And now, as his eyes dwelt lingeringly and fondly on every line of
her bowed form, he had but one thought, but one consciousness,--his desire
to throw his arms about her, and exclaim, "O Mercy, are you not my own, my
very own?"

With his heart full of this new fondness and warmth, Stephen went at an
early hour to seek Mercy. As he entered the house, he was sensibly
affected by the expression still lingering of the yesterday's grief. The
decorations of evergreens and flowers were still untouched. Mercy and
Lizzy had made the whole house gay as for a festival; but the very
blossoms seemed to-day to say that it had been a festival of sorrow. A
large sheaf of callas had stood on a small table at the head of the
coffin. The table had not yet been moved from the place where it stood
near the centre of the room; but it stood there now alone, with a strange
expression of being left by accident. Stephen bent over it, looking into
the deep creamy cups, and thinking dreamily that Mercy's nature was as
fair, as white, as royal as these most royal of graceful flowers, when the
door opened and Mercy came towards him. He sprang to meet her with
outstretched arms. Something in her look made the outstretched arms fall
nerveless; made his springing step pause suddenly; made the very words
die away on his lips. "O Mercy!" was all he could say, and he breathed it
rather than said it.

Mercy smiled a very piteous smile, and said, "Yes, Stephen, I am here."

"O Mercy, it is not you! You are not here. What has done this to you? Did
you so love that man?" exclaimed Stephen, a sudden pang seizing him of
fiercest jealousy of the dead, whom he had never feared while he was
living.

Mercy's face contracted, as if a sharp pain had wrenched every nerve.

"No, I did not love him; that is, not as you mean. You know how very
dearly I did love him, though."

"Dear darling, you are all worn out. This shock has been too much for you.
You are not well," said Stephen, tenderly, coming nearer to her and taking
her hand. "You must have rest and sleep at once."

The hand was not Mercy's hand any more than the voice had been Mercy's
voice. Stephen dropped it, and, looking fixedly at Mercy's eyes,
whispered, "Mercy, you do not love me as you used to."

Mercy's eyes drooped; she locked her hands tightly together, and said, "I
can't, Stephen." No possible form of words could have been so absolute. "I
can't!" "I do not," would have been merciful, would have held a hope, by
the side of this helpless, despairing, "I can't."

Stephen sank into a chair, and covered his eyes with his hands. Mercy
stood still, near the white callas; her hands clasped, and her eyes fixed
on Stephen. At last she spoke, in a voice of unutterable yearning and
tenderness, "I do love you, Stephen."

At these words, he pressed his hands tighter upon his eyes for one second,
then shook them hastily free, and looking up at Mercy said gently,--

"Yes, dear, I know you do; and I know you would have loved me always, if
you could. Do not be unhappy. I told you a long time ago that to have had
you once love me was enough for a lifetime." And Stephen smiled,--a smile
more pathetic than Mercy's had been. He went on, still in the same gentle
voice,--a voice out of which the very life seemed to have died,--"I hoped,
when we met, all would be right. It used to be so much to you, Mercy, to
look into my eyes, I thought you would trust me when you saw me."

No reproach, no antagonism, no entreaty. With the long-trained patience of
a lifetime, Stephen accepted this great grief, and made no effort to
gainsay it. Mercy tried again and again to speak, but no words came. At
last, with a flood of tears, she exclaimed,--

"I cannot help it, Stephen,--I cannot help it."

"No, darling, you cannot help it; and it is not your fault," replied
Stephen. Touched to the heart by his sweetness and forbearance, Mercy went
nearer him, and took his hand, and in her old way was about to lay it to
her cheek.

Stephen drew it hastily away, and a shudder ran over his body. "No, Mercy,
do not try to do that. That is not right, when you do not trust me. You
cannot help loving the touch of my hand, Mercy,"--and a certain sad pride
lighted Stephen's face at the thought of the clinging affection which even
now stirred this woman's veins for him,--"any more than you can help
having ceased to trust me. If the trust ever comes back, then"--Stephen
turned his head away, and did not finish the sentence. A great silence
fell upon them both. How inexplicable it seemed to them that there was
nothing to say! At last Stephen rose, and said gravely,--

"Good-by, Mercy. Unless there is something I can do to help you, I would
rather not see you again."

"No," whispered Mercy. "That is best."

"And if the time ever comes, darling, when you need me, ... or trust me ...
again, will you write to me and say so?"

"Yes," sobbed Mercy, and Stephen left her. On the threshold of the door,
he turned and fixed his eyes upon her with one long look of sorrow,
compassion, and infinite love. Her heart thrilled under it. She made an
eager step forward. If he had returned, she would have thrown herself into
his arms, and cried out, "O Stephen, I do love you, I do trust you." But
Stephen made an inexorable gesture of his hand, which said more than any
words, "No! no! do not deceive yourself," and was gone.

And thus they parted for ever, this man and this woman who had been for
two years all in all to each other, who had written on each other's hearts
and lives characters which eternity itself could never efface.

Hope lived long in Stephen's heart. He built too much on the memories of
his magnetic power over Mercy, and he judged her nature too much by his
own. He would have loved and followed her to the end, in spite of her
having become a very outcast of crime, if she had continued to love him;
and it was simply impossible for him to conceive of her love's being
either less or different. But, when in a volume of poems which Mercy
published one year after their parting, he read the following sonnet, he
knew that all was indeed over:--

  DIED.

  Not by the death that kills the body. Nay,
  By that which even Christ bade us to fear
  Hath died my dead.
                    Ah, me! if on a bier
  I could but see him lifeless stretched to-day,
  I 'd bathe his face with tears of joy, and lay
  My cheek to his in anguish which were near
  To ecstasy, if I could hold him dear
  In death as life. Mere separations weigh
  As dust in balances of love. The death
  That kills comes only by dishonor. Vain
  To chide me! vain! And weaker to implore,
  O thou once loved so well, loved now no more!
  There is no resurrection for such slain,
  No miracle of God could give thee breath!

       *       *       *       *       *

Mercy Philbrick lived thirty years after the events described in these
pages. It was a life rich to overflowing, yet uneventful, as the world
reckons: a life lonely, yet full of companionship; sady yet full of cheer;
hard, and yet perpetually uplifted by an inward joy which made her very
presence like sunshine, and made men often say of her, "Oh, she has never
known sorrow." This was largely the result of her unquenchable gift of
song, of the true poet's temperament, to which life is for ever new,
beautiful, and glad. It was also the result of her ever-increasing
spirituality of nature. This took no shape of creed, worship, or what the
world's common consent calls religion. Most of the words spoken by the
teachers of churches repelled Mercy by their monotonous iteration of the
letter which killeth. But her realization of the solemn significance of
the great fact of being alive deepened every hour; her tenderness, her
sense of brotherhood to every human being, and her sense of the actual
presence and near love of God. Her old intolerance was softened, or rather
it had changed from antagonisms on the surface to living principles at the
core. Truth, truth, truth, was still the war-cry of her soul; and there
was an intensity in every word of her written or spoken pleadings on this
subject which might well have revealed to a careful analyzer of them that
they had sprung out of the depths of the profoundest experiences. Her
influence as a writer was very great. As she grew older, she wrote less
and less for the delight of the ear, more and more for the stirring of the
heart. To do a little towards making people glad, towards making them kind
to one another, towards opening their eyes to the omnipresent
beauty,--these were her ambitions. "Oh, the tender, unutterable beauty of
all created things!" were the opening lines of one of her sweetest songs;
and it might have been said to be one of the watchwords of her life.

It took many years for her to reach this plane, to attain to the fulness
of this close spiritual communion with things seen and unseen. The double
bereavement and strain of her two years of life in Penfield left her for a
long time bruised and sore. Her relation with Stephen, as she looked back
upon it, hurt her in every fibre of her nature. Sometimes she was filled
with remorse for the grief she had caused him, and sometimes with poignant
distress, of doubt whether she had not after all been unjust to him.
Underlying all this remorse, all this doubt was a steadily growing
consciousness that her love for him was in the very outset a mistake, an
abnormal emotion, born of temporary and insufficient occasion, and
therefore sure to have sooner or later proved too weak for the tests of
life. On the other hand, her thoughts of Parson Dorrance grew constantly
warmer, tenderer, more assured. His character, his love for her, his
beautiful life, rose steadily higher and higher, and brighter and brighter
on her horizon, as the lofty snow-clad peaks of a mountain land reveal
themselves in all their grandeur to our vision only when we have journeyed
away from their base. Slowly the whole allegiance of her heart transferred
itself to the dead man's memory; slowly her grief for his loss deepened,
and yet with the deepened grief came a certain new and holy joy. It surely
could not be impossible for him to know in heaven that she was his on
earth? As confidently as if she had been wedded to him here, she looked
forward to the reunion with him there, and found in her secret
consciousness of this eternal bond a hidden rapture, such as has been the
stay of many a widowed heart through long lifetimes of loneliness. This
secret bond was like an impalpable yet impenetrable veil between her soul
and the souls of all men who came into relation with her. Men loved her
and sought her,--loved her warmly and sought her with long years of
devotion. The world often judged her uncharitably by reason of these
friendships, which were only friendships, and yet pointed to a warmer
regard than the world consents that friends may feel. But there was never
a man, of all the men who loved Mercy, who did not feel himself, spite of
all her frank and loving intimacy, withheld, debarred, separated from her
at a certain point, as if there stood drawn up there a cordon of viewless
spirits.

The one grief above which she could not wholly rise, which at times smote
her and bowed her down, was her sense of her loss in being childless. The
heart of mother was larger in her even than the heart of wife. Her longing
for children of her own was so great that it was often more than she could
bear to watch little children at their play. She stood sometimes at her
window at dusk, and watched the poor laboring men and women going home,
leading or carrying their children; and it seemed as if her heart would
break. Everywhere, her eye noted the swarming groups of children, poor,
uncared for, so often unwelcome; and she said sadly to herself, "So many!
so many! and not one for me." Yet she never felt any desire to adopt
children. She distrusted her own patience and justice too much; and she
feared too deeply the development of hereditary traits which she could not
conquer; "I might find that I had taken a liar," she thought; "and I
should hate him."

As she reached middle age, this unsatisfied desire ceased to be so great a
grief. She became more and more like a motherly friend to the young people
surrounding her. Her house was a home to them all, and she reproduced in
her own life very nearly the relation which Parson Dorrance had held to
the young people of Danby. Her friend Lizzy Hunter was now the mother of
four girls, all in their first young womanhood. They all strove eagerly
for the privilege of living with "Aunt Mercy," and went in turn to spend
whole seasons with her.

On Stephen White's thirty-sixth birthday, his mother died. The ten years
which had passed since Mercy left him had grown harder and harder, day by
day; but he bore the last as silently and patiently as he bore the first,
and Mrs. White's last words to the gray-haired man who bent over her bed
were,--

"You have been a good boy, Steve,--a good boy. You'll have some rest now."

Since the day he bade good-by to Mercy in the room from which Parson
Dorrance had just been buried, Stephen had never written to her, never
heard from her, except as all the world heard from her, in her published
writings. These he read eagerly, and kept them carefully in scrap-books.
He took great delight in collecting all the copies of her verses.
Sometimes a little verse of hers would go the rounds of the newspapers
for months, and each reappearance of it was a new pleasure to Stephen. He
knew most of them by heart; and he felt that he knew Mercy still, as well
as he knew her when she looked up in his face. On the night of his
mother's death he wrote to her these words:--

"MERCY,--It is ten years since we parted. I love you as I loved you then.
I shall never love any other woman. I am free now. My mother has died this
night. May I come and see you? I ask nothing of you, except to be your
friend. Can I not be that?

"STEPHEN."

If a ghost of one dead for ten years had entered her presence, Mercy had
hardly been more startled. Stephen had ceased to be a personality to her.
Striving very earnestly with herself to be kind, and to do for this
stranger whom she knew not what would be the very best and most healing
thing for his soul, Mercy wrote to him as follows:--

"DEAR STEPHEN,--Your note was a very great surprise to me. I am most
heartily thankful that you are at last free to live your life like other
men. I think that the future ought to hold some very great and good gifts
in store for you, to reward you for your patience. I have never known any
human being so patient as you.

"You must forgive me for saying that I do not believe it is possible for us
to be friends. I could be yours, and would be glad to be so. But you could
not be mine while you continue so to set me apart from all other women,
as you say you do, in your affection. I am truly grieved that you do this,
and I hope that in your new free life you will very soon find other
relations which will make you forget your old one with me. I did you a
great harm, but we were both ignorant of our mistake. I pray that it may
yet be repaired, and that you may soon be at rest in a happy home with a
wife and children. Then I should be glad to see you: until then, it is not
best.

"Yours most honestly,

"MERCY."

Until he read this letter, Stephen had not known that secretly in the
bottom of his heart he riad all these years cherished a hope that there
might yet be a future in store for him and Mercy. Now, by the new sense of
desolation which he felt, he knew that there must have been a little more
life than he thought left; in him to die.

As soon as his mother was buried, he closed the house and went abroad.
There he roamed about listlessly from country to country, for many years,
acquiring a certain desultory culture, and buying, so far as his income
would permit, every thing he saw which he thought Mercy would like. Then
he went home, bought the old Jacobs house back again, and fitted it up in
every respect as Mercy had once suggested. This done, he sat down to
wait--for he knew not what. He had a vague feeling that he would die soon,
and leave the house and his small fortune to Mercy; and she would come and
spend her summers there, and so he would recall to her their old life
together. He led the life of a hermit,--rarely went out, and still more
rarely saw any one at home. He looked like a man of sixty rather than like
one of fifty. He was fast becoming an invalid, more, however, from the
lack of purpose and joy than from any disease. Life had been very hard to
Stephen.

Nothing seemed more probable, contrasting his listless figure, gray hair,
and jaded face with Mercy's full, fresh countenance and bounding
elasticity, than that his dream of going first, and leaving to her the
gift of all he had, would be realized; but he was destined to outlive her
by many a long year.

Mercy's death was a strange one. She had gone with two of Lizzy Hunter's
daughters to spend a few weeks in one of the small White Mountain
villages, which was a favorite haunt of hers. The day after their arrival,
a two days' excursion to some of the mountains was proposed; and Mercy,
though not feeling well enough to join it herself, insisted that the girls
should go. They were reluctant to leave her; but, with her usual
vehemence, she resisted all their protestations, and compelled them to
join the party. She was thus left alone in a house crowded with people,
all of whom were strangers to her. Some of them recollected afterward to
have noticed her sitting on the piazza at sunset, looking at the mountains
with an expression of great delight; but no one spoke with her, and no one
missed her the next morning, when she did not come to breakfast. Late in
the forenoon, the landlady came running in great terror and excitement to
one of the guests, exclaiming: "That lady that came yesterday is dying.
The chambermaids could not get into her room, nor get any answer, so we
broke open the door. The doctor says she'll never come to again!"

Helpless, the village doctor, and the servants, and the landlady, and as
many of the guests as could crowd into the little room, stood around
Mercy's bed. It seemed a sad way to die, surrounded by strangers, who did
not even know her name; but Mercy was unconscious. It made no difference
to her. Her heavy breathing told only too well the nature of the trouble.

"This cannot be the first attack she has had," said the doctor; and it was
found afterward that Mercy had told Lizzy Hunter of her having twice had
threatenings of a paralytic seizure. "If only I die at once," she had said
to Lizzy, "I would rather go that way than in most others. I dread the
dying part of death. I don't want to know when I am going."

And she did not. All day her breathing grew slower and more labored, and
at night it stopped. In a few hours, there settled upon her features an
expression of such perfect peace that each one who came to look at her
stole away reverent and subdued.

The two old crones who had come to "lay out" the body crept about on
tiptoe, their usual garrulity quenched by the sad and beautiful spectacle.
It was a singular thing that no one knew the name of the stranger who had
died thus suddenly and alone. In the confusion of their arrival, Mercy
had omitted to register their names. In the smaller White Mountain houses,
this formality is not rigidly enforced. And so it came to pass that this
woman, so well known, so widely beloved, lay a night and a day dead,
within a few hours' journey of her home as unknown as if she had been cast
up from a shipwrecked vessel on a strange shore.

The two old crones sat with the body all night and all the next day. They
sewed on the quaint garments in which it is still the custom of rural New
England to robe the dead. They put a cap of stiff white muslin over
Mercy's brown hair, which even now, in her fiftieth year, showed only here
and there a silver thread. They laid fine plaits of the same stiff white
muslin over her breast, and crossed her hands above them.

"She must ha' been a handsome woman in her time, Mis' Bunker. I 'spect
she was married, don't you?" said Ann Sweetser, Mrs. Bunker's spinster
cousin, who always helped her on these occasions.

"Well, this ere ring looks like it," replied Mrs. Bunker, taking up a bit
of the muslin and rubbing the broad gold band on the third finger of
Mercy's left hand. "But yer can't allers tell by that nowadays. There's
folks wears 'em that ain't married. This is a real harndsome ring, 's
heavy 's ever I see."

How Mercy's heart must have been touched, and also her fine and pathetic
sense of humor, if her freed spirit hovered still in that little
low-roofed room! This cast-off garment of hers, so carefully honored, so
curiously considered and speculated upon by these simple-minded people!
There was something rarely dramatic in all the surroundings of these last
hours. Among the guests in the house was one, a woman, herself a poet, who
toward the end of the second day came into the chamber, bringing long
trailing vines of the sweet Linnea, which was then in full bloom. Her
poet's heart was moved to the depths by the thought of this unknown, dead
woman lying there, tended by strangers' hands. She gazed with an
inexplicable feeling of affection upon Mercy's placid brow. She lifted the
lifeless hands and laid them down again in a less constrained position.
She, too, noted the broad gold ring, and said,--

"She has been loved then. I wonder if he is alive!" The door was closed,
and no one was in the room. With a strange impulse she could not account
for to herself, she said, "I will kiss her for him," and bent and kissed
the cold forehead. Then she laid the fragrant vines around the face and
across the bosom, and went away, feeling an inexplicable sense of nearness
to the woman she had kissed. When the next morning she knew that it was
Mercy Philbrick, the poet, in whose lifeless presence she had stood, she
exclaimed with a burst of tears, "Oh, I might have known that there was
some subtile bond which made me kiss her! I have always loved her verses
so."

On the day after Lizzy Hunter returned from Mercy's funeral, Stephen White
called at her house and asked to speak to her. She had almost forgotten
his existence, though she knew that he was living in the Jacobs house.
Their paths never crossed, and Lizzy had long ago forgotten her passing
suspicion of Mercy's regard for him. The haggard and bowed man who met her
now was so unlike the Stephen White she recollected, that Lizzy
involuntarily exclaimed. Stephen took no notice of her exclamation.

"No, thank you, I will not sit down," he said, as with almost solicitude
in her face she offered him a chair. "I merely wish to give you something
of"--he hesitated--"Mrs. Philbrick's."

He drew from his breast a small package of papers, yellow, creased, old.
He unfolded one of these and handed it to Lizzy, saying,--

"This is a sonnet of hers which has never been printed. She gave it to me
when,"--he hesitated again,--"when she was living in my house. She said at
that time that she would like to have it put on her tombstone. I did not
know any other friend of hers to go to but you. Will you see that it is
done?"

Lizzy took the paper and began to read the sonnet. Stephen stood leaning
heavily on the back of a chair; his breath was short, and his face much
flushed.

"Oh, pray sit down, Mr. White! You are ill," exclaimed Lizzy.

"No, I am not ill. I would rather stand," replied Stephen. His eyes were
fixed on the spot where thirty years before Mercy had stood when she said,
"I can't, Stephen."

Lizzy read the sonnet with tears rolling down her cheeks.

"Oh, it is beautiful,--beautiful!" she exclaimed. "Why did she never have
it printed?"

Stephen colored and hesitated. One single thrill of pride followed by a
bitter wave of pain, and he replied,--

"Because I asked her not to print it."

Lizzy's heart was too full of tender grief now to have any room for wonder
or resentment at this, or even to realize in that first moment that there
was any thing strange in the reply.

"Indeed, it shall be put on the stone," she said. "I am so thankful you
brought it. I have been thinking that there were no words fit to put above
her grave. No one but she herself could have written any that would be,"
and she was folding up the paper.

Stephen stretched out his hand. "Pardon me," he said, "I cannot part with
that. I have brought a copy to leave with you," and he gave Lizzy another
paper.

Mechanically she restored to him the first one, and gazed earnestly into
his face. Its worn and harrowed features, its look of graven patience,
smote her like a cry. She was about to speak to him eagerly and with
sympathy, but he was gone. His errand was finished,--the last thing he
could do for Mercy. She watched his feeble steps as he walked away, and
her pity revealed to her the history of his past.

"How he loved her! how he loved her!" she said, and watched his figure
lingeringly, till it was out of sight.

This is the sonnet which was cut on the stone above Mercy's grave:--

  EMIGRAVIT.

  With sails full set, the ship her anchor weighs;
  Strange names shine out beneath her figure-head:
  What glad farewells with eager eyes are said!
  What cheer for him who goes, and him who stays!
  Fair skies, rich lands, new homes, and untried days
  Some go to seek: the rest but wait instead
  Until the next stanch ship her flag shall raise.
  Who knows what myriad colonies there are
  Of fairest fields, and rich, undreamed-of gains,
  Thick-planted in the distant shining plains
  Which we call sky because they lie so far?
  Oh, write of me, not,--"Died in bitter pains,"
  But, "Emigrated to another star!"





End of Project Gutenberg's Mercy Philbrick's Choice, by Helen Hunt Jackson

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10519 ***
eeailverInrlhe Project Gutenberg EBook of De complete werken van Joost van Vondel, by 
Joost van  Vondel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: De complete werken van Joost van Vondel

Author: Joost van  Vondel

Editor: H.J. Allard

Release Date: June 11, 2007 [EBook #21800]

Language: Dutch

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WERKEN VAN JOOST VAN VONDEL ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









   DE COMPLETE WERKEN

   VAN

   JOOST VAN VONDEL.



   MET EENE VOORREDE

   VAN

   H. J. ALLARD,


   LEERAAR AAN 'T SEMINARIE TE KUILENBURG.



   EERSTE DEEL.

   's-Hertogenbosch.âAmsterdam.
   HENRI BOGAERTS, opvolger van P. N. VERHOEVEN.



   1870.





      VOORREDE.


Geheel Nederland door is het overbekend, hoe verdienstelijk de Heer
HENRI BOGAERTS zich gemaakt heeft ten opzichte der katholieke pers, door
zijne talrijke en goedkoope uitgaven van echt-katholieke of althans
onschadelijke werken.

Door aankoop in 't bezit geraakt der Vondel-editie, in de jaren 1864 tot
66 bij H. A. M. ROELANTS te _Schiedam_ verschenen, deed hij mij het
heusch verzoek, om eene Voor- en Narede te schrijven tot dat werk, ten
einde het aldus in te leiden bij de katholieke huisgezinnen, waar hij
zich voorgenomen heeft het tegen een uiterst geringen prijs te
verspreiden.

Dat verzoek heb ik met gretigheid aangenomen.

Aan alle Nederlanders, maar inzonderheid aan NeÃªrlands Katholieken moet,
om genoegzaam bekende redenen, de grootste onzer Dichters, de reinste
glorie van ons vaderland, de katholieke _Joost van den Vondel_ bekend en
dierbaar zijn.

Doch, daartoe is niet voldoende, dat men met zijn naam voor de
buitenlanders brageereâgelijk N. BEETS zich eigenaardig
uitdrukt;âdaartoe is niet voldoende, dat men de vaak vernomen
lofspraken, uit den mond van Vondel-kundigen opgevangen, verder naprate
en voortvertelle; daartoe is niet voldoende, dat men eenige
stukkenâdoorgaans dezelfdeâin deze of gene verzameling hebbe gelezen
of zelfs zich in 't geheugen hebbe geprent: daartoe is ook noodzakelijk,
dat men den edelhartigen man, in geheel zijne persoonlijkheid, leere
kennen uit geheel zijn levensloop, en hem, in al zijne
voortreffelijkheid, leere waardeeren uit al zijne werken[1].

En wie kent Vondel? Wie kent den koning van den Nederlandschen Zangberg?
Wie kent hemâ't zijn de woorden van een deskundigeâin al de waarde
zijner poÃ«zij? Wie heeft de maatgedichten zijner "oorspronkelijke"
snaren in al hun kracht gesmaakt? Wie kent den ganschen omvang zijner
dichtgaaf, in haar heiligen ernst, in haar lachende soms bijtende
scherts, hare oneindige diepte en haar spelenden kinderzin, haar
goddelijken eenvoud, ook bij de stoutste verheffing en de
schrikwekkendste waarheid, haar verkwikkende frischheid, haar
bezielenden gang, den natuurlijken rijkdom harer treffende beelden, en
de zuivere volheid harer keurige kunst? Wie kent haar, in Ã©Ã©n woord, zoo
als zij gekend moest worden, en zoo als haar te kennen, haar te genieten
is?

Dit geldt voor allen:âgansch bijzondere redenen gelden voor de
Katholieken.

Zij alleen zijn volkomen in staat, beter dan hun protestantsche
medechristenen, om een aantal meesterstukken van Vondel te kunnen
begrijpen en smaken.

Immers Vondel, die in het tijdperk der volle kracht van zijn krachtvol
genie en leven tot den schoot der Moederkerk is wedergekeerd, de
katholieke Vondel heeft met zijn gouden luitstift bijna alles
aangeroerd, wat aan Katholieken vooral, en soms uitsluitend, de hoogste
belangstelling inboezemt en hun bij uitstek dierbaar moet wezen.

Hij heeft het hoog-rijzende Vaticaan bezongen en de Stad,

    Die door de zorg der Hoofdapostelen bevrijd
    Gelijk een steenrots staat, daar 't al op stuit en splijt.

Hij heeft de graven dier Hoofdapostelen der Roomsche Kerk, en tevens
Petrus' nazaten, de voorzaten van onzen PIUS, in talrijke gedichten
gevierd; hij heeft in eene dramatische Elegie het bloedig uiteinde
betreurd eener gemartelde Majesteit, eener Maria Stuart, die roomsche
bloedgetuige, die katholieke doode, "over welke tranen zullen gestort
worden, zoolang er tranen op aarde zijn"; hij heeft de ijverige
priesters herdacht, die, te midden der felste beproeving, onder onze
katholieke voorvaderen het heilig geloof behielden en aanwakkerden; hij
heeft aan bijna alle katholieke vermaardheden van zijn tijd de hulde
zijner bewondering en hoogschatting gebracht, van de Spaansche
Aartshertogin Isabella-Clara-Eugenia en de Zweedsche Koningin
Christina-Maria-Alexandra, tot de Hoornsche "arme Klarisse" Anna
Bruyningh en het Amsterdamsche JezuÃ¯eten-klopjen Dina Noordijck; hij
heeft aan de "Feniksmaagd", aan de Moeder des Heeren, een aantal schoone
dichtregels gewijd; hij heeft het hoogheilig Altaarsakrament
verheerlijkt in een voortreffelijk leerdicht, dat Ã¨n den
wetenschappelijken zin van een godgeleerde, Ã¨n den fijnsten kunstsmaak
van een letterkundige, Ã¨n het vroom gemoed van den eenvoudigen Christen
gelijkelijk bevredigt; hij heeft de "Heerlijkheden" der Roomsch
Katholieke Kerk bezongen, en in dat gedicht een klemmend betoog geleverd
van haar goddelijken oorsprong, goddelijke wording, goddelijke
uitbreiding; hij heeft "Bespiegelingen" over Gods wezen en Gods
inwendige eigenschappen, over Gods werken naar buiten en Gods
liefdewonderen op aarde, neÃªrgeschreven, die, ontleend aan den H. Thomas
van Aquino, den grootsten wijsgeer en godgeleerde der Middeleeuwen, ons
Dante Allighieri in herinnering brengen, en ook aan de diepste denkers
een onverdeeld kunstgenot verschaffen; hij heeft eindelijk in tal van
schitterende kleinighedenâ't zij bijschrift, 't zij hekelvers, 't zij
treurzang, 't zij dankdicht, 't zij vreugdeliedâschier al het lief en
leed zijner katholieke tijdgenooten bezongen.

Vooral sinds het dankbaar nageslacht, onder algemeene deelneming en
toejuiching, den grooten Nederlander, in het hem zoo dierbaar Amsterdam,
een standbeeld heeft opgericht, en den Dichterkoning ten troone heeft
verheven, is de Vondel-literatuurâen dat verschijnsel is
verblijdendâook van katholieke zijde meer en meer beoefend.

Ik heb hier niet in bijzonderheden te vermelden, wat wij ook in dezen,
aan onzen wakkeren, onzen moedigen, onzen kundigen J. A. ALBERDINGK
THIJM, te danken hebben: eene meer bevoegde hand heeft zich reeds, op
hare wijze, van die taak gekweten en ALBERDINGKS verdiensten op een en
dezelfde lijn geplaatst met die van den grooten Protestantschen
Vondelverklaarder J. V. LENNEP[2].

Ondankbaar zou het wezen, de goede diensten te miskennen of te vergeten,
die de Eerw. Heer J. W. BROUWERS ten opzichte van Vondels herstelling en
herleving bewezen heeft.

Onze hoogstbegaafde dichter, H. J. A. M. SCHAEPMAN, heeft 's lands
oudsten en grootsten PoÃ«et op eene, zijner en Vondel waardige, wijze
bezongenâmenig jeugdig hart heeft hij met geestdrift voor onzen
puikdichter vervuld:

    Vondel!âzie de polsen zwellen
      Van het warmer kloppend bloed;
    In de handen beeft de veder,
      Die dien naam hergeven moet;
    Vondel!âduizend duizend stemmen
      Geven antwoord, zingen 't lied,
    Dat den dichter roemt en huldigt
      Als monarch op 't kunstgebied.

    Vondel!âdichter boven allen,
      Dichter met uw gansche ziel,
    Echo van het eeuwig loflied,
      Dat der englen harp ontviel,
    Dichter, die in aardsche vormen
      't Hemelsch ideaal hergeeft,
    Waar de mensch, de wareldkoning
      In verrukking henenstreeft.

De Eerw. Heer G. F. DRABBE heeft voor eenige jaren het inwendig proces
van Vondels bekeeringsgeschiedenis met zeer veel talent uit de
schriften, 't karakter en de lotgevallen des grooten mans opgemaakt[3],
en zijne opvatting en voorstelling daarvan met even veel talent tegen J.
VAN LENNEP verdedigd[4].

De Katwijksche Leeraar, wijlen P. J. KOETS, heeft eene voortreffelijke
en belangrijke inleiding geschreven tot het onlangs wederom uitgegeven
treurspel "Peter en Pauwels"[5], het eerste gedicht van Vondel, na zijn
openlijken overgang tot de R. K. Kerk in 't licht gegeven, en te
beschouwen Â»als het _ex-voto_ van dien overgang, op het roemrijke graf
der Apostelen neergelegd."

In "de Katholiek"[6] heeft verleden jaar een zeer begaafd Leeraar aan
het Seminarie Hageveld, onder den titel "een kunstbeeld", zelf een
verrukkelijk kunststuk geleverd, waarin hij ons de Maagd _Ifis_ schetst
uit Vondels _Jeftha of offerbelofte_, een treurspel, dat de 72-jarige
grijsaard, met reeds bevende hand, aan jeugdige schrijvers als een
toonbeeld heeft toegereikt.

Ongetwijfeld hebben wij binnen kort iets zeer uitmuntends te verwachten
van den Eerw. Heer J. A. de Rijk, den uitmuntenden spreker en schrijver,
die ons Vondels Â»Maria Stuart" heeft toegezegd.

Eindelijk heb ik zelf, naar best vermogen, getracht het mijne bij te
dragen, om Vondel te populariseeren onder de Katholieken door de uitgave
van _Vondels gedichten op de SociÃ«teit van Jezus_ (1868); _Vondel en de
Moeder des Heeren_ (1869); _Vondel en de Paus_ (1870), een werkje, dat
mij den apostolischen zegen heeft verworven uit het Vaticaan, waar
Vondel, omstuwd van onze Hoogeerwaarde Bisschoppen, onlangs "als Koning"
zijn intrede heeft gehouden.[7]

Hebben al die studiÃ«n van Katholieken op Vondel en Vondels gedichten
niet geheel hun doel gemist, dan is de tijd daar, om nader en grondiger
kennis te maken met de complete lettervruchten van den man, wiens
levensschets, tot gereeder verklaring zijner geschriften, ik hier in het
kort zal mededeelen.

VONDEL[8] werd ten jare 1587, op den 17den November, feestdag van
Gregorius den Wonderwerker Â»zijn geboorte-heilige," uit Nederlandsche
ouders geboren in het Duitsche Keulen; de Â»trouwe dochter van de
Roomsche Kerk, in wier halve-maan men de zon van Rome kon aanschouwen."
Aan dat Keulen ontleende hij meermalen den naam van _Agrippijner_ en 't
verschafte hem bij het dankbaar nageslacht den eeretitel van
_Agrippijnsche zwaan_.

Een Antwerpsch hoedenstoffeerder, Joost van den Vondel en Sara Kranen,
de dochter van een insgelijks uit Antwerpen herkomstigen Rederijker,
Peter Kranenâbeiden met hunne doopsgezinde familiÃ«n uit hun
geboortestad ontwekenâschonken hem het eerste levenslicht in een huis
_zur viole_ of _zur Fyolen benennt_, de zevende woning, ter rechterzijde
gelegen, wanneer men uit de keulsche St. Matthijsstraat de _grosze
Witschgasse_[9] inwandelt. Die _viole_ beteekent hier de bloem van dien
naam en helaas! _niet het snaarinstrument_, wat toch zoo passend zou
wezen bij de wieg van den grooten Nederlandschen Zanger.

Als negenjarige knaap (1596) kwam de toekomstige Dichterkoning met zijne
ouders, en met eene oudere en jongere zuster, Clemensken[10] en
Sara,[11] over Frankfort en Bremen, eerst naar Utrecht, waar hij het
lager schoolonderricht genoot, en in 't volgend jaar naar Amsterdam,
waar de oude Joost in 1597 in 't poorterboek is ingeschreven en de jonge
in 't ouderlijk vak, den kousenhandel, werd opgeleid. Het Vondelgezin
woonde er in de Warmoesstraat, waar _de Trouw_ in den gevel prijkte, en
werd er in 1599 met een tweeden zoon, Willem[12], in 1602 met eene derde
dochter, Catharina[13], gezegend.

Niemand zal beweeren dat juist de kousennering bijzonder geschikt is, om
de gave der PoÃ«zij gunstig te ontwikkelen, vooral wanneer, gelijk met
Vondel het geval was, de opvoeding niet meer dan burgerlijk geweest
isâdoch een genie weet zich, in welke omstandigheden ook, een eigen weg
te banen. Zoo geschiedde het met onzen Dichtervorst.

Reeds in 1605 trad de jeugdige Vondel met zijn eerste dichtproeve op; 't
was een wansmakelijk bruiloftslied in den gebrekkige trant der
Rederijkers van zijn tijd. Die Rederijkers bezaten destijds te Amsterdam
drie vereenigingen: twee Brabantsche kamers, de _Lavendelbloem_, onder
de zinspreuk Â»uut levender jonst" en het _Vijgenboomken_, met het devies
Â»het zoet vergaeren," waarbij een derde eerlang de voornaamste, te
voegen is, de _Eglantieren_, gewoonlijk Â»de oude Kamer" geheeten of de
kamer Â»in liefde bloeyende." Aanvankelijk sloot Vondel zich vooral bij
zijne brabantsche landgenooten aan, wat toch niet belette, dat hij
naast de Protestanten Coster, Brederoo, Hooft en de Katholieken Vechters
of Victorijn, Spieghel en Roemer Visscher, lid was van het hollandsch
Rederijkersgilde. Daar oefende hij zich in de Dichtkunst.

Zijne handelsbelangen leden niet bij zijne blijkbare voorliefde tot de
PoÃ«zij, toen hij op 21-jarigen leeftijd, na den dood zijns vaders
(1608), de kousennering alleen begon te drijven. Want spoedig daarop, in
1610, had hij in Mayken (Maria) de Wolf, zuster van zijn zwager Hans,
eene voortreffelijke echtgenoote gevonden, die de winkelzaken trouw
behartigde, die om Â»haar vriendschap en gedienstigheÃªnÂ» door den Dichter
hoog wordt geprezen en hem vader maakte van vier kinderen. De oudste
dezer was de uitmuntende en rijkbegaafde Anna (1611), het toekomstig
klopjen, dat eens de grootste troost van den zwaarbeproefden grijsaard
zou uitmaken: op haar volgde (1612) een zoon, die wel den naam des
vaders droeg, maar niet zijne schoone hoedanigheden van hoofd en hart
bezat,âeen verkwistende losbol, die wellicht den diepbedroefden vader
den smartkreet ontperste:

    Och! d'ouders telen 't kind en maken 't groot met smart;
      De kleine treedt op 't kleed, de groote treedt op 't hart!

Een tweede zoon, Konstantijntje Â»'t zalig kijntje" en eene tweede
dochter, Saartje, zoo hartelijk door vader beweend en bezongen, stierven
op zeer jeugdigen leeftijd.

Het eerste gedicht, dat veler aandacht op zich trok en ook verdiende,
was het _Pascha of de Verlossing der kinderen IsraÃ«ls_, waarin de
Dichter ten jare 1612 de wording der Republiek bezong, gelijk hij in het
_Lof-Gezang over de wijdberoemde scheepvaart der vereenigde Nederlanden_
de heerschappij harer vloten over de zeeÃ«n verheerlijkte. Na eenige,
vrij ongelukkige, dichtproevenâmeestal vertalingenâverscheen in 1620
het _Hierusalem verwoest_, een drama, dat, hoe gebrekkig ook, de meest
doorslaande bewijzen leverde van hetgeen Vondel eenmaal worden zou.

Omstreeks dezen tijd, uit een kwijnende ziekte opgestaan, scheen hij een
ander mensch geworde. In de Kerk- en Staatspartijen, die ons volk in
twee groote afdeelingen gescheiden hadden, had Vondel de zijde der
minderheid gekozen. Na het bloedig uiteinde van Oldenbarneveld en de
gevangenneming van zijn vriend Huig de Groot, greep hij naar de
hekelroede, om de verdrukte Arminianen tegen de vervolgzieke Gommaristen
te verdedigen, en in 1625 gaf hij een zijner talrijke meesterstukken in
't licht, getiteld: _Palamedes of vermoorde onnoozelheid_âeene vrucht
van zijne studie der oudheid (hij had intusschen vlijtig de latijnsche
taal bestudeerd) en van zijn onverzoenlijken wrok tegen het geweld van
Maurits en der grimmige Contra-remonstranten. Heerlijk blonken bij die
gelegenheid zijn moed en overtuiging uit: hij toonde zich waarlijk
ridder zonder vrees.

Om 't schrijven van bovengenoemd treurspel ter kerkering gezocht door de
gerechtsdienaars, begaf hij zich heimelijk,âzoo luidt het verhaal van
G. Brandt, zijn oudste levensbeschrijver Â»ten huize van Hans de Wolf,
broeder zyner huisvrouwe, en met zyne zuster, Klementia van den Vondel
getrouwt: maar deze vrienden wilden zich met zyne zaken niet bemoeyen;
hem begraauwende over zyne schryfzucht. Zy verstonden, dat hy zyn huis
behoorde voor te staan, op zyn neering te passen, en al dat schryven en
wryven, dat hem in gevaar bracht, te staaken. Hy zeide: _Ik zal dat volk
de waarheid nog scherper zeggen_, en schreef daar ten huize nog
steekender heekeldichten, die hy echter op zijn zusters aanhouden in 't
vuur smeet, 't welk hem namaals roude."[14] Op 't landgoed Scheibeck bij
de familie Baeck werd hij hartelijker ontvangen; Vondel zou 't nooit
vergeten.

Slechts de gehechtheid der Amsterdamsche vroedschap aan hare PrivilegiÃ«n
bewaarde den schuilenden Dichter voor 't verlies zijner vrijheid, en
deed hem ontkomen met eene boete van 300 gulden en eene scherpe
vermaning. Die vermaning baatte luttel; want de verboden _Palamedes_
werd in weinige jaren dertigmaal herdrukt, en spoedig daarop verschenen
de vinnigste hekelverzen: _de Rommelpot van 't Hanekot_ (1626) ten
gunste van den afgezetten predikant Hanekop en tegen zijne
contra-remonstrantste ambtsbroeders te Amsterdam; _het sprookje van
Reintje de Vos_ (1627) tegen den oud-burgemeester Reinier Pauw; _de
Medaellie van den Gommaristen Kettermeester en Inquisiteur te Dordrecht;
de Roskam; de Harpoen; een otter in 't bolwerk_ tegen Otto Radius (allen
in 1630); en eindelijk het van verontwaardiging gloeiend _Decretum
Horribile_ (1631) tegen de predestinatie-leer van Calvijn.âVondel
scheen onvermoeibaar en onuitputtelijk.

Vijf zangen van een historisch heldendicht: _de tocht van Keizer
Konstantijn naar Rome_, waren ook reeds afgewerkt, toen helaas! de dood
hem zijn diepbetreurde echtgenoote in 1635 ontrukte, en den in zijn moed
geknakten dichter dwong zijne grootsche onderneming te staken. Slechts
op 75-jarigen leeftijd keerde hij in "Joannes de Boetgezant" tot de
epische dichtsoort weder.

Algemeenen bijval en groote verdiensten verwierf hij in 1637. Samuel
Costers Academie, vroeger slechts een houten loods, was destijds in een
schouwburg herschapen, welke, bij de opening, door Vondel werd ingewijd
met een overheerlijk treurspel _Gijsbrecht van Aemstel_, eene
gedramatiseerde navolging van 't tweede boek van Virgilius, waarin hij
den Â»ondergangk" van het doorluchtige Amsterdam bezong. Aan de
omstandigheid, dat de handeling op Kerstnacht wordt voorgesteld, hebben
wij het hemelsch lied te danken:

    O Kerstnacht schooner dan de dagen.

Het is overbekend dat nog jaarlijks de Gijsbrecht ten tooneele wordt
gevoerd.

De tijd naderde, waarop een geheele ommekeer in de denkwijze en de
levensbetrekkingen van den grooten en edelhartigen man zou plaats
grijpen. In 't gevoelen van Menno Simons opgevoed door zijne
oudersâofschoon zijne Roomsch gedoopte moeder wellicht tot de Roomsche
Kerk is teruggekeerd en daarin gestorvenâwas hij altijd godsdienstig en
vroom van gemoed geweest en zelfs diaken der Waterlandsche-Doopsgezinde
gemeente, eene betrekking nogtans, die hij door ziekte of zwakte
verhinderd en door de veelvuldige twisten ontstemd, reeds lang had laten
varen. Eerst meende men in den Oud-diaken eene zekere overhelling, en
spoedig daarop eene sterke voorliefde tot de R. K. Kerk te bespeuren.

Negen jaren na zijn openlijken overgang tot het Roomsch geloof, getuigde
de warme Katholiek van zich zelven:

    Mijn jonkheid bond door erref-leer
    Zich aan Ã©Ã©n Secte en geene meer,
    Tot dat me, door een klaarder blijk
    Van 't Wereldlijk en Kerkelijk,
    Ontdekt wierd, in een schooner dag,
    De Perle, die verborgen lag,
    Waarvoor men' al met winst verliest.
    Gelukkig die het beste kiest!

De dichter dezer versregelen was een hoog ernstig man, die, wars van
halve overtuiging, niet plotseling tot dien gewichtigen stap was
overgegaan. Lang, zeer lang had hij de Â»verborgen perle" gezocht. Reeds
in 1621 of 22 had hij, op verzoek van Anna Roemers, _tot lof der kuische
Martelares Agnes_ met den diepsten eerbied over de relieken der Heiligen
en hunne jaarlijksche gedachtenisviering gesproken. Of het
echt-katholieke kunstjuweel _de kruisberg_ tot het jaar 1624 behoort,
hebben wij hier niet te beslissen, daar een gedicht van 1625 of 26 op
Paus Urbanus VIII, uit het Latijn zijns broeders vertolkt, nog
duidelijker eene katholiseerende strekking verraadt en luide genoeg
datgene huldigt, wat een gruwel moest zijn in het oog van ieder
Protestant, te weten: het kerkelijke of liever het pauselijk oppergezag
in het Katholicisme:

    Dees is de groote Sleutelvoogd
    Van 's Hemels poorte; rust nu, poogt
    Niet meer te weten: buig uw knien
    En kus zijn voeten wijd ontzien.

Dat klinkt al vrij roomsch, zelfs ultramontaansch. En was hij niet aan
't twijfelen, stelde hij geen redelijk onderzoek naar de waarheid in,
bestond er geen zielestrijd bij hem, die in 1630 schreef:

    Ziet, onze Joost
    Die zoekt, maar vindt geen troost?

Of ook, was hij geen geestverwant van den katholiseerenden Huig de
Groot, toen hij, onder andere, 't volgend vers van hem in 1632
vertaalde:

    Zie naarstig van onze eeuw terug na de oude jaren!

Eene frissche, geheel katholieke kleur ligt er verspreid over 't
grafschrift, waarin de katholieke rechtsgeleerde C. G. Plemp, in 1638,
aldus sprekend door Vondel wordt ingevoerd:

    Doch boven Poezy en snaar
    Omhelsde ik ijvrig 't Roomsch autaar,
    En hing, om staat, noch snood genot,
    Mijn hart aan niemand dan aan God
    En Jezus' nimmer feilbre stem.
    Hier rust nu Plemp: ay, bid voor hem!

Een gebed voor de zielen in 't vagevuur!

In 1639 verscheen het treurspel _Maagden_ en G. Brandt legt de gulle
bekentenis af: Â»hoe pryswaardig het treurspel der Maagden was ten
opzicht van de kunst, men vondt er evenwel zaaken in, die veelen
bedroefden: des Dichters zucht tot de stellingen en gewoonten der
Roomsche Kerke, en zyne afwyking tot haare dwaalingen, die hy welhaast
in andere zyne dichtwerken ten volle openbaarde. Men hielt dat hy,
Gysbrecht van Amstels treurspel dichtende, toen alreede aan 't waggelen
was."[15]

Brandt en zijn tijdgenooten hadden juist gezien. Het jaar 1640 zal
Vondel in ernstige overpeinzing hebben doorgebracht, tot dat hij, in
1641, het voorbeeld zijner beminnelijke Anna volgend, de "verborgen
Parel" eindelijk meester werd en openlijk tot de Moederkerk
wederkeerde.âDat was een keerpunt in zijn leven en dichterlijke
strekking. Over de beweegredenen en de uiterlijke toedracht dier
gewichtige gebeurtenis schrijft de Eerw. Heer W. EVERTS: Â»Vondel had de
onhoudbaarheid van het beginsel der individueele vrijheid van onderzoek,
niet slechts uit de onderlinge twisten en tegenstrijdige leerstukken der
Protestanten, maar vooral uit de inconsequente besluiten der Dordsche
Synode, ingezien, en daaruit besloten tot de noodzakelijkheid van een
onfeilbaar leergezag. Daarbij komen, als menschelijke beweegreden, de
aesthetische aanleg, de echte kunstenaarsziel des dichters, die hem,
naar de uitdrukking van prof. G. F. Drabbe, _vÃ³Ã³r alle redeneering, als
door louteren natuurdrang_, tot de Katholieke Kerk trok; verder zijn
omgang, niet alleen met zijne reeds vÃ³Ã³r hem Katholiek geworden dochter
Anna, wier deugdzaam leven en edelmoedig hart hem stichtten aan den
huislijken haard, maar ook met _Vechters_, _Plemp_, _Tesselschade_ en
den schranderen pastoor en overste van het Bagijnhof, Leonardus Marius,
van wien men tot dusverre algemeen geloofd heeft, dat hÃ¨m het geluk ten
deel viel, _Vondel_ in de Moederkerk op te nemen, en die dan ook
ongetwijfeld, hoe groot het aandeel der P.P. JezuÃ¯eten in dit gewichtig
werk geweest zij, er veel aan heeft toegebracht."[16]

Deze laatste bijzonderheid is natuurlijk eene bijzaak: ware geen ander
de hoofdbewerker van Vondels bekeering geweest, waarom zouden we die eer
niet schenken aan den schranderen pastoor en overste van 't Begijnhof?
Doch ik geloof dat de kundige schrijver der aangehaalde plaats, hadde
hij 't groot aandeel van L. Marius op _degelijke_ gronden te bewijzen,
_ongetwijfeld_ vruchteloozen arbeid zou ondernemen. Ik meen voldingend
bewezen te hebben[17], dat de Zuid-belgische JezuÃ¯et, Pater Petrus
Laurens, het nederig werktuig is geweest, door de goddelijke genade
uitgekozen om den braven en edeldenkenden man in de R. Kerk in te
lijven.

_Op d' Afbeelding van den Eerwaardigen Petrus Laurentius_, _door
Holstein_ _gesneeden_, plaatste de katholieke Dichter-glazenmaker Jan
Vos het volgend bijschrift:[18]

    Dus leeft LAUWRENS, die ons de kruisleer, door zijn leven
    En lessen, onder 't kruis, op hoop van heil verbreit.
    Zoo kan hy d' Afgrondt, die de ziel bestormt, doen beeven:
    Het zaadt van Godt wordt best door leer in 't hart gezeit.
    Hoe moet men zulk een man, tot loon van deugd versieren?
    Lauwrens verdient een krans van hemelsche lauwrieren.

Â»Eens Roomsch geworden" zegt J. van Lennep[19], Â»was het klaar, dat
Vondel, als alle bekeerlingen, de meest rechtzinnig gehouden leer
voorstond, en alzoo veel meer overhelde tot de partij, die men nu gewoon
is de ultramontaansche te noemen, dan tot hare tegenstanders." De groote
man telde destijds 54 jaren en had in de kunst het toppunt bereikt,
waarop hij zich nog 37 jaren lang met nimmer kwijnenden gloed zou
handhaven. Men herinnere zich het schoone woord van onzen Alberdingk
Thijm Â»dat Vondel, die alleen meer poezij in zijn ziel had dan al de
nederlandsche dichters van zijn tijd.... zijn slechtste vaerzen niet
heeft geschreven, nadat hij tot den Godsdienst van
Isabella-Clara-Eugenia was te-rug-gekeerd."[20]

Vondels _ex-voto_, gelijk wij reeds aanmerkten, was het in 1641
verschenen treurspel _Peter en Pauwels;_ hij viert er de hoofdapostelen
der Roomsche Kerk en roept zijn tijdgenooten toe:

         ziet, hoe 't al wat haar de kroon benijdt
    Zijn hart knaagt en vergeefs op diamantsteen bijt.

In het volgend jaar gaf hij de _Brieven der Maagden en Martelaressen_ in
't licht, opgedragen aan de Feniksmaagd:

    Gij spant de kroon, o puikkroon aller vrouwen!
    De loftrompet van uw benijde faam
    Vult hemel, aarde, en zee met uwen naamâ
    Een naam, waarin wij Kristus' kerken bouwen.

Om niet te gewagen van een aantal gedichten meest van godsdienstigen of
polemisch-godsdienstigen aard, wijzen wij hier slechts op het _Eeuwgetij
der H. Stede_ (1645), dat zooveel opspraak en verbolgenheid verwekte bij
zijne vroegere geloofsgenooten. Â»Vondelâzoo schrijft Hooft in volstrekt
geen gloeiende verontwaardigingâheeft een veirs gemaakt op het wonder,
waar af de Heilige Stee haar naam draagt, ende laat het openbaarlijk
voor de boekwinkels ten toon hangen, gelijk de voorvechters de messen in
de luifels steeken, om de oogen der voorbijgangers te tergen, als met
zeggen: wie 't hart heeft pluike. My deert des mans, die geenes dings
eerder moede schijnt te worden, dan der ruste. 't Schijnt dat hy noch
drie hondert guldens in kasse moet hebben, die hem dreigen de keel af te
byten. Noch weet ik niet, oft hem niet wel dierder mogte komen te staan:
ende d' een oft d' andre heethersen, by ontyde, de handen aan hem
schenden, denkende, dat er niet een haan na kraayen zou."

't Baatte al wederom niet: de onvervaarde en strijdlustige Vondel kende
geen halfslachtigheid. Â»Het gedicht op het Eeuwgetijde, en het
_Kenteeken des Afvals_ waren maar voorloopers geweest, lichte troepen
uitgezonden om den weg te banen voor een krachtig leger, met voor- en
middeltocht- en achterhoede, met andere woorden, voor een doorwrocht
leerdicht, even uitmuntende door zaakrijkheid en fiksche dialektiek, als
door gloed van poezy en vernuftige gedachten"[21] 't luidde:

    Ik zing van Gods _Altaargeheimenissen_
    Van d' _Offerspijs_ der heilige offerdisschen
    Van _Offereere_, en eeuwige _Offerand_.

De tegenschriften en lasterverzen, bij deze gelegenheid verschenen,
stoorden de kalmte niet van _Joost den Rechtvaardige, levend van de
snaren en door het geloof_. Want na _de vierbaak van Ignatius Loyole_ en
_Grotius' Testament_, ontboezemde hij even gerust zijn katholiek hart in
een treurspel, getiteld _Maria Stuart of Gemartelde Majesteit_ (1646).
Wel haalde't hem een vloed van scheldwoorden op den hals en een boete
van honderd tachtig gulden, waarmede Â»die paapsche stoutigheid" betaald
moest worden; maar Vondel bleef het woord getrouw, eens door zijn
kunstverwant, den Muider Drost, op hem toegepast:

    _Virtutis est domare quae cuncta pavent_
    Hetgeen, daar alle man voor zwicht,
    Te temmen, is manhaftheits plicht.

En zoo hebben we Vondel begeleid tot het jaar 1647, toen hij in zijn
_Geboortezang aan Gregoriu Thaumaturgus_ nogmaals bezong:

    De beste paerle, die zoo diep
    Begraven lag, bestulpt met aarde,
    Eer Hij ons tot zijn Waarheid riep,
    Uit geen verdienste, maar genade.
    Gelukkig zijn ze, die vÃ³Ã³r 't end
    Met vleesch noch bloed niet gaan te rade,
    Noch dit vergankelijk element.
    De melk der voÃªster, slimme wennis
    En d' eerste plooi van erref-leer
    Wordt spa verleerd door beetre kennis,
    Zoo lang men d' ootmoed nog ontbeer':
    Die schiet te traag haar eedle wortlen
    In steen van 't eigenzinnig hart,
    Hetwelk verhardt in tegensportelen,
    En bij zijn opzet blijft verward.
    Geboorteheilig, die in 't midden
    Der zaligen uw zetel hebt,
    Volhard voor mij en elk te bidden
    Bij Hem, die licht uit duister schept!

In de Voorrede van 't volgende deel zullen wij onzen Dichter van den
Munsterschen vrede tot het jaar 1679 volgen.

Mogen deze vluchtige levenstrekken onzen Dichterkoning welkom doen zijn
bij Neerlands Katholieken!! want Vondel is de glorie van Nederland, de
glorie tevens der Katholieke Kerk.


H. J. ALLARD, R. K. Pr.

_Seminarie Kuilenburg_, 1ste der Meimaand 1870.

[Voetnoot 1: Hiermede wil ik niet zeggen, dat Vondel _in zijn geheel_,
aan iedereen, op elken leeftijd, mag in handen gegeven worden. Om zich
zelven te oefenen in de klassieke talen, heeft Vondel sommige
voorbeelden ter vertolking uitgekozen, die voor menigeen gevaarlijk
zouden kunnen zijn. Daarbij heeft zijn argelooze deugd, die nimmer kwaad
in anderen vermoedde, en zijn echte kunstenaarsziel zich eenige al te
vrije schilderingen veroorloofd: dat was 't gebrek van zijn tijd.
Overigensâ't is ook het gevoelen der Eerw. Heeren G. F. Drabbe en J. W.
Brouwersâoveral waar Vondel, volkomen vrij, zijn aangeboren zangdrift
volgt, "_is hij gewoonlijk, tot stichtens toe, kiesch en zedig_!"]

[Voetnoot 2: E. J. Potgieter, voorrede der _StudiÃ«n en schetsen over
vaderlandsche geschiedenis en letteren_ door R.C. Bakhuysen van den
Brink.]

[Voetnoot 3: De Katholiek. Dl. LI. blz. 352.]

[Voetnoot 4: t.a.p. Dl. LIII. blz. 20.]

[Voetnoot 5: C. L. van Langenhuyzen. 1869.]

[Voetnoot 6: Dl. LVI. blz. 69.]

[Voetnoot 7: Zie het Pius-Album. blz. 433.]

[Voetnoot 8: Het woord _Vondel_, ook _vonder_ of _vlondel_, beteekent
eigenlijk een _brugje_. De dichter zelf en zijn tijdgenooten schrijven
nu eens _Vondel_, _van Vondel_, _van den Vondel_, dan weer _van
Vondelen_, _van der Vondelen_ of ook wel _Vondelens_, _van Vondelens_.]

[Voetnoot 9: Dus noch de _Weingasse_ van G. Brandt, noch de _Weisgasse_
van V. Lennep, noch de _Waisenhaus-gasse_ van Mr. H. J. Koenen, noch de
_Waisengasse_ van Dr. Eelco Verwijs. Zie D. Warande D. IX blz. 86.]

[Voetnoot 10: In 1607 met Hans de Wolf, een te Keulen geboren
Amsterdamsch passement- en linthandelaar, gehuwd.]

[Voetnoot 11: In April des jaars 1614 gehuwd met Joost Willemz van
Nyenkerke.]

[Voetnoot 12: Deze, Mr. in de rechten, stierf ongehuwd ten jare 1628 in
ItaliÃ«. 't Is niet onwaarschijnlijk dat hij Katholiek is geworden. Zie
mijn _Vondel en de Paus_ blz. 47 en 48.]

[Voetnoot 13: In Juni des jaars 1621 met Arie Bruyningh gehuwd. Zij werd
Katholiek met al hare kinderen. Zie: _Vondels gedichten op de SociÃ«teit
van Jezus_, in de _StudiÃ«n_, eerste jaargang, I. blz. 18.]

[Voetnoot 14: G. Brandt. _Leven van Vondel_.]

[Voetnoot 15: _Leven van Vondel_.]

[Voetnoot 16: _Geschiedenis der Nederlandsche letteren_ II. blz. 51.]

[Voetnoot 17: _Vondels gedichten op de Societeit van Jezus_ blz. 5-6 en
12-16.]

[Voetnoot 18: _Alle de gedichten van J. Vos_ I. blz. 304.]

[Voetnoot 19: _De werken van Vondel_, XII. blz. 148.]

[Voetnoot 20: _Volks-Alm. voor Neerl. Katholiek_, 1859 blz. 146.]

[Voetnoot 21: J. V. Lennep, _De werken van Vondel_ IV. blz. 451.]




      Schriftuurlijk Bruilofsreferein
      op het huwelijk van
      JACOB HAESBAERT
      met
      CLARA VAN TONGERLO.

      JUNIJ[1] 1605


  Verheugt, o Febi jeugd![2] door dezen zoeten tijd:
  De Zomer, door zijn deugd, vertoont zijn groene blaÃ¢ren;
  't Gevogelt' zich vervreugt, 't gediert' in 't Bosch verblijdt;
  't Veld lacht elk toe verjeugd; vliedt weg alle bezwaren!
  Droefheid, neemt[3] fluks uw keer! nijd, strijd, wilt henenvaren!
  Voor u de Bruiloft wijkt, zoo gij daar komt omtrent.
  Klein, groot, ja wie 't mag zijn, jong' jeugd of grijze haren,
  Zijt welkom in 't gemeen; weest gegroet hier present,
  Die om[4] vergad'ren hier, u zoo ootmoedig[5] kent,
  In liefd' sticht'lijk verheugd, bij een met rein manieren.
  Dus zeg ik nog: vliedt fluks van hier, gij nijdig tieren!
  Laat jonst[6] begeerig zijn, gelijk eens Herts bestieren,
  En d' Haas-baart[7] zijn kracht snel, om loopend d' Hond t' ontwijken,
  Snakkend naar 't water Claar[7]; 'k en kan 't[8] beter gelijken?

  Geenszins en laat in zang Hymenaeus[9] zijn verhoogd
  Noch Thalassus[10] geclangh, maar Godes lof voortbringen,
  Hoe hij overvloed schank[11], en 't water gansch verdroogd,
  Zonder iemands bedwang, betoond' zoo vreemde dingen,
  Uit 't water, wijn zeer klaar, als een fontein deed springen,
  Vervuld' zes kruiken vol, in 't Galilesche land;
  Te Cana in de Stad, een Bruiloft zonderlingen,
  't Eerste teeken Christi, men elk maakte bekand[12].
  Door zulks ons merk'lijk leert[13], dat in't Huwlijks-verband
  Alleen men eerlijk hoort te houden goed' geruchten:
  Den getrouwden hij meest behoeden zal voor schand':
  Wie hem met lust bemint, en derft[14] voor niemand duchten,
  Zoo liefd' begeerig haakt, als 't Hert doorsnelt gehuchten
  En d' Haas-baart zijn kracht snel, om loopend d' Hond t' ontwijken,
  Snakkend naar 't water Claar; 'k en kan 't beter gelijken.

  Wat Christus, met zijn Bruid, elkeen te kennen geeft,
  Laat ons, met goed beduid, elkander daarin stichten,
  Die hij met zoet geluid, zoo vriend'lijk roept beleefd:
  Komt, overschoone spruit, die mijn hart kan verlichten!
  Mijn paarl, mijn edelgrein[15], ter weiden komt bedichten!
  Schoon' bloem en Roos in 't dal, nooit minnaar mijns gelijk,
  Voor niemand zijt bevreesd, Rein' Duivel wilt niet zwichten,
  Die uitverkoren zijt! Mijn jonst zonder afwijk,
  Al laagt gij hier veracht, in 't bloed, op 't veld, in 't slijk,
  Vertreden van elkeen, nochtans u niet begeven[16],
  Maar wiesch uw aanschijn schoon, welriekend met praktijk,
  Balsemd' uw zoeten reuk, boven al waard verheven[17];
  Als gij schier waart vernield, mijn liefd' vurig gedreven,
  Als d' Haas-baart zijn kracht snel, om loopend d' Hond t' ontwijken,
  Snakkend naar 't water Claar; 'k en kan 't beter gelijken.

  Gods kerke de Bruid recht, 't lichaam Christi eenpaar
  Van Christo, haren echt[18], werd zij zalig naar reden,
  Zeer lieflijk hij beslecht al haar zaken eerbaar,
  Mint, naar reden en recht, alleen zijns lichaams leden,
  Die al ter Bruiloftsfeest lieflijk werden gebeden,
  Verkoren volk alleen, uit goedaardig geslacht;
  't Bruiloftskleed zij ontfaÃ¢n[19] door dezen Vorst vol vreden,
  Zijn' Bruid wordt bovenal aldaar waardig geacht,
  Zittend' in Haar Troon na de genooden wacht[20],
  In witte zijd' gekleed, met paarlen fraai behangen;
  Een kroone zij ontvangt, van den Bruid'gom gewracht[21],
  Een Trouwring, haar bedacht, Zijns geests, heeft zij ontvangen.
  Hierom spoedt u ter feest, begeerig met verlangen
  Als d' Haas-baart zijn kracht snel, om loopend d' Hond t' ontwijken,
  Snakkend naar 't water Claar; 'k en kan 't beter gelijken.

      PRINCE[22].

  Prinsen, de Bruid present, voor al die zijn vergaÃ¢rd,
  Laat ons voor 't slot en end, 't geluk haar lieflijk bieden;
  Dat God zijn zegen wendt, als David ons verklaart,
  In zijn Psalm maakt bekend, klaarlijk voor alle lieden:
  Wel, die den Heere vreest! Geluk zal hem geschieden,
  In al zijn wegen zal[23] verleenen overvloed,
  Uw wijf zal gelijk zijn den wijnstok, na 't bedieden[24],
  Die vrucht draagt t' zijner tijd, zij zal ontvangen spoed[25];
  Aan den Disch, als een kroon, uw kinders lieflijk zoet,
  Als olijfranken schoon, zult gij ze klaar aanschouwen,
  Met veel weldaden meer, van God verkrijgen goed:
  De Heer geev' haar doch kracht, om inliefd' niet te flaauwen,
  Maar Jonst hen voege t' zaÃ¢m, begeerig na vreeds-dauwen,
  Als d' Haas-baart zijn kracht snel, om loopend d' Hond t' ontwijken,
  Snakkend naar 't water Claar; 'k en kan 't beter gelijken.

                              LIEFDE VERWINNET AL.


[Voetnoot 1: Eigenlijk de tweede naamval van 't Lat. _Junius_ (even als
_Julius_, _Augustus_, enz.), en dus zonder voorafgaand dagcijfer minder
juist gebezigd. De ij staat (gelijk steeds in dezen tijd) voor ii, en
zou thans dus best door een y vervangen worden, sedert de ij als _ei_
uitgesproken wordt, en dus in dezen slechts tot wanspraak (Junei,
Ju-lei, enz.) verleidt.]

[Voetnoot 2: _Verheugt_ u, zonen van den dichtgod.]

[Voetnoot 3: Thans, minder juist, _neem_; daar, sedert het verdringen
van 't tweeden persoons voorn. w. (_du_) door 't meerv. (_gij_),
natuurlijk ook het werkw. in 't meerv. diende te staan. Wij zullen dit
daarom ook in deze uitgave steeds behouden.]

[Voetnoot 4: Thans _om te_, dat eigenlijk tweemaal 'tzelfde uitdrukt.]

[Voetnoot 5: _Minzaam_.]

[Voetnoot 6: _Gunst_.]

[Voetnoot 7: Zinspeling op de namen van bruidegom en bruid, naar den
smaak des tijds, die echter (gelijk meer) tot gedwongenheid aanleiding
geeft. Versta: Laat gunst zich genegen toonen, gelijk een hert naar 't
klare water snakt, en de haas zijn snelheid toont, om de honden te
ontkomen.]

[Voetnoot 8: _Ik kan het niet_;â_en_ (niet met het verbindend _en_,
eig. _ende_, te verwarren) staat met het Fransche _ne_ gelijk, en had
dan (even als dit _pas_) gewoonlijk _niet_ bij zich, maar heeft dit
allengs geheel zijn plaats geruimd. Verg. ook in den volg. regel _en
laat_.]

[Voetnoot 9: De (Grieksche) huwelijksgod.]

[Voetnoot 10: De Gr. bruiloftsgod.]

[Voetnoot 11: Thans _schonk_.]

[Voetnoot 12: Voor _bekend_.]

[Voetnoot 13: _leert_ hij nam. Kristus.]

[Voetnoot 14: _behoeft_.]

[Voetnoot 15: _edelgesteente_.]

[Voetnoot 16: Versta: _begeven zou_.]

[Voetnoot 17: _waardig_, _verheven te worden boven alles_.]

[Voetnoot 18: _echtgenoot_.]

[Voetnoot 19: Thans _ontvangen_; welke verlengde vorm allengs den
oorspronkelijken _ontva-en_ geheel verdrongen heeft.]

[Voetnoot 20: Versta: _wacht zij_.]

[Voetnoot 21: Voor _gewrocht_.]

[Voetnoot 22: Naar den Rederijkerstrant, waarin dit geheeleâmeer
gekunstelde dan kunstrijkeâReferein gerijmd is, wordt in 't slotcouplet
de _Prins_ der Kamer aangesproken.]

[Voetnoot 23: Nam. de Heer.]

[Voetnoot 24: Naar de beteekenis (van den bedoelden bijbeltext).]

[Voetnoot 25: Voor _voorspoed_.]





      Nieuwjaarslied,
      AÂ°. 1607.

  gesteld op den toon van den 2den Psalm.


    De Dood, zeer snood, d'[1] Aarde haar pijlen bood,
    D' Ondeugd verheugd was met haar Helsche scharen,
    Deugd vlood door nood, durfd' haar[2] niet geven bloot,
    Haar vreugd, verjeugd, veranderd' in bezwaren,
    Omdat, het pad der Waarheid, werd bestreden;
    De Trouw, met rouw, zeer deerlijk was verplet;
    Liefd's schat, Gods stad, de vrucht in 't lustig Edenâ
    Een vrouw, (te flaauw, helaas!) elk waas besmet.

    Maar 't Licht, 't Gezicht der Blinden, die 't al sticht,
    Bekleedt met vreed' een spruit wiens TROUW MOET BLIJKEN[3],
    Wiens plicht opricht elks Heil, met Liefdes schicht,
    Bestreed het wreed' geslacht, 's vijands praktijken:
    D' Ootmoed hem voedt, in Davids stad onrustig:
    Een kroon, zeer schoon, hij biedt, van God gewracht:
    Doet boet, met spoed, voor deez' Ziel-Rust wellustig:
    Gods Zoon, tot loon, 't Leven uit Sion bracht.

    Dit Lam, Gods stam, 't welk Satans macht benam,
    Zijn' bruid, de spruit, die zijn hart heeft ontstolen,
    Waarnam, en kwam tot haar, der Jonsten vlam,
    Om uit 't besluit der feest[4] niet meer te dolen.
    Haar deel, 't Juweel, 't nieuw Paradijs verheven,
    Schonk haar, 't Nieuw-Jaar, Christus d' Opperste pand;
    Een eÃªl prieel, Gods Geest, der Eng'len leven,
    Alwaar dit paar[5] des levens Boom herplant.

    Het kind bemint[6] de Liefd', die 't kwaad verwint,
    Elk noodt, minioot[7]: kiest mijn eenvuldig[8] wezen;
    Die blind gezind, u tot 's Doods vruchten bindt,
    Ontbloot[9] devoot, uw eigen wil misprezen,
    En tracht, bedacht, om[10] zuiveren inwendig
    Uw Hart, verward, bevlekt, van 't Aardsch gekwel;
    Verwacht d' Eendracht, na dit Leven ellendig;
    Gij werdt van smert vrij, door EmanuÃ«l.

      PRINSE.

    Verlaat dan 't kwaad, gij Prinsen metter daad
    Ontziet verdriet noch kruis om[10] zijn herboren,
    Al staat vleesch-raad, en[11] poogt naar 's wer'lds onmaat,
    Rust niet, maar vliedt naar Bethlehem verkoren,
    Beschreidt uw leid[12], zoo komt u mild te baten,
    't Kind klein, 't welk pleyn[13] u heerschen[14] moet vooral;
    Want scheidt Goedheid van u (door 's Deugds verlaten)
    Deez' rein' Fontein uw Hart niet zuiv'ren zal.

                              LIEFDE VERWINNET AL.

[Voetnoot 1: Daar men in Vondels tijd nog niet gewoon was, de stomme
slot-e met den volgenden klinker te laten samensmelten, was deze
afkorting van 't lidwoord (thans alleen voor _den_ in zwang) noodig.
Verg. ook in den volg. regel _D' ondeugd_, en later _D' ootmoed_.]

[Voetnoot 2: Thans _zich_.]

[Voetnoot 3: Naam der rederijkers-kamer, in welke Vondel dit lied dichtte.]

[Voetnoot 4: _Buiten den kring van 't feest_; dit laatste woord (naar
den aard van 't lat. _festa_) oudtijds vrouwelijk, verscherpte alras,
door de werking der f, de voorafgaande d, en werd daardoor allengs als
onzijdig beschouwd. Evenzoo _venster_ (beter _fenster_) voor 't lat.
_fenestra_.]

[Voetnoot 5: Kristus en zijn kruis.]

[Voetnoot 6: _Het beminde kind_, nam. de Liefde.]

[Voetnoot 7: _Minzaam_, _liefelijk_.]

[Voetnoot 8: _Eenvoudig_.]

[Voetnoot 9: _Verzaakt_.]

[Voetnoot 10: Thans _om te_; verg. vroeger.]

[Voetnoot 11: _niet_.]

[Voetnoot 12: Voor _leed_.]

[Voetnoot 13: _Volkomen_.]

[Voetnoot 14: Voor _beheerschen_.]




      De Jacht van Cupido.


    In het zoetste van den tijd,
    Als Zefyrus Flora vrijdt[1],
    Als Febus[2], met helder stralen,
    Taurus[3] snel ging achterhalen,
    Kwam Cupido, Venus' zoon,
    's Morgens tot zijn moeders troon,
    Eer Titons bruid[4], met verlangen,
    Vertoont haar bloeyende wangen.
    Venus lag in ruste zoet,
    Die door Lethes[5] werd gevoed;
    Cupido, met heuscher spraken[6],
    Onverziens haar deed ontwaken:
    "Moeder! (riep hij) slaapt gij zacht?
    'k Neem oorlof, ik ga ter jacht."
    Zij ontsprong[7], en goedertierig
    Schoof op haar gordijntjens cierig[8]:
    "Wel (sprak zij), mijn zone waard[9]!
    Aanvangt[10] gij uwe dagvaart?
    Ik wensch, uw kracht zoo vermeere,
    Dat niemand uw pijlen keere;
    Keert in tijds tot mijn paleis,
    Fortuin bejongstig' uw reis!"
    Fluks heeft zich Cupido waardig
    Tot de jacht snel gemaakt vaardig;
    Niet, als Adonis, beangst[11]
    Om der wilder[12] dieren vangst,
    Maar om hemel en aard' tranig[13]
    Zich te maken onderdanig.
    Hij streelde zijn haar verguld,
    Zijnen koker hij vervuld'
    Met zijn pijlen, t'wreed bezuren[14],
    Doch verscheiden van naturen,
    WaarmeÃª hij, zonder geschil,
    De minnaars pijnt naar zijn wil;
    Hij ontsloeg[15] zijn wakkre vlerken,
    Om zijn krachten te doen werken;
    Eer hij toegemaakt[16] vol jonst
    Was, door der Chariten[17] konst
    Zag hij 's werelds lamp[18] verschijnen,
    Nu hij tot de reis ging pijnen[19].
    Aura[20] en Zefyrus beid'
    Speurend, dat hij was bereid,
    Als voorboden gingen zwieren,
    Beekskens, blaadren deden beven;
    Cupido haar volgde snel,
    Om spelen 't gewoonlijk spel.
    Beiden, menschen ende Goden,
    Haast vernamen, door dees boden,
    Wat kwale hen overviel,
    Tot beroering van hun ziel;
    Maar eer zij konden ontvluchten
    Dezen schutter, 't pijnlijk zuchten,
    Werden zij, in korter[21] stond,
    Van zijn pijlen wreed doorwond;
    Gelijk 't nachtegaaltjen jeugdig,
    't Welk, in 't kwinkeleeren vreugdig,
    Onverziens zich vindt bezet
    In des vooglaars listig net,
    Alzoo dees vrijen, in orden[22],
    Moesten Liefdes slaven worden;
    Jupiter[23], uit den Olimp,
    Die voormaals, met spot en schimp,
    Dezen jager ging begekken,
    Moest nu Liefdes keten trekken;
    Apollo, en Pluto rijk[24],
    Mercurius, vol praktijk[25],
    't Moest al onder zijn juk buigen:
    Mars moest Venus borsten zuigen,
    Niet de rechter borst vol wijn,
    Maar de slinke vol venijn;
    Lyaeus[26], voor zijn zoete druiven,
    Moest van Liefdes spijze kluiven;
    't Kind hield d' overhand in 't perk[27]
    Over menschen, Goden sterk,
    Ving en schoot stadig vol kwalen,
    't Waar te lange om verhalen;
    En, gelijk 't vermoeide hert,
    't Welk in strikken is verward,
    En 's jagers list is beproevig[28],
    Schreyet bittre tranen droevig,
    Alzoo ook met tranen elk
    Moest vervullen Venus' kelk;
    Deze schutter, naar zijn wenschen,
    Trefte[29] Goden ende menschen.
    Den tijd, die (steeds onvermoeid)
    Gedurig voortvaart en spoeit,
    Liet Hesperus[30] zien, terwijlen
    Cupido verschoot zijn pijlen;
    D'avond dekte 's werelds oog,
    't Weeldrig kind van Pafos vloog,
    Om zijn moeder te verzellen,
    En zijn avontuur vertellen;
    Als Venus haar kind vernam,
    Zij hem in haar armen nam.

[Voetnoot 1: Als 't Westewindjen met de bloemen koost.]

[Voetnoot 2: De Grieksche Zonnegod.]

[Voetnoot 3: De Grieksch-Latijnsche naam van 't sterrebeeld de Stier.]

[Voetnoot 4: Aurora,'t morgenrood.]

[Voetnoot 5: de vergetelheid.]

[Voetnoot 6: _met heusche taal_.]

[Voetnoot 7: _Sprong op_.]

[Voetnoot 8: Anders _sierlijk_, _fraai_.]

[Voetnoot 9: Thans _mijn waarde zoon_.]

[Voetnoot 10: Thans _vangt aan_.]

[Voetnoot 11: _bezorgd_, _er op uit om_, _begeerig, belust_; 't laatste
ware dan ook wel zoo juist geweest, en 't eerste waarschijnlijk alleen
om het rijm gekozen.]

[Voetnoot 12: Naar den weggeslonken verbuigingsvorm; thans _wilde_.]

[Voetnoot 13: _in tranen_.]

[Voetnoot 14: _Tot wreede kwelling_.]

[Voetnoot 15: _Sloeg open_, _ontvouwde_.]

[Voetnoot 16: _klaargemaakt_.]

[Voetnoot 17: De drie _GraciÃ«n_, _Bevalligheden_.]

[Voetnoot 18: _De zon_.]

[Voetnoot 19: _Voor zich op reis ging begeven_.]

[Voetnoot 20: _zacht windjen_.]

[Voetnoot 21: Thans (bij weggeslonken verbuigingsvorm) _korte_.]

[Voetnoot 22: _Naar den rij af_.]

[Voetnoot 23: De Grieksch-Latijnsche hoofdgod, die op den Olymp zetelde].

[Voetnoot 24: Uit dit bijv. naamw. zou men een verwarring van den God
des rijkdoms (Plutus) met dien der onderwereld (Pluto) vermoeden.]

[Voetnoot 25: _vol sluwheid_ (als de God van handel en dieven).]

[Voetnoot 26: Bacchus.]

[Voetnoot 27: _strijdperk_.]

[Voetnoot 28: _beproeft_, _ondervindt_.]

[Voetnoot 29: Verkeerdelijk voor trof.]

[Voetnoot 30: De avondster.]





      Dedicatie
      AAN DE JONKVROUWEN
      VAN FRIESLAND EN OVERIJSEL[1].


    Als Venus goedertier[2] de liefd' ter werelt bracht,
    Werd Jupiter beroerd, die terstond alle Goden
    In 's Hemels hoogste zaal liet dagen door zijn boden,
    Die aan dit kinds gedaant'[3] oordeelden, met voordacht,
    Dat hij de menschen zoÃ» beroeren met tweedracht;
    Dies zij bestemden[4] al dit dartel kind te dooden.
    Venus dit haast[5] vernam, is met haar kind gevloden.
    En bracht het om te voÃªn bij u, o zoet geslacht!â
    Dit kind hebdy[6] gevoed, geleerd, en bovendien
    Met boog en pijlen straf gewapend en voorzien;
    Het treft (naar uwen wil) ons met zijn scherpe stralen[7],
    Dat wij, als zwanen droef, vÃ³Ã³r onzen ondergang,
    Met een treurig geluid u bieden ons gezang;â
    Jonkvrouwen! uw gezicht laat minlijk daarop dalen!

[Voetnoot 1: Onder dezen titel kwam dit klinkdicht in _Den Witten
verbeterden Lusthoff_ (Amsterdam bij Dirk Pietersz, in de Witte Persse,
1607) het eerst voor, en schijnt (naar Van Lenneps opmerking) uit een
handelsreis van den jongen Vondel naar beide provinciÃ«n geboren. Later
gaf hij het, onder zijne _Oude Rijmen_, met het opschrift _Aan de
Jonkvrouwen van Nederland_ uit.]

[Voetnoot 2: Thans de goede Venus.]

[Voetnoot 3: Uit de gestaltenis van dit kind wijselijk opgemaakt.]

[Voetnoot 4: _Bepaalden_; verg. over dit woord de juiste opmerkingen van
Mr. A. Bogaers in den _Taalgids_ IV, 1.]

[Voetnoot 5: _ras, spoedig._]

[Voetnoot 6: Saamgetrokken uit _hebt gij_ (of eig. gy.)]

[Voetnoot 7: _pijlen._]




      Oorlof-Lied.[1]

  (Op den toon: de rein liefde vierig.)


    D'wijl Saturnus vluchtig, Die ons heeft vergaÃ¢rd[2],
    Ons nu scheiden zuchtig[3] Doet, geheel bezwaard,
    Neem ik met verlangen Oorlof aan u, mijnen lust,
    G'hebt mijn hart bevangen, Ik versmacht naar pijnen-rust[4].

    Doch hoewel wij scheiden, Met droefheid en pijn,
    Ja, met tranig schreiden[5], Zal uw zoet aanschijn,
    't Welk mij heeft verwonnen Door Cupido's schichten fel,
    Mij verheugen konnen, En mijn hart verlichten wel.

    Ja, mijn liefde krachtig, Die ik t'uwaarts draag,
    Als Piram[6] eendrachtig, Blijft u trouwe[7] staÃ¢g;
    Dit zal ik doen blijken, Als die liefd' bestrijdet mij,
    'k Zal geenszins bezwijken voor den dood; belijdet[8] mij.

    Nooit minnaar gestadig Als ik, dijnen[9] knecht,
    Mijn[10] Hero weldadigh! Die uw haren vlecht
    Als Diana cierig; Mij van gelijken gerieft[11],
    Groeit in liefd vierig! Troost mij laat blijken de liefd'!

    Stort dijne gebeden, Als ik ben op reis,
    Opdat ik met vreden Keer in dijn paleis;
    Bid Neptunus jonstig, Dat hij zij behoedig mij,
    En Aeool mij jonstig, Door Zefyr, voorspoedig zij.

    Trouw als Penelope Mij, Ulysses, wacht!
    Ik stel al mijn hope Op u, dag en nacht;
    Als OcÃ©aan woedig Het gantsche schip deyen doet,
    Door golven onspoedig, Zal ik aan dij peizen vroed.

    Lijdzaam wilt verwachten Mijn weÃªrkomst verheugd,
    Met wankel gedachten Maakt geen ongeneugt';
    Geen Paris lichtvaardig, Ben ik, zoo gij merken moogt,
    OÃ«none waardig! mij een vreugds versterken toogt[12].

    Mijn Tempe verheven, Daar ik in vermei!
    Mijn vreugd en mijn leven, Wiens troost ik verbeÃ®!
    Wie kan mij aftrekken Van uw lieflijk wezen zoet,
    Gij kunt mij verwekken Door uw deugd geprezen goed.

    Cyrce's tooverkruiden[13] Hoef ik zoeken niet,
    In 't Noorden of Zuiden, Met pijn en verdriet;
    Gelijk Glaucus zwaarlijk[14] Om Scylla veel pijnen leed,
    Gij troost mij eenpaarlijk[15] Zijt mijn medicijnen reed!

    Oorlof, mijn Princesse! Waardig om bespien,
    Voor de laatste lesse[16], Tot een wederzien,
    Als mijn kwaal zal blusschen Uw bijwezen vreugdig tier;
    Met een treurig kussen, Oorlof! gij, schoon jeugdig dier[17]!

[Voetnoot 1: _Afscheidslied._]

[Voetnoot 2: _Samenbracht._]

[Voetnoot 3: _zuchtend._]

[Voetnoot 4: Verpoozing van leed.]

[Voetnoot 5: Voor _schreyen_.]

[Voetnoot 6: _Piramus_, de bekende minnaar van Thisbe.]

[Voetnoot 7: _getrouw._]

[Voetnoot 8: _bekent het_.]

[Voetnoot 9: Thans _uwen_ of liever _uw_.]

[Voetnoot 10: Zoo zal men wel lezen moeten voor het onverstaanbare
_Min_.]

[Voetnoot 11: Zoo lees ik voor _geriefd'_, dat geen zin geeft, en
wellicht alleen voor 't rijm op _liefd'_ zoo gespeld werd.]

[Voetnoot 12: _toont_, _schenkt_.]

[Voetnoot 13: Zoo werd reeds door Mr. van Lennep voor _Toonderkruiden_
gelezen.]

[Voetnoot 14: moeitevol.]

[Voetnoot 15: _gelijkerwijs_.]

[Voetnoot 16: _maal_, _keer_.]

[Voetnoot 17: _meisjen_.]




      Op het Twaalfjarig Bestand der Nederlanden


    De Hemel, krijgens zat, erbarmt zich onzer kwalen,
    Kastiljen wordt beweegd[1] den Vrede ons aan te biÃªn;
    De Staten leenen 't oor, dies wij verwonderd zien
    Het Vredemakend volk[2] genaken onze palen.
    Na onderling gesprek, opschorsing, en lang dralen,
    Vergunt men hun 't Bestand voor jaren twee en tien:
    Op hope, of metter tijd een Vrede-zon misschien
    De Nederlanden mocht geduriglijk bestralen.

    Nassau ontwapent zich, om ruste te verwerven,
    Steekt op zijn dreigend staal, geschaard van 't veel doorkerven,
    En 't Bondig Land[3] geniet de vruchten van zijn zweet.

    Van vreugde golven vuurs ten Hemel opwaarts varen,
    Men offert lof en dank den Heere der Heerscharen,
    Die nu in lout're vreugd doet eindigen ons leed.

[Voetnoot 1: Thans minder juist _bewogen_.]

[Voetnoot 2: De gevolmachtigde onderhandelaars.]

[Voetnoot 3: De verbonden of Vereenigde Nederlanden.]




      UITVAART EN TREURDICHT
      van
      HENRICUS DE GROOTE,
      Koning van Frankrijk en Navarre.[1]


    Welaan, mijn Zang-Godin! 't is tijd, dat wij aanvangen
    Te stellen op 't Tooneel, al zijn wij plomp en grof,
    Het droevig Treurspel van 't Parisiaansche Hof,
    Waarom de tranen nog bepaarlen onze wangen.
        Gij wereld-Goden, o! die op uw groote kroonen,
    Op uw Rijks-staven en verheven zetels pocht,
    Wiens wortels in de Hel, wiens spitsen in de Locht[2]
    Zich bergen, komt nu hier! komt hier, ik zal u toonen
        Dit heerlijk schouwtooneel: komt, doet uw oogen open,
    't Zij of gij heerscht, daar ons met zijn gespiegeld licht
    De Morgen-wekker[3] roept, 't zij of gij hebt gesticht
    Uw troonen, daar den dag ons afpunt[4] gaat ontloopen.
        Ziet, in dit tafereel, van uwe heerlijkheden
    Den wankelbaren stand; ziet, hoe eens Konings roem
    En blijdschap eer verwelkt dan een versierde bloem,
    Die 's morgens vrolijk bloost, en 's avonds ligt vertreden.
        Schouwt's tijds getuimel aan, die[5] als een gramme Leeuwe
    Uw vluchtig leven scheurt, en hier in 't aardsch gewoel
    Den Vader rukt in 't graf, den Zoon stelt op den stoel,
    En wendt zoo stadig 't glas van Koning, Staat, en Eeuwe.
        Zijn hooge Majesteit, de Kristelijkste Koning[6]
    Zich nu gezegend vond, en Frankrijk in 't gemeen
    Riep: tot verzeekring van dees' Monarchie, alleen
    Ontbreekt onz' Koningin[7] de Koninklijke krooning.
        De krooninge, wiens glans van 't Oosten tot het Westen
    Gelijk de bliksem licht, en onzen Dolfijn[8] voedt
    Zoo mann'lijk tot de Kroon, als wel zijn Edel bloed
    Rechtvaardig' erfgenaam hem tuigt, en kan bevesten.
        Dus rees tot Sint Denijs[9] den blijden dag besloten,
    Tot Medicis[7] triumf, waar voor de schoone Mei
    Haar bloemen allesins op 't aardrijk, als een sprei,
    Had verwig uitgespreid, en rijkelijk gegoten.
        De vuur'ge Zonne-kloot (die met een heet gebluister[10]
    Naar 't Tweelings teeken liep) heeft zich van spijt gebergd[11],
    En, van zoo veel gesteente en dierbaar goud getergd,
    Verloor zijn heerlijkheid, en zijner stralen luister.
        Wat pratter[12] pronkerij! wat zeldzaam' levereyen
    Vertoonen zich alhier! hoe blinkt hier menigvoud
    Den aardschen Hemel! Ã´, hoe ruischt en kraakt hier 't goud
    Der kleedingen, waarin zich Zephyr komt vermeyen!
        't Is Salomonis Eeuw, 't zijn d' Idumeesche stranden,
    De Paarlen zijn gemeen, en 't Goud hier ongeacht;
    Hier heeft Natuur en Kunst om 't kunstigste gewracht,
    Zij off'ren samen hier de werken hunder[13] handen.
        Maar wie in al 't gedrang zoo heerlijken van verre
    Doch bovenal uitmunt, o, 't is de Koningin!
    Henrici schoone Bruid, de sterflijke Godin,
    Die men de Kroon opstelt[14] van Frankrijk en Navarre.
        Die, met haar witte hand en vingeren ompeerelt[15]
    Den Scepter Galliae, eenstemmig algelijk
    Men Koninginne kroont van 't Fransche Koningrijk,
    En wettelijk omdrukt[16] voor God en al de wereld.
        Ai! ziet, wat grooter vreugd en vrolijkheid der Franschen
    Gemoeden[17] rÃªe bevangt, nu met een luide stem
    Des Hemels Echo roept: veel heils de Diadem,
    Die op Maria's hoofd weÃªrlicht met helder glansen!
        Leef lang, o Koningin! die door uw kinder-baren
    Ons gelukzalig maakt, uit wier vruchtbaren schoot
    De Dolfijn is verwekt, die na zijns Vaders dood
    Den sleutel van dit Rijk zal houden en bewaren.
        Ter goeder tijd en uur, Princesse! gij Florencen
    Tot onzer baten liet, en braakt de blaauwe zee
    Haar golven met de kiel uws vlottigs Schips in twee,
    En landen[18] spoedig als een Venus aan onz' grenzen.
        Dus eindigt deze Feest. _Vive!_ _o Vive la Reine!_
    De naklank al den nacht vast wederschalt verheugd,
    Denijs[19] onwetens is op 't hoogste van zijn vreugd',
    Met dat zich Febus weÃªr komt spieg'len in de Seine.
        De Koning vindt Parijs met vrolijkheid bevangen,
    En overgeven heel; hij ziet, naar zijnen lust,
    Hoe vlijtig ieder zich siert, wapent, en toerust,
    Om 's volgenden Sabbats[20] zijn' Koningin te ontvangen.
        Henricus, die de deugd en 't heilig Evangelie
    Zoo vuriglijk beschermt, helaas! denkt luttel, ach!
    Dat met de Zon alreÃª gerezen is de dag,
    Waarin zijn leven zal verwelken als een Lelie.
        Als hij na middag doet den Koetsier zijnen wagen
    Voorthalen met 't gespan, terwijl, aan 's Hemels glas,
    De Zonne wederom gaat vallen in het gras,
    Zoo heeft de klok zijns tijds de laatste uur geslagen.
        Hij klimt ontijdelijk in zijn gewielde Koetse,
    Om, volgens zijnen aard, in 't Heldisch Arsenaal
    Zich spieglen in 't azuur van 't Oorlogs wapen-staal,
    Daar van zijn vromigheid[21] blijkt de beproefde toetse.
        Waar is de dapp're schild, daar zijn verwonnen Steden
    Men in gebliksemd ziet? daar hij met 't bloedig zwaard,
    Met roode sluyers, en veel krijgs-roof kwam te paard,
    Zelfs uit den slag Ivry[22] triumfelijk gereden;
        Daar 't bloed liep van zijn arm met karmozijnen stralen,
    Daar hij stak in de lucht de bloedige TrofeÃªn,
    Waar met[23] de Ligue in 't vlak bestoven veld verscheen,
    En meende van zijn hoofd de groote kroon te halen.
        De blazers[24] liggen hier, daar zijn rebelle Gallen
    Eer met gedwongen zijn tot onderdanigheid,
    Waar met de dolle Mars ter neder is geleid,
    Waar met beschoten zijn zoo veel versteende wallen.
        Maar och! hij rijdt al voorts; lijf-wachters! wilt u schamen,
    Dat gij zoo traaglijk volgt; 't is tijd om toe te zien,
    Gij laat hem in zijn koets met weinige Edel-liÃªn
    Zijn einde vinden, en zijn duister tombe samen.
        De Voerman, die hier stuurt de breidels en de toomen,
    Den Stuurder recht gelijkt, die met 't gevlerkte schip
    Loopt op een blinde klip, op een verrader-klip,
    Op een gedoken Roots[25] in d' Oceaansche stroomen.
        De Rossen doen 't gebit van hare breidels schuimen,
    En weig'ren lui en traag te trekken hunnen last,
    De toom die hun[26] bedwingt, de geesel-zweep die klast[27],
    Doet hun het laatste pad van 's Konings rid opruimen.
        't Plaveisel van de straat, d' oneffen harde steenen,
    De Koetse weren wil in haren kwaden tocht:
    Des Hemels oog verdompt[28], zijn fakkel in de locht,
    De blaauwe Hemel zich ontluistert al met eenen.
        Gelijk men menigmaal de teekens en voorboden
    Van 't aanstaande onweÃªr ziet, als over 's werelds kruin
    Zich donder, bliksem, wind wroegt[29], dampig, mistig bruin,
    Als Juno[30] krijgen zal met haren God der Goden;
        Zoo ziet men hier alreÃª bewegelijk voorloopen
    De bonte Regen-boog, der zwarte wolken val,
    Die Frankrijks Horizont, met 't schreyende kristal
    Van een stort-regen, zal in droeve tranen doopen.
        FranÃ§ois[31] (o, geen FranÃ§ois, maar overgeven Moorder!)
    Den wagen heeft in 't oog, welk bij Sint Innocent
    Een Karre en Koetse[32] ontmoet, die met hun wielen, blend[33]
    WeÃªrhouden 's Konings Koets, dat achterwaarts noch voorder
        Geen van hun allen mag; 't zij dat de raders haken
    In d' een en d' anders As, of 't zij elkanders rad
    Malkanderen in 't spoor van eenen wagen-pad
    WeÃªrhouden, en soo t' zaÃ¢m aan 't stille staan geraken.
        De booswicht hierop loert, en ziet zijn zake schoone,
    Dies wapent Satan hem: hij rukt uit zijne scheÃª
    't Geblinddoekt hand-staal[34] daar hij met (o schriklijk wee!)
    Bourbon[35] twee wonden geeft, aldaar hij zit ten toone:
        Beide in zijn linkerzijd', vervloekte Moorder-stukken!
    D' een naar de schouder toe, niet dieper is gepriemd,
    Dan recht door 't vliezig vel, en d' ander, al gevliemd[36],
    Van 's Konings edel hart gaat d' ader diep doordrukken.
        BeneÃªn de zesde rib 't gepunte moord-mes krachtig
    In 's Konings lichaam dringt, zoodat het met zijn spits
    Den hollen[37] ader treft; o doodelijke flits!
    De wereldsche Monarch zinkt in zijn koetse onmachtig.
        Gelijk op Helicon[38] uitbortelende d' ader
    Des Bergs ten Hemel sprong, toen met 't hoef-ijzer straf
    PerseÃ¯ lichten Hengst haar sloeg en oorsprong gaf,
    Zoo spuit ook alsins 't bloed van dezen Franschen Vader;
        Zijn EdelliÃªn verbaasd, om 't edel bloed te stelpen,
    Fluks wenden naar 't Paleis de Koninklijke koets,
    Die stroomig overliep van een riviere bloeds:
    Men riep, men kreesch om hulp; helaas! het mocht niet helpen.
        Van alle kanten 't volk de straten kwam vervullen,
    En bootsen[39] 't baar-gedrang van een vergramde Zee:
    D' een, om den moordenaar te scheuren fluks in twee,
    Men als een Leeuwe zag van toorne en gramschap brullen;
        D' een loopt naar 't groot Paleis, en d' ander, met veel scharen,
    Zich op de wallen geeft; d' een spoedt zich vlug en rad,
    Om 't Capitolium van dees beroemde stad,
    En d' ander om Loys, den Dolfijn, te bewaren.
        Dus ondertusschen raakt de Koning in de Louvre,
    Alwaar zijn bleek gelaat naar 't leven vast de dood
    Afschildert, en betuigt den sterfelijken nood,
    En star-oogt Hemelwaarts naar aller vromen oevre[40].
        Zijn handen vlecht hij t'zaÃ¢m naar den gesternden Troone
    En roept helaas! (zoo 't schijnt) den hoogsten Koning aan:
    Wil tot een Offerande, o Heer! mijn Ziel ontfaan,
    Als 't Lichaam zal ontlast zijn van deez' aardsche Kroone.
        Driemalen schijnt hij nog adieu te roepen t' elken[41]:
    Adieu, mijn Koningin, mijn Kinders, en mijn Hof!
    Mijn leven nu verscheidt uit 's Lichaams brooze stof,
    Onsterflijk zij mijn Ziel, 's Geest's hutte moet verwelken.
      Daar werd zijn lijk beschreid met heet beweegde tranen,
    De droefheid overvloeit tot 's Hemels hoog gebouw,
    't Geluid ten wolken klimt; daar kleedt zich in den rouw
    De Choor des Parlements[42], met al zijn onderdanen.
      De duizend-tongsche Faam zij uw gerucht bevolen,
    Beklaaglijke Monarch! aldus de Peleaan[43],
    Met Cesar de Romein dy[44] lange is voorgegaan,
    Doch huns naams Echo speelt nog heden in de polen[45].
      Jaar-maanden zeventien, en elf Olympiaden[46]
    Afgunstig heeft de tijd uw dagen afgemaaid,
    En eindelijke 't wiel van dynen[47] loop gedraaid,
    Na dat men heeft gezien de bliksems van uw daden:
      Na dat men den Olijf heeft vredelijk zien bloeyen
    Sinds gij den TraciÃ«r[48] hebt zijn wapenen beroofd,
    En, onder 't lief ontzag van uw gelauwerd hoofd,
    Navarre en Frankrijk tot Ã©Ã©n Ligchaam laten groeyen:
      Nu slaapt, Henrice! slaapt; nu rust op der gedachten
    Verheven Altaar-plat, na zoo veel Wapen-strijds:
    Vermeluwt[49] dijn Colos door 't oud verloop des tijds,
    Of wischt men't grafschrift uit van mijn geveÃªrde schachten,
      Uw vliegende gerucht kan tijd noch eeuw verrassen:
    De Fenix beeldt dit af, die eindelijken[50] spijst
    't Vuur met zijn sterflijkheid[51] waar uit de jonge rijst:
    Zoo ziet men weÃªr verwekt den Dolfijn uit uw asschen.
      O, snoode Ravaillac! God zal hier namaals eischen
    Van u (die Jean Castel, La Barre, en Biron volgt
    Welk Acherontis poel en Styx[52] heeft op gegolgd[53])
    Het duur vergoten bloed met een gekromde zeisen.
      Helaas! gij moordt uw ziele in droefheid en ellenden,
    Met 's Konings sterflijk lijf te maayen in het graf,
    En moet hier evenwel, door d' allerwreedste straf,
    Treurspelig dijnen tijd met 's Konings eind' volenden.
    [Hoe lange zuldy[54] nog den hoogsten rechter tergen,
    Gij, Babylonsche hoer! die in de wereld zaait
    't Vermaledijde zaad, waarvan men eindlijk maait
    Dees vruchten; o, de val genaakt uw zeven bergen!
    De waarheid schuift alsins de breÃª gordijnen open,
    Waarachter gij boeleert met dijnen Helschen boel!â
    Afgodisch knielt niet meer voor haren stoel,
    Doet eens uw oogen op, gij, vorsten van Europen!
      Ziet, hoe zij hare schaamt', met een onnut geweven
    En ijdel spinneweb, nog te bedekken tracht,
    Wat monster zij in 't licht der zonne heeft gebracht,
    En hoe heur beelde Krist gelijkt als dood en leven!
      D'onvastigheid aanschouwt van hare kerkpilaren,
    Welk dreigen al van zelf te vallen onder voet,
    Haar Evangelie-boek, bezegeld met het bloed
    Des moorders, welk zij noemt haar heilge martelaren!][55]
      De Hemel zij geloofd, die met zijn goedheids-vlerken
    Heeft Frankrijk overschaÃ¢uwd, en met genade omarmd,
    Die in zoo grooten storm den Dolfijn heeft beschermd
    Met d'Eed'le Koningin; nu prijst Gods wonderwerken!
      Veel heils en veel geluks, o schoone Morgen-sterre!
    Die over Frankrijk licht, en in uw Vaders plaats
    Met dijn Vrouw-Moeder heerscht, met zoo veel wijzen raads:
    Io! Io! de Kroon van Frankrijk en Navarre!
      Dolfijn (niet meer Dolfijn, maar Koninklijke Lelie[56],)
    Loys! die stadig moet vertreden zien den kop
    Zijns vijands, en alsins 't veldteeken richten op,
    De roode Standaart-Vaan van 't dobbel[57] Evangelie!â
      Tot eenen Gyges[58] groeit; dat, door uw kloek bestieren,
    Des Ibers jalouzie[59] dy nimmer achterhaalt;
    Als[60] 't Pyreneesch gebergt' dijn Rijk van Spanje paalt[61],
    Schut zijn afgunstigheid ook zoo van uw frontieren!

                              I. V. VONDELEN.

[Voetnoot 1: Die, gelijk men weet, den 15en Mei 1610, door Ravaillac
vermoord was.]

[Voetnoot 2: Voor _lucht_.]

[Voetnoot 3: Nam. de _Zon_.]

[Voetnoot 4: _gezichtspunt_.]

[Voetnoot 5: Nam. de tijd.]

[Voetnoot 6: Naar de bekende Fransche koningstitel van _Allerkristelijke
Majesteit_.]

[Voetnoot 7: Hendriks tweede gade, Maria de Medicis.]

[Voetnoot 8: De welbekende naam van den Franschen kroonprins.]

[Voetnoot 9: De koninklijke begrafenis-abdij.]

[Voetnoot 10: _Geblaak_ (verg. 't Eng. _to blister_).]

[Voetnoot 11: Thans _geborgen_.]

[Voetnoot 12: _trotscher_.]

[Voetnoot 13: voor _hunner_ (_harer_).]

[Voetnoot 14: voor _opzet_.]

[Voetnoot 15: Vleyend voor _omvat_.]

[Voetnoot 16: Voor _omspant_ (met de kroon nam.).]

[Voetnoot 17: Thans _gemoederen_, met verlengden meervoudvorm.]

[Voetnoot 18: Thans _landdet_.]

[Voetnoot 19: Frankrijks beschermheilige; verg. [24].]

[Voetnoot 20: _op den volg. zondag_.]

[Voetnoot 21: _Wakkerheid_, _kloekheid_, naar de oorspronkelijke
beteekenis van 't woord.]

[Voetnoot 22: Door Hendrik op de Ligue gewonnen.]

[Voetnoot 23: Thans _waarmeÃª_; verg. ook drie regels later.]

[Voetnoot 24: De vuurwapenen.]

[Voetnoot 25: Voor _rotse_, thans _rots_.]

[Voetnoot 26: Thans _hen_.]

[Voetnoot 27: _kletst_.]

[Voetnoot 28: _dooft_.]

[Voetnoot 29: Voor _wringt_.]

[Voetnoot 30: Mythologische vergelijking naar den wansmaak der eeuw.]

[Voetnoot 31: Klankspeling op den voor- en volksnaam van den moordenaar
(_Frans_ en _Fransch_).]

[Voetnoot 32: Eig. twee vrachtwagens.]

[Voetnoot 33: Voor _blind_.]

[Voetnoot 34: _De verholen dolk_.]

[Voetnoot 35: Hendriks stamnaam.]

[Voetnoot 36: Thans _golvend_, _doorsnijdend_.]

[Voetnoot 37: De zoogenoemde _vena cava_, door welke 't bloed naar 't
hart vloeit]

[Voetnoot 38: De welbekende Grieksche zangberg, op welken, naar de
overlevering, door den hoefslag van Perseus' paard de zangbron (of
_Hippokrene_) ontsprong.]

[Voetnoot 39: Thans _nabootsen_.]

[Voetnoot 40: Voor _oever_, _boord_.]

[Voetnoot 41: Thans _telkens_.]

[Voetnoot 42: Het bekende hooge Fransche staatslichaam van vÃ³Ã³r 1789.]

[Voetnoot 43: Achilles (de zoon van Peleus).]

[Voetnoot 44: Derde en vierde naamval van 't verouderde voorn. w. van
den tweeden persoon (du).]

[Voetnoot 45: Versta: tusschen de polen, d. i. in de wereld.]

[Voetnoot 46: Wansmakelijke en onjuiste vermenging der Grieksche en
latere jaartelling voor 56 j. en 5 m.]

[Voetnoot 47: Thans uwen; verg. den vorigen regel.]

[Voetnoot 48: Den Turk, als bewoner van 't vroegere ThraciÃ«n.]

[Voetnoot 49: _Vermolmt._]

[Voetnoot 50: Thans, met onverbogen vorm, _eindelijk_.]

[Voetnoot 51: Voor _lichaam_.]

[Voetnoot 52: _Ach. en Styx_ de bekende wateren der onderwereld.]

[Voetnoot 53: _Uitgegolpt._]

[Voetnoot 54: Saamgetrokken, _voor zult gij_.]

[Voetnoot 55: De toespraak tot Rome, in de 16 voorafgaande regels
vervat, wordt slechts in sommige uitgaven gevonden, en is wellicht niet
van Vondel.]

[Voetnoot 56: Niet meer kroonprins, maar koning.]

[Voetnoot 57: Het O. en N. Verbond.]

[Voetnoot 58: Lees _Gigas d. i. reus_.]

[Voetnoot 59: Spanjes naijver.]

[Voetnoot 60: _gelijk_.]

[Voetnoot 61: Voor _scheidt_.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of De complete werken van Joost van Vondel, by 
Joost van  Vondel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WERKEN VAN JOOST VAN VONDEL ***

***** This file should be named 21800-0.txt or 21800-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/8/0/21800/

Produced by Frank van Drogen and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
eThe Project Gutenberg eBook, The Mystics, by Katherine Cecil Thurston


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Mystics
       A Novel


Author: Katherine Cecil Thurston



Release Date: April 17, 2007  [eBook #21127]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTICS***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Storm, and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (https://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21127-h.htm or 21127-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/1/1/2/21127/21127-h/21127-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/1/1/2/21127/21127-h.zip)





THE MYSTICS

A Novel

by

KATHERINE CECIL THURSTON

Author of
"The Masquerader" "The Gambler"

Illustrated







[Illustration: See Chap. VII "THE PROPHET WITH HIS FIXED GAZE UPON THE
SCITSYM"]



Harper & Brothers Publishers
New York and London
MCMVII

Copyright, 1904, by Katherine Cecil Thurston.
All rights reserved.
Published April, 1907.




                 To my Cousin
              Nancy Inez Pollock




ILLUSTRATIONS


   "THE PROPHET WITH HIS FIXED GAZE UPON THE SCITSYM" _Frontispiece_

   "THE FIGURE OF HIS UNCLE ... SHOWED TALL AND
   ANGULAR IN THE APERTURE"                           _Facing p._ 20

   "HE ... GATHERED THE FIRST SHEAF OF LEAVES INTO
   HIS FINGERS"                                            "      40

   "ACROSS THE PROPHET'S BREAST, IN MARKS OF A CRUEL
   LACERATION, RAN THE SYMBOLIC OCTAGONAL FIGURE OF
   THE MYSTIC SECT"                                        "      56

   "WITH A FRESH BURST OF TEARS, SHE TURNED AND FLUNG
   HERSELF UPON THE COUCH"                                 "     116

   "HER HAND WAS TREMBLING AS SHE RAISED THE HEAVY
   KNOCKER"                                                "     136

   "'I AM IN NEED OF HELP ... AND YOU CAN HELP ME'"        "     146

   "SHE SAW THE FIGURE OF THE PROPHET ... ATTENDED BY
   THE PRECURSOR AND THE SIX ARCH-MYSTICS"                 "     158




THE MYSTICS

CHAPTER I


Of all the sensations to which the human mind is a prey, there is none
so powerful in its finality, so chilling in its sense of an impending
event as the knowledge that Death--grim, implacable Death--has cast his
shadow on a life that custom and circumstance have rendered familiar.
Whatever the personal feeling may be--whether dismay, despair, or
relief--no man or woman can watch that advancing shadow without a
quailing at the heart, an individual shrinking from the terrible,
natural mystery that we must all face in turn--each for himself and each
alone.

In a gaunt house on the loneliest point where the Scottish coast
overlooks the Irish Sea, John Henderson was watching his uncle die. In
the plain, whitewashed room where the sick man lay, a fire was burning
and a couple of oil-lamps shed an uncertain glow; but outside, the wind
roared inland from the shore, and the rain splashed in furious showers
against the windows of the house. It was a night of tumult and darkness;
but neither the old man who lay waiting for the end nor the young man
who watched that end approaching gave any heed to the turmoil of the
elements. Each was self-engrossed.

Except for an occasional rasping cough, or a slow, indrawn breath, no
sign came from the small iron bedstead on which the dying man lay. His
hard, emaciated face was set in an impenetrable mask; his glazed eyes
were fixed immovably on a distant portion of the ceiling; and his hands
lay clasped upon his breast, covering some object that depended from
his neck.

He had lain thus since the doctor from the neighboring town had braved
the rising storm and ridden over to see him in the fall of the evening;
and no accentuation of the gale that lashed the house, no increase in
the roar of the ocean three hundred yards away, had power to interrupt
his lethargy.

In curious contrast was the expression that marked his nephew's face. An
extraordinary suppressed energy was visible in every line of John
Henderson's body as he sat crouching over the fire; and a look of
irrepressible excitement smoldered in the eyes that gazed into the
glowing coals. He was barely twenty-three years old, but the
self-control that comes from endurance and privation sat unmistakably on
his knitted brows and closed lips. He was neither handsome of feature
nor graceful of figure, yet there was something more striking and
interesting than either grace or beauty in the strong, youthful form
and the strong, intelligent face. For a long time he retained his
crouching seat on the wooden stool that stood before the hearth; then at
last the activity at work within his mind made further inaction
intolerable. He rose and turned towards the bed.

The dying man lay motionless, a