!aeop ƒ€  eetcms
 ie to the
lovely little creature as to force it open like that, and spread it
heart-bare to the terrible death-lamp? Whoever it was, it must be the
same that had thrown her out there to be burned to death in its fire!
But she had her hair, and could hang her head, and make a small sweet
night of her own about her! She tried to bend the daisy down and away
from the sun, and to make its petals hang about it like her hair, but
she could not. Alas! it was burned and dead already! She did not know
that it could not yield to her gentle force because it was drinking
life, with all the eagerness of life, from what she called the
death-lamp. Oh, how the lamp burned her!

But she went on thinking--she did not know how; and by-and-by began to
reflect that, as there was no roof to the room except that in which the
great fire went rolling about, the little Red-tip must have seen the
lamp a thousand times, and must know it quite well! and it had not
killed it! Nay, thinking about it farther, she began to ask the question
whether this, in which she now saw it, might not be its more perfect
condition. For now not only did the whole seem perfect, as indeed it did
before, but every part showed its own individual perfection as well,
which perfection made it capable of combining with the rest into the
higher perfection of a whole. The flower was a lamp itself! The golden
heart was the light, and the silver border was the alabaster globe
skillfully broken and spread wide to let out the glory. Yes; the radiant
shape was plainly its perfection! If, then, it was the lamp which had
opened it into that shape, the lamp could not be unfriendly to it, but
must be of its own kind, seeing it made it perfect! And again, when she
thought of it, there was clearly no little resemblance between them.
What if the flower, then, was the little great-grandchild of the lamp,
and he was loving it all the time? And what if the lamp did not mean to
hurt her, only could not help it? The red tips looked as if the flower
had some time or other been hurt: what if the lamp was making the best
it could of her--opening her out somehow like the flower? She would bear
it patiently, and see. But how coarse the color of the grass was!
Perhaps, however, her eyes not being made for the bright lamp, she did
not see them as they were! Then she remembered how different were the
eyes of the creature that was not a girl, and was afraid of the
darkness! Ah, if the darkness would only come again, all arms, friendly
and soft everywhere about her!

She lay so still that Watho thought she had fainted. She was pretty sure
she would be dead before the night came to revive her.


XVIII.--REFUGE.

Fixing her telescope on the motionless form, that she might see it at
once when the morning came, Watho went down from the tower to Photogen's
room. He was much better by this time, and before she left him he had
resolved to leave the castle that very night.

The darkness was terrible indeed, but Watho was worse than even the
darkness, and he could not escape in the day. As soon, therefore, as the
house seemed still, he tightened his belt, hung to it his hunting knife,
put a flask of wine and some bread in his pocket, and took his bow and
arrows. He got from the house, and made his way at once up to the plain.
But what with his illness, the terrors of the night, and his dread of
the wild beasts, when he got to the level he could not walk a step
farther, and sat down, thinking it better to die than to live. In spite
of his fears, however, sleep contrived to overcome him, and he fell at
full length on the soft grass.

He had not slept long when he woke with such a strange sense of comfort
and security that he thought the dawn at least must have arrived. But it
was dark night about him. And the sky--no, it was not the sky, but the
blue eyes of his naiad looking down upon him! Once more he lay with his
head in her lap, and all was well, for plainly the girl feared the
darkness as little as he the day.

"Thank you," he said. "You are like live armor to my heart; you keep the
fear off me. I have been very ill since then. Did you come up out of the
river when you saw me cross?"

"I don't live in the water," she answered. "I live under the pale lamp,
and I die under the bright one."

"Ah, yes! I understand now," he returned. "I would not have behaved as
I did last time if I had understood; but I thought you were mocking me;
and I am so made that I can not help being frightened at the darkness. I
beg your pardon for leaving you as I did, for, as I say, I did not
understand. Now I believe you were really frightened. Were you not?"

[Illustration: "WHAT IS THIS? IT MUST BE DEATH!"]

"I was, indeed," answered Nycteris, "and shall be again. But why you
should be, I can not in the least understand. You must know how gentle
and sweet the darkness is, how kind and friendly, how soft and velvety!
It holds you to its bosom and loves you. A little while ago I lay faint
and dying under your hot lamp. What is it you call it?"

"The sun," murmured Photogen: "how I wish he would make haste!"

"Ah! do not wish that. Do not, for my sake, hurry him. I can take care
of you from the darkness, but I have no one to take care of me from the
light.--As I was telling you, I lay dying in the sun. All at once I drew
a deep breath. A cool wind came and ran over my face. I looked up. The
torture was gone, for the death-lamp itself was gone. I hope he does not
die and grow brighter yet. My terrible headache was all gone, and my
sight was come back. I felt as if I were new made. But I did not get up
at once, for I was tired still. The grass grew cool about me, and turned
soft in color. Something wet came upon it, and it was now so pleasant to
my feet that I rose and ran about. And when I had been running about a
long time, all at once I found you lying, just as I had been lying a
little while before. So I sat down beside you to take care of you, till
your life--and my death--should come again."

"How good you are, you beautiful creature! Why, you forgave me before
ever I asked you!" cried Photogen.

Thus they fell a-talking, and he told her what he knew of his history,
and she told him what she knew of hers, and theys nothing to be afraid
of then? Perhaps one so much at home in the darkness was correspondingly
afraid of the light! Then his selfish joy at the rising of the sun,
blinding him to her condition, had made him behave to her, in ill return
for her kindness, as cruelly as Watho behaved to him! How sweet and dear
and lovely she was! If there were wild beasts that came out only at
night, and were afraid of the light, why should there not be girls too,
made the same way--who could not endure the light, as he could not bear
the darkness? If only he could find her again! Ah, how differently he
would behave to her! But alas! perhaps the sun had killed her--melted
her--burned her up!--dried her up: that was it, if she was the nymph of
the river.


XVII.--WATHO'S WOLF.

From that dreadful morning Nycteris had never got to be herself again.
The sudden light had been almost death to her; and now she lay in the
dark with the memory of a terrific sharpness--a something she dared
scarcely recall, lest the very thought of it should sting her beyond
endurance. But this was as nothing to the pain which the recollection of
the rudeness of the shining creature whom she had nursed through his
fear caused her; for the moment his suffering passed over to her, and he
was free, the first use he made of his returning strength had been to
scorn her! She wondered and wondered; it was all beyond her
comprehension.

Before long, Watho was plotting evil against her. The witch was like a
sick child weary of his toy: she would pull her to pieces, and see how
she liked it. She would set her in the sun, and see her die, like a
jelly-fish from the salt ocean cast out on a hot rock. It would be a
sight to soothe her wolf-pain. One day, therefore, a little before noon,
while Nycteris was in her deepest sleep, she had a darkened litter
brought to the door, and in that she made two of her men carry her to
the plain above. There they took her out, laid her on the grass, and
left her.

Watho watched it all from the top of her high tower, through her
telescope; and scarcely was Nycteris left, when she saw her sit up, and
the same moment cast herself down again with her face to the ground.

"She'll have a sun-stroke," said Watho, "and that'll be the end of her."

Presently, tormented by a fly, a huge-humped buffalo, with great shaggy
mane, came galloping along, straight for where she lay. At sight of the
thing on the grass he started, swerved yards aside, stopped dead, and
then came slowly up, looking malicious. Nycteris lay quite still, and
never even saw the animal.

"Now she'll be trodden to death!" said Watho.

When the buffalo reached her, he sniffed at her all over, and went away;
then came back and sniffed again; then all at once went off as if a
demon had him by the tail.

Next came a gnu, then a gaunt wild boar. But no creature hurt her, and
Watho was angry with the whole creation.

At length, in the shade of her hair, the blue eyes of Nycteris began to
come to themselves a little, and the first thing they saw was a comfort.
I have told already how she knew the night daisies, each a sharp-pointed
little cone with a red tip; and once she had parted the rays of one of
them, with trembling fingers, for she was afraid she was dreadfully
rude, and perhaps was hurting it; but she did want, she said to herself,
to see what secret it carried so carefully hidden; and she found its
golden heart. But now, right under her eyes, inside the veil of her
hair, in the sweet twilight of whose blackness she could see it
perfectly, stood a daisy with its red tip opened wide into a carmine
ring, displaying its heart of gold on a platter of silver. She did not
at first recognize it as one of those cones come awake, but a moment's
notice revealed what it was. Who, then, could have been so cruel to the
lovely little creature as to force it open like that, and spread it
heart-bare to the terrible death-lamp? Whoever it was, it must be the
same that had thrown her out there to be burned to death in its fire!
But she had her hair, and could hang her head, and make a small sweet
night of her own about her! She tried to bend the daisy down and away
from the sun, and to make its petals hang about it like her hair, but
she could not. Alas! it was burned and dead already! She did not know
that it could not yield to her gentle force because it was drinking
life, with all the eagerness of life, from what she called the
death-lamp. Oh, how the lamp burned her!

But she went on thinking--she did not know how; and by-and-by began to
reflect that, as there was no roof to the room except that in which the
great fire went rolling about, the little Red-tip must have seen the
lamp a thousand times, and must know it quite well! and it had not
killed it! Nay, thinking about it farther, she began to ask the question
whether this, in which she now saw it, might not be its more perfect
condition. For now not only did the whole seem perfect, as indeed it did
before, but every part showed its own individual perfection as well,
which perfection made it capable of combining with the rest into the
higher perfection of a whole. The flower was a lamp itself! The golden
heart was the light, and the silver border was the alabaster globe
skillfully broken and spread wide to let out the glory. Yes; the radiant
shape was plainly its perfection! If, then, it was the lamp which had
opened it into that shape, the lamp could not be unfriendly to it, but
must be of its own kind, seeing it made it perfect! And again, when she
thought of it, there was clearly no little resemblance between them.
What if the flower, then, was the little great-grandchild of the lamp,
and he was loving it all the time? And what if the lamp did not mean to
hurt her, only could not help it? The red tips looked as if the flower
had some time or other been hurt: what if the lamp was making the best
it could of her--opening her out somehow like the flower? She would bear
it patiently, and see. But how coarse the color of the grass was!
Perhaps, however, her eyes not being made for the bright lamp, she did
not see them as they were! Then she remembered how different were the
eyes of the creature that was not a girl, and was afraid of the
darkness! Ah, if the darkness would only come again, all arms, friendly
and soft everywhere about her!

She lay so still that Watho thought she had fainted. She was pretty sure
she would be dead before the night came to revive her.


XVIII.--REFUGE.

Fixing her telescope on the motionless form, that she might see it at
once when the morning came, Watho went down from the tower to Photogen's
room. He was much better by this time, and before she left him he had
resolved to leave the castle that very night.

The darkness was terrible indeed, but Watho was worse than even the
darkness, and he could not escape in the day. As soon, therefore, as the
house seemed still, he tightened his belt, hung to it his hunting knife,
put a flask of wine and some bread in his pocket, and took his bow and
arrows. He got from the house, and made his way at once up to the plain.
But what with his illness, the terrors of the night, and his dread of
the wild beasts, when he got to the level he could not walk a step
farther, and sat down, thinking it better to die than to live. In spite
of his fears, however, sleep contrived to overcome him, and he fell at
full length on the soft grass.

He had not slept long when he woke with such a strange sense of comfort
and security that he thought the dawn at least must have arrived. But it
was dark night about him. And the sky--no, it was not the sky, but the
blue eyes of his naiad looking down upon him! Once more he lay with his
head in her lap, and all was well, for plainly the girl feared the
darkness as little as he the day.

"Thank you," he said. "You are like live armor to my heart; you keep the
fear off me. I have been very ill since then. Did you come up out of the
river when you saw me cross?"

"I don't live in the water," she answered. "I live under the pale lamp,
and I die under the bright one."

"Ah, yes! I understand now," he returned. "I would not have behaved as
I did last time if I had understood; but I thought you were mocking me;
and I am so made that I can not help being frightened at the darkness. I
beg your pardon for leaving you as I did, for, as I say, I did not
understand. Now I believe you were really frightened. Were you not?"

[Illustration: "WHAT IS THIS? IT MUST BE DEATH!"]

"I was, indeed," answered Nycteris, "and shall be again. But why you
should be, I can not in the least understand. You must know how gentle
and sweet the darkness is, how kind and friendly, how soft and velvety!
It holds you to its bosom and loves you. A little while ago I lay faint
and dying under your hot lamp. What is it you call it?"

"The sun," murmured Photogen: "how I wish he would make haste!"

"Ah! do not wish that. Do not, for my sake, hurry him. I can take care
of you from the darkness, but I have no one to take care of me from the
light.--As I was telling you, I lay dying in the sun. All at once I drew
a deep breath. A cool wind came and ran over my face. I looked up. The
torture was gone, for the death-lamp itself was gone. I hope he does not
die and grow brighter yet. My terrible headache was all gone, and my
sight was come back. I felt as if I were new made. But I did not get up
at once, for I was tired still. The grass grew cool about me, and turned
soft in color. Something wet came upon it, and it was now so pleasant to
my feet that I rose and ran about. And when I had been running about a
long time, all at once I found you lying, just as I had been lying a
little while before. So I sat down beside you to take care of you, till
your life--and my death--should come again."

"How good you are, you beautiful creature! Why, you forgave me before
ever I asked you!" cried Photogen.

Thus they fell a-talking, and he told her what he knew of his history,
and she told him what she knew of hers, and they agreed they must get
away from Watho as far as ever they could.

"And we must set out at once," said Nycteris.

"The moment the morning comes," returned Photogen.

"We must not wait for the morning," said Nycteris, "for then I shall not
be able to move, and what would you do the next night? Besides, Watho
sees best in the daytime. Indeed, you must come now, Photogen. You
must."

"I can not; I dare not," said Photogen. "I can not move. If I but lift
my head from your lap, the very sickness of terror seizes me."

"I shall be with you," said Nycteris, soothingly. "I will take care of
you till your dreadful sun comes, and then you may leave me, and go away
as fast as you can. Only please put me in a dark place first, if there
is one to be found."

"I will never leave you again, Nycteris," cried Photogen. "Only wait
till the sun comes and brings me back my strength, and we will go away
together, and never, never part any more."

"No, no," persisted Nycteris; "we must go now. And you must learn to be
strong in the dark as well as in the day, else you will always be only
half brave. I have begun already, not to fight your sun, but to try to
get at peace with him, and understand what he really is, and what he
means with me--whether to hurt me or to make the best of me. You must do
the same with my darkness."

"But you don't know what mad animals there are away there toward the
south," said Photogen. "They have huge green eyes, and they would eat
you up like a bit of celery, you beautiful creature!"

"Come! come! you must," said Nycteris, "or I shall have to pretend to
leave you, to make you come. I have seen the green eyes you speak of,
and I will take care of you from them."

"You! How can you do that? If it were day now, I could take care of you
from the worst of them. But as it is, I can't even see them for this
abominable darkness. I could not see your lovely eyes but for the light
that is in them; that lets me see straight into heaven through them.
They are windows into the very heaven beyond the sky. I believe they are
the very place where the stars are made."

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration: AN EMBARRASSMENT OF RICHES.--DRAWN BY J. E. KELLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *


=New-Year's Gifts.=--The custom of giving and receiving gifts at the new
year dates from very early times indeed. The Druids used to cut down
branches of their sacred mistletoe with a golden knife, and distribute
them amongst the people as New-Year's gifts. As they cut it down they
used to sing--

  "Gather the mistletoe, the new year is at hand."




To Publishers of Illustrated Magazines, etc.--Electrotypes of wood
engravings of every description. New illustrations received weekly.
Advertising space taken in part payment. Brown & Pulverman, 1238
Broadway, N. Y.--[_Com._]




ADVERTISEMENTS.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.

HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be issued every Tuesday, and may be had at
the following rates--_payable in advance, postage free_:

  SINGLE COPIES                     $0.04
  ONE SUBSCRIPTION, _one year_       1.50
  FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, _one year_     7.00

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY ORDER or DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

ADVERTISING.

The extent and character of the circulation of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
will render it a first-class medium for advertising. A limited number of
approved advertisements will be inserted on two inside pages at 75 cents
per line.

  Address
  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




A LIBERAL OFFER FOR 1880 ONLY.


HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE _and_ HARPER'S WEEKLY _will be sent to any address
for one year, commencing with the first Number of_ HARPER'S WEEKLY _for
January, 1880, on receipt of $5.00 for the two Periodicals_.




E. I. HORSMAN,

MANUFACTURER OF

FINE ARCHERY

(SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE),

80 & 82 WILLIAM ST., NEW YORK.

I have given Horsman's Bows the _hardest and most merciless_ test
imaginable. They stand better than any English Bows of the same class,
and have all the good points desirable. His Snakewood, backed, and
Beefwood, backed, are =better= than the same of English make.

  Very sincerely yours,
  MAURICE THOMPSON.

       *       *       *       *       *


SKATES AND NOVELTIES,

Send for Catalogue.

R. SIMPSON, 132 Nassau St., N. Y.




=PLAYS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE=, with Songs and Choruses, adapted for Private
Theatricals. With the Music and necessary directions for getting them
up. Sent on receipt of 30 cents, by HAPPY HOURS COMPANY, No. 5 Beekman
Street, New York. Send your address for a Catalogue of Tableaux,
Charades, Pantomimes, Plays, Reciters, Masks, Colored Fire, &c, &c.




BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boy Travellers in the Far East.

     Adventures of Two Youths in a Journey to Japan and China. By THOMAS
     W. KNOX. Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

An Involuntary Voyage.

     A Book for Boys. By LUCIEN BIART. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1.25.

Adventures of a Young Naturalist.

     By LUCIEN BIART. Edited by PARKER GILLMORE. 117 Illustrations.
     12mo, Cloth, $1.75.

What Mr. Darwin Saw

     In his Voyage Round the World in the Ship "Beagle." Adapted for
     Youthful Readers. Maps and Illustrations. 8vo, Ornamental Cloth,
     $3.00.

The Princess Idleways.

     By Mrs. W. J. HAYS. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, 75 cents.

Stories of the Old Dominion.

     By JOHN ESTEN COOKE. Profusely Illustrated. 12mo, Illuminated
     Cloth, $1.50.

How to Get Strong,

     And How to Stay So. By WILLIAM BLAIKIE. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth,
     $1.00.

The Boys of '76.

     A History of the Battles of the Revolution. By CHARLES CARLETON
     COFFIN. Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

The Story of Liberty.

     By CHARLES CARLETON COFFIN. Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth,
     $3.00.

Our Children's Songs.

     Illustrated. 8vo, Ornamental Cover, $1.00.

Books for Girls.

     Written or Edited by the Author of "John Halifax, Gentleman."
     Illustrated. 6 vols., 16mo, Cloth, in neat case, $5.40; the volumes
     separately, 90 cents each.

     Little Sunshine's Holiday.--The Cousin from India.--Twenty Years
     Ago.--Is it True?--An Only Sister.--Miss Moore.

Pet; or, Pastimes and Penalties.

     By Rev. H. R. HAWEIS, M.A. With 50 Illustrations. 12mo, Cloth,
     $1.50.

Dogs and their Doings.

     By Rev. F. O. MORRIS. Elegantly Illustrated. Square 4to, Ornamental
     Cloth, $1.75.

Books for Young People.

     By PAUL B. DU CHAILLU. Illustrated. 5 vols., 12mo, Cloth, $1.50
     each.

     Stories of the Gorilla Country.--Wild Life under the Equator.--Lost
     in the Jungle.--My Apingi Kingdom.--The Country of the Dwarfs.

Smiles's Books for Young Men:

     SELF-HELP.--CHARACTER.--THRIFT. 12mo, Cloth, $1.00 per volume.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

HARPER & BROTHERS _will send any of the above works by mail, postage
prepaid, to any part of the United States, on receipt of the price_.




"_A Holiday Book of the First Class._"

  EPISCOPAL REGISTER, Philadelphia.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE

Boy Travellers in the Far East,

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVENTURES OF

TWO YOUTHS IN A JOURNEY

TO

JAPAN AND CHINA.

Illustrated, 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

A more attractive book for boys and girls can scarcely be
imagined.--_N. Y. Times._

The best thing for a boy who cannot go to China and Japan is to get this
book and read it.--_Philadelphia Ledger._

Juvenile literature seems to have come to a climax in this book. In
literary quality and in material form it is a decided improvement on
anything of the kind ever before produced in America.--_N. Y. Journal of
Commerce._

One of the richest and most entertaining books for young people, both in
text, illustrations, and binding, which has ever come to our
table.--_Providence Press._

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, N. Y.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




"_A nice Gift for Children._"

  PITTSBURGH TELEGRAPH.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRINCESS IDLEWAYS,

A FAIRY STORY.

Illustrated, 16mo, Cloth, 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Written in a simple but charming manner, and illustrated by beautiful
pictures, so that a youngster just past the first reading-book would
appreciate every word.--_Christian Intelligencer_, N. Y.

The illustrations are worthy of special commendation. Any so airy,
pretty, and full of grace, have rarely appeared in any American book for
children.--_Hartford Courant._

The language in which it is told is so pure and agreeable, that parents
and good bachelor uncles will find it a pleasure to read it aloud to the
little ones.--_Boston Courier_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, N. Y.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




WHAT MR. DARWIN SAW

In His Voyage Round the World

in the Ship "Beagle."

ADAPTED FOR YOUTHFUL READERS.

Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

A capital book on natural history for young readers.--_Hartford
Courant._

A superb volume filled with maps and pictures of beasts, birds, and
fishes, as well as the faces of all sorts of men, and with all this a
most delightful story of real travel round the world by a very famous
naturalist.--_Christian Intelligencer_, N. Y.

To the intelligent boy or girl the book will be a perfect bonanza.
* * * Every statement it contains may be accepted as accurately
true. * * * This book shows once more that truth is stranger than
fiction.--_Philadelphia North American._

It can scarcely be opened anywhere without conveying interest and
instruction.--_S. S. Times_, Phila.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.

_Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States, on
receipt of the price._




[Illustration: The Christian Union]

       *       *       *       *       *

  HENRY WARD BEECHER, }  _Editors._
  LYMAN ABBOTT,       }

       *       *       *       *       *

"_The Christian Union is as careful to gratify the seasonable wants of
its readers as the best of the monthly periodicals._"--Syracuse Journal.

       *       *       *       *       *

1879-80.

       *       *       *       *       *

HINTS FOR HOME READING,

BY

  EDW. EVERETT HALE,
  M. F. SWEETSER,
  EDWARD EGGLESTON,
  FRED. B. PERKINS,
  JOSEPH COOK.

       *       *       *       *       *

COOKERY FOR THE MILLION.

By JULIET CORSON, of the N. Y. Cooking School.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN THE SICK ROOM.

By Miss E. R. SCOVIL, of Mass. General Hospital.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOME TALKS.

By Mrs. HENRY WARD BEECHER.

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Powerful Serial Story:_

"Unto the Third and Fourth Generation."

By HELEN CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *

TEN MINUTE SERMONS TO CHILDREN.

BY

  J. G. MERRILL,
  FRANK BEARD,
  B. T. VINCENT,
  W. W. NEWTON,
  W. F. CRAFTS,
  JAS. M. LUDLOW,
  and others.

       *       *       *       *       *

JUVENILE STORIES

From the best writers, including

  FRANK R. STOCKTON,
  E. HUNTINGTON MILLER,
  ELEANOR KIRK,
  HOPE LEDYARD,
  HAMILTON W. MABIE,
  SUSAN COOLIDGE,
  Mrs. E. C. GIBSON,
  LOUISE STOCKTON,
  SARAH J. PRICHARD,
  ELIOT MCCORMICK,
  LUCRETIA P. HALE.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEW STORY BY THE AUTHOR OF

"A Fool's Errand,"

'ZOURI'S CHRISTMAS,

Will begin Dec. 24th.

       *       *       *       *       *

PLYMOUTH PULPIT.

A Sermon or Lecture-Room Talk each week, by the Rev. HENRY WARD BEECHER.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUNDAY-SCHOOL PAPERS.

By the Rev. LYMAN ABBOTT and Mrs. W. F. CRAFTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

TERMS: _per annum_, $3. _To Clergymen_, $2.50.

_Four Months_, $1.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Address
  THE CHRISTIAN UNION,
  27 Paris Place, New York.




[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN ADVERTISEMENT]




HOLIDAY GOODS AT KALDENBERG'S.

[Illustration]

  Meerschaum
  PIPES,
  Amber Goods,
  CIGAR
  HOLDERS,
  Chains, &c.

--ALSO, MAKER OF--

IVORY GOODS.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Toilet-Sets, Combs, Paper-folders, Puff-boxes, Hair Brushes, Chessmen,
&c. Tortoise-shell Combs and Goods of all kinds.

PEARL SHELLS, painted and plain, in immense variety.

Repairing in all its branches.

125 FULTON ST., near Nassau.

  Branches  { Astor House, Broadway.
            { John St., cor. Nassau

F. J. KALDENBERG.




TOILET LUXURY.

Brown's Camphorated Saponaceous Dentifrice is the most agreeable article
for cleansing the teeth ever introduced to public notice. It has won its
way upon its merits. Its mission is to beautify the face by healing the
gums and whitening the teeth without resultant injury; it never fails to
accomplish this. Ladies who try it once buy it right along, and
recommend it to others.

Twenty-five cents a bottle.




  BOYS,       Take Notice.       GIRLS,

It is now a universal saying that the undersigned are the _largest
dealers_ in Scroll-Saws, Magic Lanterns, Magical Tricks, Skates, Toy
Engines, and ALL NEW NOVELTIES AS SOON AS MANUFACTURED. Send for
Catalogue of 192 pages, 700 Illustrations. Price 10 cents.

  PECK & SNYDER,
  124 & 126 Nassau St., N. Y.




FRAGRANT

SOZODONT

Is a composition of the purest and choicest ingredients of the vegetable
kingdom. It cleanses, beautifies, and preserves the =TEETH=, hardens and
invigorates the gums, and cools and refreshes the mouth. Every
ingredient of this =Balsamic= dentifrice has a beneficial effect on the
=Teeth and Gums=. =Impure Breath=, caused by neglected teeth, catarrh,
tobacco, or spirits, is not only neutralized, but rendered fragrant, by
the daily use of =SOZODONT=. It is as harmless as water, and has been
indorsed by the most scientific men of the day. Sold by druggists.




GAS,

The Modern Fuel,

[Illustration: Gas Stove]

When burned in one of Morton's admirable HEATERS, realizes the
predictions of scientists, that "THE USE OF GAS FOR HEATING MUST SOON
FAR OVERBALANCE ITS IMPORTANCE AS AN ILLUMINATOR."

These Heaters are BEAUTIFUL, EFFECTIVE, and ECONOMICAL.

Interesting Illustrated Circular sent to any person favoring us with his
address.

Ask your Gas Light Co. about these Heaters.

MORTON GAS STOVE CO.,

22 Frankfort Street,

NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

This cut shows the style of Stove in use by the METROPOLITAN ELEVATED
RAILWAY for heating the waiting-rooms of the stations.




[Illustration]

WIGGLES.


These are filled-in wiggles that several of our young correspondents
have drawn from the outlines given in Nos. 3 and 4 of _Young People_.
They are the contributions of H. W. K., Jessie Beal, J. A. Wells,
H. W. P., J. M. W., Lil, A. D. Crane, S. R. W., Fred Houston, and
H. E. M. Wiggles similar in design were also received from Cyrus O.,
Virgie Cumings, W. G. Page, J. H. Grensel, Sadie Vairin, and others.
Next week we shall show you what we make from wiggle