tdarthat tow dismasted frigates in a
gale; and I may look so. But ere I break, ye’ll hear me crack; and till
ye hear _that_, know that Ahab’s hawser tows his purpose yet. Believe
ye, men, in the things called omens? Then laugh aloud, and cry encore!
For ere they drown, drowning things will twice rise to the surface;
then rise again, to sink for evermore. So with Moby Dick—two days he’s
floated—tomorrow will be the third. Aye, men, he’ll rise once more,—but
only to spout his last! D’ye feel brave men, brave?”

“As fearless fire,” cried Stubb.

“And as mechanical,” muttered Ahab. Then as the men went forward, he
muttered on: “The things called omens! And yesterday I talked the same
to Starbuck there, concerning my broken boat. Oh! how valiantly I seek
to drive out of others’ hearts what’s clinched so fast in mine!—The
Parsee—the Parsee!—gone, gone? and he was to go before:—but still was
to be seen again ere I could perish—How’s that?—There’s a riddle now
might baffle all the lawyers backed by the ghosts of the whole line of
judges:—like a hawk’s beak it pecks my brain. _I’ll_, _I’ll_ solve it,
though!”

When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.

So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed nearly as on
the previous night; only, the sound of hammers, and the hum of the
grindstone was heard till nearly daylight, as the men toiled by
lanterns in the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats and
sharpening their fresh weapons for the morrow. Meantime, of the broken
keel of Ahab’s wrecked craft the carpenter made him another leg; while
still as on the night before, slouched Ahab stood fixed within his
scuttle; his hid, heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone backward on its
dial; sat due eastward for the earliest sun.


CHAPTER 135. The Chase.—Third Day.

The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the
solitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of the
daylight look-outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.

“In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that’s all. Helm
there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been going. What a lovely day
again! were it a new-made world, and made for a summer-house to the
angels, and this morning the first of its throwing open to them, a
fairer day could not dawn upon that world. Here’s food for thought, had
Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks; he only feels, feels, feels;
_that’s_ tingling enough for mortal man! to think’s audacity. God only
has that right and privilege. Thinking is, or ought to be, a coolness
and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor brains beat too
much for that. And yet, I’ve sometimes thought my brain was very
calm—frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the
contents turned to ice, and shiver it. And still this hair is growing
now; this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it’s like
that sort of common grass that will grow anywhere, between the earthy
clefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava. How the wild winds blow
it; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash the
tossed ship they cling to. A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere this
through prison corridors and cells, and wards of hospitals, and
ventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as fleeces.
Out upon it!—it’s tainted. Were I the wind, I’d blow no more on such a
wicked, miserable world. I’d crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink
there. And yet, ’tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever
conquered it? In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow. Run
tilting at it, and you but run through it. Ha! a coward wind that
strikes stark naked men, but will not stand to receive a single blow.
Even Ahab is a braver thing—a nobler thing than _that_. Would now the
wind but had a body; but all the things that most exasperate and
outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, but only bodiless as
objects, not as agents. There’s a most special, a most cunning, oh, a
most malicious difference! And yet, I say again, and swear it now, that
there’s something all glorious and gracious in the wind. These warm
Trade Winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on, in
strong and steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their mark,
however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack, and mightiest
Mississippies of the land swift and swerve about, uncertain where to go
at last. And by the eternal Poles! these same Trades that so directly
blow my good ship on; these Trades, or something like them—something so
unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my keeled soul along! To it!
Aloft there! What d’ye see?”

“Nothing, sir.”

“Nothing! and noon at hand! The doubloon goes a-begging! See the sun!
Aye, aye, it must be so. I’ve oversailed him. How, got the start? Aye,
he’s chasing _me_ now; not I, _him_—that’s bad; I might have known it,
too. Fool! the lines—the harpoons he’s towing. Aye, aye, I have run him
by last night. About! about! Come down, all of ye, but the regular look
outs! Man the braces!”

Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod’s
quarter, so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the braced
ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own
white wake.

“Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw,” murmured Starbuck to
himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail. “God
keep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the inside
wet my flesh. I misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him!”

“Stand by to sway me up!” cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket.
“We should meet him soon.”

“Aye, aye, sir,” and straightway Starbuck did Ahab’s bidding, and once
more Ahab swung on high.

A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages. Time itself now held
long breaths with keen suspense. But at last, some three points off the
weather bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the
three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had
voiced it.

“Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick! On deck
there!—brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind’s eye. He’s too far
off to lower yet, Mr. Starbuck. The sails shake! Stand over that
helmsman with a top-maul! So, so; he travels fast, and I must down. But
let me have one more good round look aloft here at the sea; there’s
time for that. An old, old sight, and yet somehow so young; aye, and
not changed a wink since I first saw it, a boy, from the sand-hills of
Nantucket! The same!—the same!—the same to Noah as to me. There’s a
soft shower to leeward. Such lovely leewardings! They must lead
somewhere—to something else than common land, more palmy than the
palms. Leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then;
the better if the bitterer quarter. But good bye, good bye, old
mast-head! What’s this?—green? aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks.
No such green weather stains on Ahab’s head! There’s the difference now
between man’s old age and matter’s. But aye, old mast, we both grow old
together; sound in our hulls, though, are we not, my ship? Aye, minus a
leg, that’s all. By heaven this dead wood has the better of my live
flesh every way. I can’t compare with it; and I’ve known some ships
made of dead trees outlast the lives of men made of the most vital
stuff of vital fathers. What’s that he said? he should still go before
me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again? But where? Will I have eyes at
the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs? and
all night I’ve been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to. Aye,
aye, like many more thou told’st direful truth as touching thyself, O
Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short. Good-bye, mast-head—keep
a good eye upon the whale, the while I’m gone. We’ll talk to-morrow,
nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down there, tied by head and
tail.”

He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered
through the cloven blue air to the deck.

In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop’s
stern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to the
mate,—who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck—and bade him pause.

“Starbuck!”

“Sir?”

“For the third time my soul’s ship starts upon this voyage, Starbuck.”

“Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.”

“Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing,
Starbuck!”

“Truth, sir: saddest truth.”

“Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of the
flood;—and I feel now like a billow that’s all one crested comb,
Starbuck. I am old;—shake hands with me, man.”

Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck’s tears the glue.

“Oh, my captain, my captain!—noble heart—go not—go not!—see, it’s a
brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!”

“Lower away!”—cried Ahab, tossing the mate’s arm from him. “Stand by
the crew!”

In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.

“The sharks! the sharks!” cried a voice from the low cabin-window
there; “O master, my master, come back!”

But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and the
boat leaped on.

Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when
numbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath
the hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time
they dipped in the water; and in this way accompanied the boat with
their bites. It is a thing not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats
in those swarming seas; the sharks at times apparently following them
in the same prescient way that vultures hover over the banners of
marching regiments in the east. But these were the first sharks that
had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had been first
descried; and whether it was that Ahab’s crew were all such
tiger-yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the
senses of the sharks—a matter sometimes well known to affect
them,—however it was, they seemed to follow that one boat without
molesting the others.

“Heart of wrought steel!” murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, and
following with his eyes the receding boat—“canst thou yet ring boldly
to that sight?—lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and followed by
them, open-mouthed to the chase; and this the critical third day?—For
when three days flow together in one continuous intense pursuit; be
sure the first is the morning, the second the noon, and the third the
evening and the end of that thing—be that end what it may. Oh! my God!
what is this that shoots through me, and leaves me so deadly calm, yet
expectant,—fixed at the top of a shudder! Future things swim before me,
as in empty outlines and skeletons; all the past is somehow grown dim.
Mary, girl! thou fadest in pale glories behind me; boy! I seem to see
but thy eyes grown wondrous blue. Strangest problems of life seem
clearing; but clouds sweep between—Is my journey’s end coming? My legs
feel faint; like his who has footed it all day. Feel thy heart,—beats
it yet? Stir thyself, Starbuck!—stave it off—move, move! speak
aloud!—Mast-head there! See ye my boy’s hand on the hill?—Crazed;—aloft
there!—keep thy keenest eye upon the boats:—mark well the whale!—Ho!
again!—drive off that hawk! see! he pecks—he tears the vane”—pointing
to the red flag flying at the main-truck—“Ha! he soars away with
it!—Where’s the old man now? see’st thou that sight, oh Ahab!—shudder,
shudder!”

The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the mast-heads—a
downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had sounded; but
intending to be near him at the next rising, he held on his way a
little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crew maintaining the
profoundest silence, as the head-beat waves hammered and hammered
against the opposing bow.

“Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost heads
drive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and
no hearse can be mine:—and hemp only can kill me! Ha! ha!”

Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then
quickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice,
swiftly rising to the surface. A low rumbling sound was heard; a
subterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as bedraggled with
trailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shot lengthwise,
but obliquely from the sea. Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist,
it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and then fell swamping
back into the deep. Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters flashed for
an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower of
flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the
marble trunk of the whale.

“Give way!” cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward to
the attack; but maddened by yesterday’s fresh irons that corroded in
him, Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell
from heaven. The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad
white forehead, beneath the transparent skin, looked knitted together;
as head on, he came churning his tail among the boats; and once more
flailed them apart; spilling out the irons and lances from the two
mates’ boats, and dashing in one side of the upper part of their bows,
but leaving Ahab’s almost without a scar.

While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as the
whale swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as he
shot by them again; at that moment a quick cry went up. Lashed round
and round to the fish’s back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in
which, during the past night, the whale had reeled the involutions of
the lines around him, the half torn body of the Parsee was seen; his
sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended eyes turned full upon old
Ahab.

The harpoon dropped from his hand.

“Befooled, befooled!”—drawing in a long lean breath—“Aye, Parsee! I see
thee again.—Aye, and thou goest before; and this, _this_ then is the
hearse that thou didst promise. But I hold thee to the last letter of
thy word. Where is the second hearse? Away, mates, to the ship! those
boats are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, and return to me;
if not, Ahab is enough to die—Down, men! the first thing that but
offers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing I harpoon. Ye are
not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obey me.—Where’s the
whale? gone down again?”

But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with the
corpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the last encounter
had been but a stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was now again
steadily swimming forward; and had almost passed the ship,—which thus
far had been sailing in the contrary direction to him, though for the
present her headway had been stopped. He seemed swimming with his
utmost velocity, and now only intent upon pursuing his own straight
path in the sea.

“Oh! Ahab,” cried Starbuck, “not too late is it, even now, the third
day, to desist. See! Moby Dick seeks thee not. It is thou, thou, that
madly seekest him!”

Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled
to leeward, by both oars and canvas. And at last when Ahab was sliding
by the vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck’s face as he
leaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and
follow him, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval. Glancing upwards,
he saw Tashtego, Queequeg, and Daggoo, eagerly mounting to the three
mast-heads; while the oarsmen were rocking in the two staved boats
which had but just been hoisted to the side, and were busily at work in
repairing them. One after the other, through the port-holes, as he
sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask, busying
themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances. As he saw all
this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats; far other hammers
seemed driving a nail into his heart. But he rallied. And now marking
that the vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to
Tashtego, who had just gained that perch, to descend again for another
flag, and a hammer and nails, and so nail it to the mast.

Whether fagged by the three days’ running chase, and the resistance to
his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was some
latent deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White
Whale’s way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rapidly
nearing him once more; though indeed the whale’s last start had not
been so long a one as before. And still as Ahab glided over the waves
the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciously stuck to
the boat; and so continually bit at the plying oars, that the blades
became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in the sea, at
almost every dip.

“Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars. Pull
on! ’tis the better rest, the shark’s jaw than the yielding water.”

“But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!”

“They will last long enough! pull on!—But who can tell”—he
muttered—“whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on
Ahab?—But pull on! Aye, all alive, now—we near him. The helm! take the
helm! let me pass,”—and so saying two of the oarsmen helped him forward
to the bows of the still flying boat.

At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along with
the White Whale’s flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its
advance—as the whale sometimes will—and Ahab was fairly within the
smoky mountain mist, which, thrown off from the whale’s spout, curled
round his great, Monadnock hump; he was even thus close to him; when,
with body arched back, and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to the
poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into the
hated whale. As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as if sucked
into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically rolled his
nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so
suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated
part of the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have
been tossed into the sea. As it was, three of the oarsmen—who foreknew
not the precise instant of the dart, and were therefore unprepared for
its effects—these were flung out; but so fell, that, in an instant two
of them clutched the gunwale again, and rising to its level on a
combing wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard again; the third man
helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and swimming.

Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,
instantaneous swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering
sea. But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns with
the line, and hold it so; and commanded the crew to turn round on their
seats, and tow the boat up to the mark; the moment the treacherous line
felt that double strain and tug, it snapped in the empty air!

“What breaks in me? Some sinew cracks!—’tis whole again; oars! oars!
Burst in upon him!”

Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeled
round to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that evolution,
catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship; seemingly seeing
in it the source of all his persecutions; bethinking it—it may be—a
larger and nobler foe; of a sudden, he bore down upon its advancing
prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.

Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead. “I grow blind; hands!
stretch out before me that I may yet grope my way. Is’t night?”

“The whale! The ship!” cried the cringing oarsmen.

“Oars! oars! Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be for
ever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark! I
see: the ship! the ship! Dash on, my men! Will ye not save my ship?”

But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the
sledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks
burst through, and in an instant almost, the temporarily disabled boat
lay nearly level with the waves; its half-wading, splashing crew,
trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the pouring water.

Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego’s mast-head hammer
remained suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him as
with a plaid, then streamed itself straight out from him, as his own
forward-flowing heart; while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon the
bowsprit beneath, caught sight of the down-coming monster just as soon
as he.

“The whale, the whale! Up helm, up helm! Oh, all ye sweet powers of
air, now hug me close! Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in a
woman’s fainting fit. Up helm, I say—ye fools, the jaw! the jaw! Is
this the end of all my bursting prayers? all my life-long fidelities?
Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work. Steady! helmsman, steady. Nay, nay! Up
helm again! He turns to meet us! Oh, his unappeasable brow drives on
towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot depart. My God, stand by me
now!”

“Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now
help Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here. I grin at thee, thou grinning
whale! Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb’s own
unwinking eye? And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that is
all too soft; would it were stuffed with brushwood! I grin at thee,
thou grinning whale! Look ye, sun, moon, and stars! I call ye assassins
of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost. For all that, I would
yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand the cup! Oh, oh! oh, oh!
thou grinning whale, but there’ll be plenty of gulping soon! Why fly ye
not, O Ahab! For me, off shoes and jacket to it; let Stubb die in his
drawers! A most mouldy and over salted death, though;—cherries!
cherries! cherries! Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we die!”

“Cherries? I only wish that we were where they grow. Oh, Stubb, I hope
my poor mother’s drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers will
now come to her, for the voyage is up.”

From the ship’s bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive; hammers,
bits of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained in their
hands, just as they had darted from their various employments; all
their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, which from side to side
strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent a broad band of
overspreading semicircular foam before him as he rushed. Retribution,
swift vengeance, eternal malice were in his whole aspect, and spite of
all that mortal man could do, the solid white buttress of his forehead
smote the ship’s starboard bow, till men and timbers reeled. Some fell
flat upon their faces. Like dislodged trucks, the heads of the
harpooneers aloft shook on their bull-like necks. Through the breach,
they heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.

“The ship! The hearse!—the second hearse!” cried Ahab from the boat;
“its wood could only be American!”

Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its
keel; but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far
off the other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab’s boat, where, for a
time, he lay quiescent.

“I turn my body from the sun. What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thy
hammer. Oh! ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked keel;
and only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and
Pole-pointed prow,—death-glorious ship! must ye then perish, and
without me? Am I cut off from the last fond pride of meanest
shipwrecked captains? Oh, lonely death on lonely life! Oh, now I feel
my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief. Ho, ho! from all your
furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole foregone
life, and top this one piled comber of my death! Towards thee I roll,
thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with
thee; from hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit my last
breath at thee. Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool!
and since neither can be mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still
chasing thee, though tied to thee, thou damned whale! _Thus_, I give up
the spear!”

The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with igniting
velocity the line ran through the grooves;—ran foul. Ahab stooped to
clear it; he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him round the
neck, and voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was
shot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone. Next instant, the
heavy eye-splice in the rope’s final end flew out of the stark-empty
tub, knocked down an oarsman, and smiting the sea, disappeared in its
depths.

For an instant, the tranced boat’s crew stood still; then turned. “The
ship? Great God, where is the ship?” Soon they through dim, bewildering
mediums saw her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseous Fata
Morgana; only the uppermost masts out of water; while fixed by
infatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once lofty perches, the
pagan harpooneers still maintained their sinking lookouts on the sea.
And now, concentric circles seized the lone boat itself, and all its
crew, and each floating oar, and every lance-pole, and spinning,
animate and inanimate, all round and round in one vortex, carried the
smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.

But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over the
sunken head of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of the
erect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards of the flag,
which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the destroying
billows they almost touched;—at that instant, a red arm and a hammer
hovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the act of nailing the
flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar. A sky-hawk that
tauntingly had followed the main-truck downwards from its natural home
among the stars, pecking at the flag, and incommoding Tashtego there;
this bird now chanced to intercept its broad fluttering wing between
the hammer and the wood; and simultaneously feeling that etherial
thrill, the submerged savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept his
hammer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic
shrieks, and his imperial beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive
form folded in the flag of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like
Satan, would not sink to hell till she had dragged a living part of
heaven along with her, and helmeted herself with it.

Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen
white surf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the
great shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.


Epilogue

“AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE” Job.

The drama’s done. Why then here does any one step forth?—Because one
did survive the wreck.

It so chanced, that after the Parsee’s disappearance, I was he whom the
Fates ordained to take the place of Ahab’s bowsman, when that bowsman
assumed the vacant post; the same, who, when on the last day the three
men were tossed from out of the rocking boat, was dropped astern. So,
floating on the margin of the ensuing scene, and in full sight of it,
when the halfspent suction of the sunk ship reached me, I was then, but
slowly, drawn towards the closing vortex. When I reached it, it had
subsided to a creamy pool. Round and round, then, and ever contracting
towards the button-like black bubble at the axis of that slowly
wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve. Till, gaining that
vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by
reason of its cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising
with great force, the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea,
fell over, and floated by my side. Buoyed up by that coffin, for almost
one whole day and night, I floated on a soft and dirgelike main. The
unharming sharks, they glided by as if with padlocks on their mouths;
the savage sea-hawks sailed with sheathed beaks. On the second day, a
sail drew near, nearer, and picked me up at last. It was the
devious-cruising Rachel, that in her retracing search after her missing
children, only found another orphan.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOBY DICK; OR, THE WHALE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


eeProject Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, December 30, 1879, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Harper's Young People, December 30, 1879
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: March 8, 2009 [EBook #28275]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, DEC 30, 1879 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S

YOUNG PEOPLE

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]


       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. I.--NO. 9. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, December 30, 1879. Copyright, 1879, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




A COASTING SONG.

[Illustration: COASTING NEW-YEAR'S EVE.

Drawn by C. GRAHAM.]


  From the quaint old farm-house, nestling warmly
  'Neath its overhanging thatch of snow,
  Out into the moonlight troop the children,
  Filling all the air with music as they go,
  Gliding, sliding,
  Down the hill,
  Never minding
  Cold nor chill,
  O'er the silvered
  Moon-lit snow,
  Swift as arrow
  From the bow,
  With a rush
  Of mad delight
  Through the crisp air
  Of the night,
  Speeding far out
  O'er the plain,
  Trudging gayly
  Up again
  To where the firelight's
  Ruddy glow
  Turns to gold
  The silver snow.
  Finer sport who can conceive
  Than that of coasting New-Year's Eve?
  Half the fun lies in the fire
  That seems to brighter blaze and higher
  Than any other of the year,
  As though his dying hour to cheer,
  And at the same time greeting give
  To him who has a year to live.
  'Tis built of logs of oak and pine,
  Filled in with branches broken fine;
  It roars and crackles merrily;
  The children round it dance with glee;
  They sing and shout and welcome in
  The new year with a joyous din
  That rings far out o'er hill and dale,
  And warns the watchers in the vale
  'Tis time the church bells to employ
  To spread the universal joy.

  Then the hill is left in silence
  As the coasters homeward go,
  And the crimson of the fire-light
  Fades from off the trodden snow.

  So the years glide by as swiftly
  As the sleds rush down the hill,
  And each new one as it cometh
  Bringeth more of good than ill.




THE FAIRY'S TOKEN.


  Ethelreda, the Fairy of Northland,
    Was singing a song to herself,
  As she swung from a wreath of soft snow-flakes,
    And smiled to another bright elf.

  What token shall we send to our darling,
    Our name-child, fair Ethel, below
  In the house which is down in the valley
    All covered and calm in the snow?

  Shall we gather our glorious jewels,
    And wind them about her lithe form?
  They would glitter and glance in the sunshine,
    And merrily gleam in the storm.

  Shall we clothe her in whitest of ermine,
    And robe her as grand as a queen;
  Weave her laces of ice and of frost-work,
    A mantle of glistening sheen?

  She would shudder and cry at the clasping,
    She would moan aloud in her woe,
  And think the gay robes had been fashioned
    By cruelest, bitterest foe.

  I will none of these gifts for my darling,
    Neither jewels nor laces rare,
  Neither diamonds nor pearls of cold anguish--
    My gift shall be tender and fair.

  Early Ethel awoke Christmas morning,
    And found on her pillow that day
  A bunch of bright little snow-drops,
    From kind Ethelreda, the Fay!




[Begun in No. 1 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, November 4.]

THE BRAVE SWISS BOY.


_VIII.--THE REWARD OF FIDELITY._

Walter met with a friendly reception from General De Bougy--a brave old
warrior who had served under Napoleon, and fought at Waterloo, where he
had been severely wounded, and had lost his right foot by a cannon-ball.
His hair was gray, and his countenance weather-beaten; but in spite of
his age and infirmities he enjoyed tolerably good health, and was always
in good humor. Having from long experience become a keen observer of
those around him, it was not long before he recognized the merits of his
new servant, to whom he soon became as much attached as his nephew had
been.

Walter had been about three months in the general's service, and it
seemed to all appearance as if he was likely to become a permanency
there, when a letter arrived from Paris, the reading of which suddenly
changed the customary gayety of the old man into the deepest gloom.

"This is a sad affair," said he to Walter, who happened to be in the
room at the time. "My poor nephew!"

"Mr. Lafond? What is the matter with him?" inquired Walter, earnestly.

"He is ill, dangerously ill, poor fellow, so the doctor informs me,"
replied the general. "You can read the letter yourself. He seems to
complain of being surrounded by strangers, with no one in the house that
he can rely on. If I were not such an old cripple, I would go and help
him to the best of my ability; for although he has led a thoughtless,
reckless life, a more thorough-hearted gentleman does not live. Poor
Adolphe!"

"I must go to him, sir," said Walter, suddenly, after hastily reading
the letter, the perusal of which had driven all the color from his
cheeks.

"You! Why, it is not long since you left him; and what do you want to go
back for?" inquired the general, in surprise.

"Can you not guess, sir? I must go and nurse him. He must at least have
one person near him to pay him some attention."

"If you care for him so," exclaimed the general, "why did you leave his
service?"

This led Walter to explain to the old gentleman the reasons which had
compelled him to give up his situation, and again to beg permission to
act the part of nurse to his former master. A tear sparkled in the old
man's eye as the youth declared the attachment he had always cherished
for Mr. Lafond. "Go to him, then," said he. "I can not trust him to a
more faithful attendant; and as soon as I can I will follow you, and
take my place with you by his bedside. Poor Adolphe! Had he only
possessed firmness of character, and avoided bad company, he might have
been well and strong to-day. But his unhappy weakness has brought him to
the grave before his time, in spite of all my warnings, and entreaties.
As he has sowed, so must he reap. Ah, Walter, his fate is a terrible
proof of the consequences of evil habits. But all regrets are useless
now. Let us lose no time in giving what little help we can."

Making all the necessary preparations for the journey without a moment's
delay, Walter soon reached Paris. When he entered the chamber of Mr.
Lafond he was shocked at the change which a few short months had made in
his appearance. It was evident that the doctor had rather disguised than
exaggerated the danger he was in. The sunken eyes and withered face
showed only too plainly that the space of time allotted to him on earth
was but short. Walter sank on his knees by the bedside and taking the
pale and wasted hand in his, breathed a prayer that God might see fit to
deal mercifully with a life yet so young; while the invalid smiled
faintly, and stroked the cheek of his faithful attendant.

"Dear Walter, how good of you to come back!" murmured the invalid. "I
thought you would not leave me to die alone. I feared that your
prediction would prove true, and therefore I did not wish you to go
home. I wanted to have a true friend with me at the last moment which I
feel can not be far off now."

The faithful Switzer saw that Mr. Lafond too well knew the critical
condition he was in to be deceived by any false hopes, and he therefore
did everything in his power to make the last days of the dying man as
free from pain and discomfort as possible. Who could tell what might be
the effect, even at so late a period, of careful nursing and devoted
attention? But all his thoughtful and loving care seemed in vain.

"The end is coming," said the invalid one evening, as the glowing rays
of the evening sun streamed into his apartment. "I shall never more look
upon yonder glorious sun, or hear the gay singing of the birds. I have
something to say to you, Walter, before I go. Do you see that black
cabinet in the corner? I bequeath it to you, with everything it
contains, and hope with all my heart that it will help you on in the
world as you deserve. Here is the key of my desk, in which you will find
my will, which confirms you in the possession of the cabinet and all its
contents. And now give me your hand, dear boy. Let me look once more
upon your honest face. May Heaven bless you for all your kindness and
devotion! Farewell!"

Walter bent over the face of the dying man, and looked at him with deep
emotion. He smiled and closed his eyes; but after lying in a quiet
slumber for about an hour, he awoke with a spasm; his head fell back,
and the hapless victim died in the arms of his faithful servant.

The long hours of the night were passed by Walter in weeping and prayer
beside the corpse of the master to whose kindness he had owed so much;
but when morning dawned he roused himself from his grief, and gave the
directions that were necessary under the melancholy circumstances. It
was a great relief to him that General De Bougy arrived toward evening
to pay the last honors to his deceased nephew. Two days afterward the
funeral took place; and as the mortal remains were deposited in the
family grave, Walter's tears flowed afresh as he thought of the many
proofs of friendship he had received from his departed master.

A day or two afterward he was awakened from his sorrow by news from
home. The letter was from Neighbor Frieshardt, who again thanked him for
the money he had received for the sale of the cattle, praised him for
the faithfulness and ability with which he had managed the business, and
then went on to speak of Walter's father. "The old man," he wrote, "is
in good health, but he feels lonely, and longs for you to come back. 'If
Watty only were here, I should feel quite young again,' he has said to
me a hundred times. He sends you his love; and Seppi, who is still with
me, and is now a faithful servant, does the same. So good-by, Walter. I
think you now know what you had better do."

Without any delay Walter hastened to the general, showed him the letter,
and told him he had decided to leave Paris and return home.

The general used all his powers of persuasion, promised to regard the
young mountaineer as his own son; but it was all of no use. Walter spoke
so earnestly of his father's solitary home, and the desire he felt to
see his native mountains once more, that the old gentleman had to
reconcile himself to parting with him. "Go home, then," said he. "When
the voice of Duty calls, it is sinful to resist. But before you go, we
must open my nephew's will. It will surprise me very much if there is
nothing in it of importance to you." Unlocking the desk, the will was
found sealed up as it had been left by Mr. Lafond. After opening it, the
general read the document carefully through, and laid it down on the
table with an expression of disappointment. "Poor fellow!" he exclaimed.
"Death must have surprised him too suddenly, Walter, or he would
certainly have left you a larger legacy. This is all he says about you:
'To Walter Hirzel, my faithful and devoted servant, I bequeath the black
cabinet in my bedroom, with all its contents, and thank him sincerely
for all his attention to me.' That is the whole of it. But never mind,
my young friend; the old general is still alive, and he will make good
all that his nephew has forgotten."

Walter shook his head. "Thanks, a thousand times, dear sir, but indeed I
wish for nothing. My feet will carry me to my native valley; and once I
am there, I can easily earn my living. I dare say there will be some
little keepsake in the cabinet that I can take in memory of my poor
master, and I want nothing more."

"Then search the cabinet at once. Where is the key?"

"Here," said Walter, taking it from his pocket. "Mr. Lafond gave me the
cabinet shortly before his death, and handed me the key at the same
time."

"And have you never thought of opening it to see what it contained?"

"No," replied Walter. "It did not occur to me to do so. But I will go
and see now." With these words he left the room, and went up to the
apartment where the piece of furniture stood. In the various drawers
were found the watch, rings, and jewelry his master had been accustomed
to wear. As he viewed these tokens of regard, his eyes were bedewed with
melancholy gratitude. Carefully placing the jewelry in a little box, he
was about to close the cabinet again, when his eye fell upon a drawer
which he had omitted to open. Here, to his infinite surprise, he found a
packet with the inscription, in his late master's handwriting, "The
Reward of Fidelity," which, on opening, he found to contain bank-notes
for one hundred thousand francs.

"Well, what have you found?" inquired the general, eagerly, when the
half-bewildered youth returned.

"This watch and jewelry, and a packet of bank-notes," replied Walter,
laying them on the table.

"One hundred thousand francs!" exclaimed the old gentleman. "That is
something worth having. Why, that will be a fortune to you; and I am now
sorry that I did my nephew the injustice to think he had forgotten you.
I wish you joy with all my heart!"

"For what do you wish me joy, sir?"

"For what? For the money," said the general, in surprise.

"But that is not for me," said the Switzer, shaking his head. "This
watch and the jewelry I will keep as long as I live, in memory of my
good master; but the money must have been left there by mistake, and I
should feel like a thief if I were to take any of it."

The old general opened his eyes as wide as he could, and stared in
astonishment at the simplicity of the youth. "I'm afraid you are out of
your mind," said he. "The will says, 'The black cabinet, with all its
contents.' The bank-notes were in it, and of course they are yours."

"And yet it must be a mistake."

"But I tell you it is no mistake," exclaimed the general, impatiently.
"Look at the inscription, 'The Reward of Fidelity!' To whom should that
apply but to you? Put the money in your pocket, Walter, and let us have
no more absurd doubts about it."

But the young man persisted in his refusal, and pushed the packet away
from him. "It is too much," said he; "I can not think of robbing you of
such a large sum."

"Well, then," said the general, greatly touched by such singular
unselfishness, "_I_ must settle the business. If you won't take the
money, I will take _you_. From this day, Walter, you are my son. Come to
my heart. Old as it is, it beats warmly for fidelity and honesty. Thanks
to God that He has given me such a son in my lonely old age!"

Walter stood as if rooted to the spot. But the old man drew him to his
breast and embraced him warmly, till both found relief for their
feelings in tears.

"But my father," stammered the young man at last. "My father is all
alone at home."

[Illustration: "HE WRAPPED HIMSELF IN HIS DRESSING-GOWN, AND WALKED
HASTILY TO AND FRO."]

"Oh, we will start off to him at once, bag and baggage," exclaimed the
general. "I know your fatherland well, and shall very soon feel myself
more at home there than I am in France, where there is not a creature
left to care for me. Yes, Walter, we will go to the glorious Bernese
Oberland, and buy ground, and build a house, within view of your noble
mountains, and live there with your father. He shall have cattle and
goats to cheer his heart in his old age, and we will lead a happy life
together as long as God spares us."

Walter in his happiness could scarcely believe his ears, and thought the
whole a splendid dream. But he soon found the reality. The general sold
his property in France, and departed with his adopted son to
Switzerland, where he carried out the intention he had so suddenly
formed. Old Toni Hirzel renewed his youth when he had his son once more
beside him, and he and the general soon became fast friends. A year had
scarcely passed ere a beautiful house was built near Meyringen, and
furnished with every comfort; while an ample garden, surrounded by
meadows, in which cows and oxen fed, added to the beauty of the scene.
Walter's dream had become a reality; and everything around him was so
much better than he had ever dared to hope, that his heart overflowed
with gratitude to God, and to the benefactor who had done so much for
him.

Nor was this prosperity undeserved. Walter had not spent his time in
idleness and sloth. He knew that the diligent hand maketh its owner
rich, and he managed the land with so much energy and skill that he soon
became renowned as one of the best farmers in the Oberland. The general
and Toni assisted him with their counsel and help as far as they were
able; and the old soldier soon experienced the beneficial influence of
an active out-door life and the change of air and scene. His pale cheeks
grew once more ruddy with health, and he soon grew so active that he
even forgot that his right foot lay buried on the field of Waterloo.

Thus the little family lived in happiness, enjoying the good wishes of
all their neighbors, and the gratitude of all who were in want; for they
were always ready to relieve out of their abundance any who needed it.
Mr. Seymour increased their happiness by visiting his friend Walter
nearly every year, and rejoiced in the prosperity which God had bestowed
upon him as a reward for his honesty and uprightness.

THE END.




AROUND THE WORLD IN A STEAM-YACHT.

[Illustration: STEAM-YACHT "HENRIETTE."--DRAWN BY F. S. COZZENS.]


The beautiful steam-yacht _Henriette_, of which a picture is given on
this page, has just left New York, bound on a pleasure voyage around the
world. Her passengers are her owner, M. Henri Say, and his wife and
child, and they will doubtless have a most pleasant voyage, and see many
strange sights and countries before it is ended.

The general outline of the route to be pursued is from New York down the
coast, touching at Baltimore and Washington, and possibly at some of the
Southern ports, then to the West Indies, where several weeks will be
spent in cruising among the beautiful islands. Some of the principal
South American cities will be visited before stormy Cape Horn is
doubled, and the _Henriette_ enters the quieter waters of the Pacific.
Then the plan of the voyage includes the Sandwich Islands, San
Francisco, Japan, China, Australia, the East Indian islands, India,
Arabia, the Red Sea, Egypt, the Suez Canal, Turkey, the many interesting
countries bordering on the Mediterranean, and at last France, where M.
Say's home is, and where the long voyage will end in the harbor of
Nantes.

The _Henriette_ was built at Newburgh, on the Hudson, last summer, at a
cost of $50,000, and was originally named the _Shaughraun_; but she was
sold, and her name changed, before she went on her first cruise. She is
rigged as a top-sail schooner, and under steam can make seventeen knots
an hour, which is very fast travelling. She is 205 feet long over all,
and is the largest steam-yacht but one ever built in this country. She
is to be accompanied in her trip around the world by a smaller
steam-yacht, or tender, named the _Follet_, in which will be carried
quantities of choice provisions and extra supplies of all kinds. The
crew of the _Henriette_ numbers thirty men, all of whom are French,
excepting her engineers, who are Americans, and the discipline
maintained on board is that of a French man-of-war.




THE NEW YEAR'S ERRAND.


"What are those children doing?" asked the clergyman of his wife a few
days after Christmas.

[Illustration: WHAT BECAME OF THE CHRISTMAS TREE.--DRAWN BY C. S.
REINHART.]

"I really can not tell you, James," was the reply, as his wife peered
anxiously over his shoulder, and out of the window. "All that I know
about it is this: I was busy in the pantry, when Rob put his head in,
and asked if he could have the Christmas tree, as nearly everything had
been taken off of it; so I said 'Yes,' and there he goes with it, sure
enough. I do hope the wax from the candles has not spotted the parlor
carpet."

"Don't be anxious, wife; 'Christmas comes but once a year, and when it
comes should bring good cheer.'"

"Yes," said the careful housewife, "I suppose I do worry. But there! it
is snowing again, and Bertha perched up on that tree on Rob's sled, and
she so subject to croup!"

"The more she is out in the pure air, the less likely she is to take
cold; but where are they going?"

"I really do not know, James. Did you ever see a dog more devoted to any
one than Jip is to Rob? There he goes, dancing beside him now; and I see
Rob has tied on the scarf Bertha knit for him; that is done to please
her. She did work so hard to get it finished in time before he came home
for the holidays."

"She is very like her own dear little mother in kindness and care for
others," was the reply.

The mother gave a bright smile and a kiss for the compliment, but a
little wail from the nursery hurried her out of the room.

Christmas at the parsonage had been delightful, for, first of all, Rob's
return from boarding-school was a pleasurable event; he always came home
in such good spirits, was so full of his jokes and nonsense, and had so
many funny things to tell about the boys. Then there was the dressing of
the church with evergreens, and the decoration of the parlor with
wreaths of holly or running pine, and the spicy smell of all the
delicacies which were in course of preparation, for Sally was a famous
cook, and would brook no interference when mince-pies and plum-pudding
were to be concocted.

But the children thought the arrival of a certain box, which was always
dispatched from town, the very best of all the Christmas delights. This
box came from their rich aunts and uncles, who seemed to think that the
little parsonage must be a dreary place in winter, and so, to make up to
its inmates for losing all the brightness of a city winter, they sent
everything they could think of in the way of beautiful pictures,
gorgeous books, games, sugar-plums, and enough little glittering things
for two or three trees. Of course the clergyman always laid aside some
of these things for other occasions, lest the children should be
surfeited.

And so Christmas had passed happily, as usual. The school-children had
sung their carols and enjoyed their feast, the poor had been carefully
looked after and made comfortable, and there had come the usual lull
after a season of excitement. It was now the day before the first of the
new year, and the parson was writing a sermon. He was telling people
what a good time it was to try and turn over a new leaf; to be nobler,
truer, braver, than they had ever been before; to let the old year carry
away with it all selfishness, all anger, envy, and unloving thoughts;
and as he wrote, he looked out of the window at the falling snow, and
wondered where Bob and Bertha could have gone.

Dinner-time came. Aunt Ellen, mamma, and the parson sat down alone.
"Where _are_ those children?" repeated mamma.

"I do not think you need be worried, Kate," said Aunt Ellen. "Rob is so
thoughtful, he will take good care of Bertha. They have perhaps stopped
in at a neighbor's, and been coaxed to stay."

"Very likely," said the parson. And then the baby came in, crowing and
chuckling, and claiming his privileges, such as sitting in a high chair
and feeding the cat, and mamma had enough to do to keep the merry fellow
in order, or his fat little hands would have grasped all the silver, and
pulled over the glasses.

After dinner, while the parson let the baby twist his whiskers or creep
about his knees, mamma played some lovely German music, and Aunt Ellen
crocheted. The short afternoon grew dusky. Baby went off to the nursery;
the parson had lighted his cigar, and was going out for a walk, but
mamma looked so anxious that he said,

"I will go look for the children, Kate."

"Really, I think you will have to give Rob a little scolding, my dear.
He should have told us where he was going."

"Yes, I suppose so," said the parson; when just then there was a gleeful
cry--a merry chorus made up of Rob's, Bertha's, and Jip's voices, and
there they were, Bertha on the sled, and Rob was her horse.

"Where have you been, my son?" said the parson, trying to be severe.
"You should not have gone off in this manner for the whole day without
asking permission."

Rob's bright smile faded a little; but Bertha said, quickly, "Please,
papa, don't scold Rob. If you only knew--"

"Hush, Bertha!" said Rob; and red as his cheeks were, they grew redder.

"I am sorry you are offended, sir. I did not mean to be so long. We were
detained."

"What detained you?"

"And where did you get your dinner?" asked mamma.

"Oh, we had plenty to eat."

"But you don't intend us to know where you got it?"

"No, sir," said Rob, frankly.

"Now, papa, you _shall_ not scold Rob," said Bertha, putting her hand in
his. "Come into your study. Go away, Rob; go give Jip his supper. Come,
mamma;" and Bertha dragged them both in to the fire, where, with
sparkling eyes and cheeks like carnation, she began to talk: "Mamma, you
remember that scrimmage Rob got into with the village boys last Fourth
of July, and how hatefully they knocked him down, and how bruised his
eye was for a long time?"

"Yes, I remember, and I always blamed Rob. He should never have had
anything to do with those rowdies."

"I didn't blame him; I never blame Rob for anything, except when he
won't do what I want him to do. Well, the worst one of all those horrid
boys is Sim Jenkins--at least he was; I don't think he's quite so bad
now. But he has been punished for all his badness, for he hurt his leg
awfully, and has been laid up for months--so his mother says; and she is
quite nice. She gave us our dinner to-day. Somehow or other, Rob heard
that Sim was in bed, and had not had any Christmas things, and that his
mother was poor; and she says all her money has gone for doctor's bills
and medicine. And so it just came into his head that perhaps it would do
Sim good to have a Christmas-tree on New-Year's Day; and he asked Mrs.
Jenkins, and she was afraid it would make a muss, but Rob said he would
be careful. And so he carried our tree over, and fixed it in a box, and
covered the box with moss, and we have been as busy as bees trying to
make it look pretty. And that is what has kept us so long, for Rob had
to run down to the store and get things--nails and ribbons, and I don't
know what all. And Sim is not to know anything about the tree until
to-morrow. And please give us some of the pretty things which were in
our box, for we could not get quite enough to fill all the branches. Rob
spent so much of his pocket-money on a knife for Sim that he had none
left for candy; for he said the tree would not give Sim so much pleasure
unless there was something on it which he could always keep."

Here little Bertha stopped for want of breath, and looked into the faces
of her listeners.

The parson put his arm around her as he said, "I hardly think we can
scold Rob now, after special pleading so eloquent as this; what do you
say, mamma?"

"I say that Rob is just like his father in doing this kindly deed, and I
am glad to be the mother of a boy who can return good for evil."

The parson made a bow. "Now we are even, madam, in the matter of
gracious speeches."

So Sim Jenkins woke up on New-Year's Day to see from his weary bed a
vision of brightness--a little tree laden with its fruit of kindness,
its flowers of a forgiving spirit; and as the parson preached his
New-Year's sermon, and saw Rob's dark eyes looking up at him, he thought
of the verse,

  "In their young hearts, soft and tender,
    Guide my hand good seed to sow,
  That its blossoming may praise Thee
    Wheresoe'er they go."




LAFAYETTE'S FIRST WOUND.


The Marquis of Lafayette came to this country to give his aid in the
struggle for liberty in 1777, and his first battle was that of the
Brandywine. Washington was trying to stop the march of the British
toward Philadelphia. There was some mistake in regard to the roads, and
the American troops were badly beaten. Lafayette plunged into the heart
of the fight, and just as the Americans gave way, he received a
musket-ball in the thigh. This was the 11th of September. Writing to his
wife the next day, he said:

"Our Americans held their ground firmly for quite a time, but were
finally put to rout. In trying to rally them, Messieurs the English paid
me the compliment of a gunshot, which wounded me slightly in the leg;
but that's nothing, my dear heart; the bullet touched neither bone nor
nerve, and it will cost nothing more than lying on my back some time,
which puts me in bad humor."

But the wound of which the marquis wrote so lightly, in order to
re-assure his beloved wife, kept him confined for more than six weeks.
He was carried on a boat up to Bristol, and when the fugitive Congress
left there, he was taken to the Moravian settlement at Bethlehem, where
he was kindly cared for. On the 1st of October he wrote again to his
wife:

"As General Howe, when he gives his royal master a high-flown account of
his American exploits, must report me wounded, he may report me killed;
it would cost nothing; but I hope you won't put any faith in such
reports. As to the wound, the surgeons are astonished at the promptness
of its healing. They fall into ecstasies whenever they dress it, and
protest that it's the most beautiful thing in the world. As for me, I
find it a very disgusting thing, wearisome and quite painful. That
depends on tastes. But, after all, if a man wanted to wound himself for
fun, he ought to come and see how much I enjoy it."

He was very grateful for the attention he received. "All the doctors in
America," he writes, "are in motion for me. I have a friend who has
spoken in such a way that I am well nursed--General Washington. This
worthy man, whose talents and virtues I admire, whom I venerate more the
more I know him, has kindly become my intimate friend.... I am
established in his family; we live like two brothers closely united, in
reciprocal intimacy and confidence. When he sent me his chief surgeon,
he told him to care for me as if I were his son, for he loved me as
such." This friendship between the great commander, in the prime of
life, and the French boy of twenty, is one of the most touching
incidents of our history.

       *       *       *       *       *


=The Rock of Gibraltar.=--This great natural fortification, which among
military men is regarded as the key to the Mediterranean Sea, abounds in
caverns, many of which are natural, while others have been made by the
explosion of gunpowder in the centre of the mountain, forming great
vaults of such height and extent that in case of a siege they would
contain the whole garrison. The caverns (the most considerable is the
hall of St. George) communicate with the batteries established all along
the mountain by a winding road, passable throughout on horseback.

The extreme singularity of the place has given rise to many
superstitious stories, not only amongst the ancients, but even those of
our own times. As it has been penetrated by the hardy and enterprising
to a great distance (on one occasion by an American, who descended by
ropes to a depth of 500 feet), a wild story is current that the cave
communicates by a submarine passage with Africa. The sailors who had
visited the rock, and seen the monkeys, which are seen in no other part
of Europe, and are only there occasionally and at intervals, say that
they pass at pleasure by means of the cave to their native land. The
truth seems to be that they usually live in the inaccessible precipices
of the eastern side of the rock, where there is a scanty store of monkey
grass for their subsistence; but when an east wind sets in it drives
them from their caves, and they take refuge among the western rocks,
where they may be seen hopping from bush to bush, boxing each other's
ears, and cutting the most extraordinary antics. If disturbed, they
scamper off with great rapidity, the young ones jumping on the backs and
putting their arms round the necks of the old, and as they are very
harmless, strict orders have been received from the garrison for their
especial protection.

Gibraltar derives its chief importance from its bay, which is about ten
miles in length and eight in breadth, and being protected from the more
dangerous winds, is a valuable naval station.




SANTA CLAUS VISITS THE VAN JOHNSONS.


  Swing low, sweet chariot--
    Goin' fur to car' me home;
  Swing low, sweet chariot--
    Goin' fur to car' me home.
  Debbil tought he would spite me--
    Goin' fur to car' me home,
  By cuttin' down my apple-tree--
    Goin' fur to car' me home;
  But he didn't spite ah-me at all--
    Goin' fur to car' me home;
  Fur I had apples all de fall--
    Goin'--

"Oh, jess shut up wiff yo' ole apples, Chrissfer C'lumbus Van Johnson,
an' lissen at dat ar wat Miss Bowles done bin a-tellin' me," said Queen
Victoria, suddenly making her appearance at the gate which opened out of
Mrs. Bowles's back garden into the small yard where her brother sat with
Primrose Ann in his arms.

The Van Johnsons were a colored family who lived in a Southern city in a
small three-roomed wooden house on the lot in the rear of Mrs. Bowles's
garden, and Mrs. Bowles was their landlady and very good friend. Indeed,
I don't know what they would have done without her, for when she came
from the North, and rented the big house, they were in the depths of
poverty. The kind lady found them work, gave them bright smiles, words
of encouragement, fruit, vegetables, and spelling lessons, and so won
their simple, grateful hearts that they looked upon her as a miracle of
patience, goodness, and wisdom. And as for Baby Bowles--the
rosy-cheeked, sweet-voiced, sunshiny little thing--the whole family,
from Primrose Ann up to Mr. Van Johnson, adored her, and Queen Victoria
was "happy as a queen" when allowed to take care of and amuse her.

"Wat's dat ar yo's speakin'?" asked Christopher Columbus (so named, his
father said, "'cause he war da fustest chile, de discoberer ob de
family, as it war") as Queen Victoria hopped into the yard on one leg,
and he stopped rocking--if you can call throwing yourself back on the
hind-legs of a common wooden chair, and then coming down on the
fore-legs with a bounce and a bang, rocking--the youngest Van Johnson
with such a jerk that her eyes and mouth flew open, and out of the
latter came a tremendous yell. "Dar now," said Christopher Columbus,
"yo's done gone an' woked dis yere Primrose Ann, an' I's bin hours an'
hours an' hours an' hours gittin her asleep. Girls am de wustest bodders
I ebber see. I allus dishated girls."

"Ain't yo' 'shamed yo'seff, Chrissfer C'lumbus," said Queen Victoria,
indignantly, "wen bofe yo' sisters am girls? But spect yo' don't want to
lissen at wat Miss Bowles done bin a-tellin' me. Hi! Washington
Webster's a-comin', an' I'll jess tell him dat ar secrek all by
hisseff."

"No yo' won't; yo' goin' to tell me too," said her big brother. "An' yo'
better stop a-rollin' yo' eyes--yo' got de sassiest eyes I ebber see
since de day dat I war bohn--an' go on wiff yo' story."

"Story?" repeated Washington Webster, sauntering up to them, leading a
big cat--dragging, perhaps, would be the better word, as poor puss was
trying hard to get away--by a string.

"'Bout Mahser Zanty Claws," said Queen, opening her eyes so wide that
they seemed to spread over half her face. "Miss Bowles says to-morrer's
Chrissmus, an' to-day's day befo' Chrissmus, an' to-night Mahser Zanty
Claws go 'bout"--lowering her voice almost to a whisper--"an' put tings
in chillun's stockin's dat 'haved deirselbs."

"Am Mahser Zanty Claws any lashun to dat ar ole man wiff de allspice
hoof?" asked Washington Webster, with a scared look.

"Allspice hoof! Lissen at dat ar foolish young crow. _Clove_ hoof, yo'
means," said Queen Victoria. "Dat's anodder gemman 'tirely. Mahser Zanty
Claws am _good_. He gits yo' dolls, an' candies, an' apples, an' nuts,
an' books, an' drums, an' wissels, an' new cloze."

"Golly! wish he'd frow some trowsus an' jackits an' sich like fruit
'roun' here," said Christopher Columbus.

"Trowsus wiff red 'spenders an' a pistil pockit," said Washington
Webster, "an' a gole watch, an' a sled all yaller, wiff green stars on
it, an'--"

"Yo' bofe talk 's if yo'd bin awful good," interrupted Queen Victoria.
"Maybe Mahser Zanty Claws disagree wiff yo'."

"Who dat ar done gone git her head cracked wiff de wooden spoon fur
gobblin' all de hom'ny befo' de breakfuss war ready?" said Washington
Webster, slyly.

"I 'most wish dar war no Washington Websters in de hull worle--I
certainly do. Dey's too sassy to lib," said Queen Victoria. "An' _sich_
busybodies--dey certainly is."

"But how am we to know wedder we's Mahser Zanty Claws's kine o' good
chillun?" said Christopher Columbus. "We's might be good nuff fur
ourseffs, an' not good nuff fur him. If I knowed he come yere certain
sure, I git some green ornamuntses from ole Pete Campout--he done gone
got hunderds an' hunderds an' piles an' piles--to stick up on de walls,
an' make de house look more despectable like."

"Let's go an' ax Miss Bowles," said Queen Victoria. "Baby Bowles am fass
asleep, an' she's in de kitchen makin' pies, an' she know
ebberyting--she certainly do."

And off they all trooped, Primrose Ann, cat, and all.

"Come in," called the pleasant voice of their landlady, when they rapped
on her door; and in they tumbled, asking the same question all together
in one breath: "Mahser Zanty Claws comin' to our house, Miss Bowles?"
Christopher Columbus adding, "'Pears dough we muss ornamentem some if he
do."

Mrs. Bowles crimped the edge of her last pie, and then sat down, the
children standing in a row before her.

"Have you all been very good?" she said. "Suppose you tell me what good
thing you have done since yesterday afternoon. Then I can guess about
Santa Claus."

"Primrose Ann cried fur dat ar orange yo' gib me," said Queen Victoria,
after a moment's thought, "an' I eat it up quick 's I could, an' didn't
gib her none, 'cause I's 'fraid she git de stummick-ache."

"I car'd home de washin' fur mommy fur two cakes an' some candy," said
Washington Webster.

"And you?" asked Mrs. Bowles, turning to Christopher Columbus.

"I ran 'way from 'Dolphus Snow, an' wouldn't fight him, 'cause I 'fraid
I hurt him," said Christopher, gravely.

Mrs. Bowles laughed merrily. "Go home and ornament," she said. "I am
sure Santa Claus will pay you a visit."

And he did; for on Christmas morning, when the young Van Johnsons rushed
pell-mell, helter-skelter, into the room prepared for his call, a new
jacket hung on one chair, a new pair of trousers on the other; a doll's
head peeped out of Queen Victoria's stocking; a new sled, gayly painted,
announced itself in big letters "The Go Ahead"; lots of toys were
waiting for Primrose Ann; and four papers of goodies reposed on the
lowest shelf of the cupboard.

"'Pears dat ar Mahser Zanty Claws don't take zact measure fur boys'
cloze," said Christopher Columbus, as he tried to struggle into the
jacket. "Dis yere jackit's twicet too small."

"An' dis yere trowsusloons am twicet too big," said Washington Webster,
as he drew them up to his armpits.

[Illustration: "LOR BRESS YOU, HONEY-BUGS! YO' HAS GOT TINGS
MIXED."--DRAWN BY J. E. KELLY.]

"Lor' bress you, honey-bugs!" called their mommy from the doorway, "yo'
_has_ got tings mixed. Dat ar jackit's fur de odder boy, an' dem trowsus
too." And they all burst out laughing as Christopher Columbus and
Washington Webster exchanged Christmas gifts, and laughed so loud that
Mrs. Bowles came, over to see what was the matter, bringing Baby Bowles,
who, seeing how jolly everybody was, began clapping her tiny hands, and
shouting, "Melly Kissme! melly Kissme!"




[Illustration: ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO.--DRAWN BY KATE GREENAWAY.]




[Illustration]

PET AND HER CAT.


  Now, Pussy, I've something to tell you:
    You know it is New-Year's Day;
  The big folks are down in the parlor,
    And mamma is just gone away.

  We are all alone in the nursery,
    And I want to talk to you, dear;
  So you must come and sit by me,
    And make believe you hear.

  You see, there's a new year coming--
    It only begins to-day.
  Do you know I was often naughty
    In the year that is gone away?

  You know I have some bad habits,
    I'll mention just one or two;
  But there really is quite a number
    Of naughty things that I do.

  You see, I don't learn my lessons,
    And oh! I do hate them so;
  I doubt if I know any more to-day
    Than I did a year ago.

  Perhaps I am awfully stupid;
    They say I'm a dreadful dunce.
  How would you like to learn spelling?
    I wish you could try it once.

  And don't you remember Christmas--
    'Twas naughty, I must confess--
  But while I was eating my dinner
    I got two spots on my dress.

  And they caught me stealing the sugar;
    But I only got two little bits,
  When they found me there in the closet,
    And frightened me out of my wits.

  And, Pussy, when people scold me,
    I'm always so sulky then;
  If they only would tell me gently,
    I never would do it again.

  Oh, Pussy! I know I am naughty,
    And often it makes me cry:
  I think it would count for something,
    If they knew how hard I try.

  But I'll try again in the new year,
    And oh! I shall be so glad
  If I only can be a good little girl,
    And never do anything bad!




HOW SUNKEN SHIPS ARE RAISED.


When a ship sinks some distance from the shore in several fathoms of
water, and the waves conceal her, it may seem impossible to some of our
readers that she can ever be floated again; but if she rests upon a firm
sandy bottom, without rocks, and the weather is fair enough for a time
to give the wreckers an opportunity, it is even probable that she can be
brought into port.

In Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Norfolk, and New Orleans,
large firms are established whose special business it is to send
assistance to distressed vessels, and to save the cargo if the vessels
themselves can not be prevented from becoming total wrecks; and these
firms are known as wreckers--a name which in the olden time was given to
a class of heartless men dwelling on the coast who lured ships ashore by
false lights for the sake of the spoils which the disaster brought them.

When a vessel is announced to be ashore or sunk, the owners usually
apply to the wreckers, and make a bargain with them that they shall
receive a certain proportion of her value if they save her, and the
wreckers then proceed to the scene of the accident, taking with them
powerful tug-boats, large pontoons, immense iron cables, and a massive
derrick.

Perhaps only the topmasts of the wreck are visible when they reach it;
but even though she is quite out of sight, she is not given up, if the
sea is calm and the wind favorable. One of the men puts a diving dress
over his suit of heavy flannels. The trousers and jacket are made of
India rubber cloth, fitting close to the ankles, wrists, and across the
chest, which is further protected by a breastplate. A copper helmet with
a glass face is used for covering the head, and is screwed on to the
breastplate. One end of a coil of strong rubber tubing is attached to
the back of the helmet, to the outside of which a running cord is also
attached, and continued down the side of the dress to the diver's right
hand, where he can use it for signaling his assistants when he is
beneath the surface. His boots have leaden soles weighing about
twenty-eight pounds; and as this, with the helmet, is insufficient to
allow his descent, four blocks of lead, weighing fifty pounds, are slung
over his shoulders; and a water-proof bag containing a hammer, a chisel,
and a dirk-knife is fastened over his breast.

He is transferred from the steamer that has brought him from the city to
a small boat, which is rowed to a spot over the wreck, and a short iron
ladder is put over the side, down which he steps; and when the last rung
is reached, he lets go, and the water bubbles and sparkles over his head
as he sinks deeper and deeper.

The immersion of the diver is more thrilling to a spectator than it is
to him. The rubber coil attached to his helmet at one end is attached at
the other to an air-pump, which sends him all the breath he needs, and
if the supply is irregular, a pull at the cord by his right hand secures
its adjustment. He is not timid, and he knows that the only thing he has
to guard against is nervousness, by which he might lose his presence of
mind. The fish dart away from him at a motion of his hand, and even a
shark is terrified by the apparition of his strange globular helmet. He
is careful not to approach the wreck too suddenly, as the tangled
rigging and splinters might twist or break the air-pipe and signal line;
when his feet touch the bottom, he looks behind, before, and above him
before he advances an inch.

Looming up before him like a phantom in the foggy light is the ship; and
now, perhaps, if any of the crew have gone down with her, the diver
feels a momentary horror; but if no one has been lost, he sets about his
work, and hums a cheerful tune.

It may be that the vessel has settled low in the sand, that she is
broken in two, or that the hole in her bottom can not be repaired. But
we will suppose that the circumstances are favorable, that the sand is
firm, and the hull in an easy position.

The diver signals to be hauled up, makes his report, and in his next
descent he is accompanied by several others, who help him to drag
massive chains of iron underneath the ship, at the bow, at the stern,
and in the middle. This is a tedious and exhausting operation, which
sometimes takes many days; and when it is completed, the pontoons are
towed into position at each side of the ship.

The pontoons, simply described, are hollow floats. They are oblong,
built of wood, and possess great buoyancy. Some of them are over a
hundred feet long, eighteen feet wide, and fourteen feet deep; but their
size, and the number of them used, depend on the length of the vessel
that is to be raised. Circular tubes, or wells, extend through them; and
when the chains are secured underneath the ship, the ends are inserted
in these wells by the divers, and drawn up through them by hydraulic
power. The chains thus form a series of loops like the common swing of
the playground, in which the ship rests; and as they are shortened in
being drawn up through the wells, the ship lifts. The ship lifts if all
be well--if the chains do not part, or some other accident occur; but
the wreckers need great patience, and sometimes they see the labor of
weeks undone in a minute.

We are presupposing success, however, and instead of sinking or
capsizing, the ship appears above the bubbling water, and between the
pontoons, which groan and tremble with her weight.

As soon as her decks are above water, so much of the cargo is removed as
is necessary to enable the divers to reach the broken part of the hull,
which they patch with boards and canvas if she is built of wood, or with
iron plates if she is of iron. This is the most perilous part of the
diver's work, as there are so many projections upon which his air-tube
may catch; but he finds it almost as easy to ply his hammer and drill in
making repairs under water as on shore.

The ship is next pumped out, and borne between the pontoons by powerful
tugs to the nearest dry-dock, where all the damages are finally
repaired, and in a month or two she is once more afloat, with nothing to
indicate her narrow escape.




[Begun in No. 5 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, December 2.]

THE HISTORY OF PHOTOGEN AND NYCTERIS.

A Day and Night Maehrchen.

BY GEORGE MACDONALD.


XVI.--AN EVIL NURSE.

Watho was herself ill, as I have said, and was the worse tempered; and,
besides, it is a peculiarity of witches that what works in others to
sympathy, works in them to repulsion. Also, Watho had a poor, helpless,
rudimentary spleen of a conscience left, just enough to make her
uncomfortable, and therefore more wicked. So when she heard that
Photogen was ill she was angry. Ill, indeed! after all she had done to
saturate him with the life of the system, with the solar might itself!
He was a wretched failure, the boy! And because he was _her_ failure,
she was annoyed with him, began to dislike him, grew to hate him. She
looked on him as a painter might upon a picture, or a poet upon a poem,
which he had only succeeded in getting into an irrecoverable mess. In
the hearts of witches love and hate lie close together, and often tumble
over each other. And whether it was that her failure with Photogen
foiled also her plans in regard to Nycteris, or that her illness made
her yet more of a devil's wife, certainly Watho now got sick of the girl
too, and hated to have her about the castle.

She was not too ill, however, to go to poor Photogen's room and torment
him. She told him she hated him like a serpent, and hissed like one as
she said it, looking very sharp in the nose and chin, and flat in the
forehead. Photogen thought she meant to kill him, and hardly ventured to
take anything brought him. She ordered every ray of light to be shut out
of his room; but by means of this he got a little used to the darkness.
She would take one of his arrows, and now tickle him with the feather
end of it, now prick him with the point till the blood ran down. What
she meant finally I can not tell, but she brought Photogen speedily to
the determination of making his escape from the castle: what he should
do then he would think afterward. Who could tell but he might find his
mother somewhere beyond the forest! If it were not for the broad patches
of darkness that divided day from day, he would fear nothing!

But now, as he lay helpless in the dark, ever and anon would come
dawning through it the face of the lovely creature who on that first
awful night nursed him so sweetly: was he never to see her again? If she
was, as he had concluded, the nymph of the river, why had she not
re-appeared? She might have taught him not to fear the night, for
plainly she had no fear of it herself! But then, when the day came, she
did seem frightened: why was that, seeing there was nothing to be afraid
of then? Perhaps one so much at home in the darkness was correspondingly
afraid of the light! Then his selfish joy at the rising of the sun,
blinding him to her condition, had made him behave to her, in ill return
for her kindness, as cruelly as Watho behaved to him! How sweet and dear
and lovely she was! If there were wild beasts that came out only at
night, and were afraid of the light, why should there not be girls too,
made the same way--who could not endure the light, as he could not bear
the darkness? If only he could find her again! Ah, how differently he
would behave to her! But alas! perhaps the sun had killed her--melted
her--burned her up!--dried her up: that was it, if she was the nymph of
the river.


XVII.--WATHO'S WOLF.

From that dreadful morning Nycteris had never got to be herself again.
The sudden light had been almost death to her; and now she lay in the
dark with the memory of a terrific sharpness--a something she dared
scarcely recall, lest the very thought of it should sting her beyond
endurance. But this was as nothing to the pain which the recollection of
the rudeness of the shining creature whom she had nursed through his
fear caused her; for the moment his suffering passed over to her, and he
was free, the first use he made of his returning strength had been to
scorn her! She wondered and wondered; it was all beyond her
comprehension.

Before long, Watho was plotting evil against her. The witch was like a
sick child weary of his toy: she would pull her to