aIo‚ thinker; but I was, nevertheless, astounded at
the mere multitudinousness of the curios he had contrived to crowd into
the space around him. Side by side rested a palaeolithic implement, a
Chinese 'wise man,' a Gnostic gem, an amphora of Graeco-Etruscan work.
The general effect was a _bizarrerie_ of half-weird sheen and gloom.
Flemish sepulchral brasses companied strangely with runic tablets,
miniature paintings, a winged bull, Tamil scriptures on lacquered
leaves of the talipot, mediaeval reliquaries richly gemmed, Brahmin
gods. One whole side of the room was occupied by an organ whose thunder
in that circumscribed place must have set all these relics of dead
epochs clashing and jingling in fantastic dances. As I entered, the
vaporous atmosphere was palpitating to the low, liquid tinkling of an
invisible musical box. The prince reclined on a couch from which a
draping of cloth-of-silver rolled torrent over the floor. Beside him,
stretched in its open sarcophagus which rested on three brazen
trestles, lay the mummy of an ancient Memphian, from the upper part of
which the brown cerements had rotted or been rent, leaving the
hideousness of the naked, grinning countenance exposed to view.

Discarding his gemmed chibouque and an old vellum reprint of Anacreon,
Zaleski rose hastily and greeted me with warmth, muttering at the same
time some commonplace about his 'pleasure' and the 'unexpectedness' of
my visit. He then gave orders to Ham to prepare me a bed in one of the
adjoining chambers. We passed the greater part of the night in a
delightful stream of that somnolent and half-mystic talk which Prince
Zaleski alone could initiate and sustain, during which he repeatedly
pressed on me a concoction of Indian hemp resembling _hashish_,
prepared by his own hands, and quite innocuous. It was after a simple
breakfast the next morning that I entered on the subject which was
partly the occasion of my visit. He lay back on his couch, volumed in a
Turkish _beneesh_, and listened to me, a little wearily perhaps at
first, with woven fingers, and the pale inverted eyes of old anchorites
and astrologers, the moony greenish light falling on his always wan
features.

'You knew Lord Pharanx?' I asked.

'I have met him in "the world." His son Lord Randolph, too, I saw once
at Court at Peterhof, and once again at the Winter Palace of the Tsar.
I noticed in their great stature, shaggy heads of hair, ears of a very
peculiar conformation, and a certain aggressiveness of demeanour--a
strong likeness between father and son.'

I had brought with me a bundle of old newspapers, and comparing these
as I went on, I proceeded to lay the incidents before him.

'The father,' I said, 'held, as you know, high office in a late
Administration, and was one of our big luminaries in politics; he has
also been President of the Council of several learned societies, and
author of a book on Modern Ethics. His son was rapidly rising to
eminence in the _corps diplomatique_, and lately (though, strictly
speaking, _unebenb√ºrtig_) contracted an affiance with the Prinzessin
Charlotte Mariana Natalia of Morgen-√ºppigen, a lady with a strain of
indubitable Hohenzollern blood in her royal veins. The Orven family is
a very old and distinguished one, though--especially in modern
days--far from wealthy. However, some little time after Randolph had
become engaged to this royal lady, the father insured his life for
immense sums in various offices both in England and America, and the
reproach of poverty is now swept from the race. Six months ago, almost
simultaneously, both father and son resigned their various positions
_en bloc_. But all this, of course, I am telling you on the assumption
that you have not already read it in the papers.'

'A modern newspaper,' he said, 'being what it mostly is, is the one
thing insupportable to me at present. Believe me, I never see one.'

'Well, then, Lord Pharanx, as I said, threw up his posts in the fulness
of his vigour, and retired to one of his country seats. A good many
years ago, he and Randolph had a terrible row over some trifle, and,
with the implacability that distinguishes their race, had not since
exchanged a word. But some little time after the retirement of the
father, a message was despatched by him to the son, who was then in
India. Considered as the first step in the _rapprochement_ of this
proud and selfish pair of beings, it was an altogether remarkable
message, and was subsequently deposed to in evidence by a telegraph
official; it ran:

'"_Return. The beginning of the end is come._" Whereupon Randolph did
return, and in three months from the date of his landing in England,
Lord Pharanx was dead.'

'_Murdered_?'

A certain something in the tone in which this word was uttered by
Zaleski puzzled me. It left me uncertain whether he had addressed to me
an exclamation of conviction, or a simple question. I must have looked
this feeling, for he said at once:

'I could easily, from your manner, surmise as much, you know. Perhaps I
might even have foretold it, years ago.'

'Foretold--what? Not the murder of Lord Pharanx?'

'Something of that kind,' he answered with a smile; 'but proceed--tell
me all the facts you know.'

Word-mysteries of this sort fell frequent from the lips of the prince.
I continued the narrative.

'The two, then, met, and were reconciled. But it was a reconciliation
without cordiality, without affection--a shaking of hands across a
barrier of brass; and even this hand-shaking was a strictly
metaphorical one, for they do not seem ever to have got beyond the
interchange of a frigid bow. The opportunities, however, for
observation were few. Soon after Randolph's arrival at Orven Hall, his
father entered on a life of the most absolute seclusion. The mansion is
an old three-storied one, the top floor consisting for the most part of
sleeping-rooms, the first of a library, drawing-room, and so on, and
the ground-floor, in addition to the dining and other ordinary rooms,
of another small library, looking out (at the side of the house) on a
low balcony, which, in turn, looks on a lawn dotted with flower-beds.
It was this smaller library on the ground-floor that was now divested
of its books, and converted into a bedroom for the earl. Hither he
migrated, and here he lived, scarcely ever leaving it. Randolph, on his
part, moved to a room on the first floor immediately above this. Some
of the retainers of the family were dismissed, and on the remaining few
fell a hush of expectancy, a sense of wonder, as to what these things
boded. A great enforced quiet pervaded the building, the least undue
noise in any part being sure to be followed by the angry voice of the
master demanding the cause. Once, as the servants were supping in the
kitchen on the side of the house most remote from that which he
occupied, Lord Pharanx, slippered and in dressing-gown, appeared at the
doorway, purple with rage, threatening to pack the whole company of
them out of doors if they did not moderate the clatter of their knives
and forks. He had always been regarded with fear in his own household,
and the very sound of his voice now became a terror. His food was taken
to him in the room he had made his habitation, and it was remarked
that, though simple before in his gustatory tastes, he now--possibly
owing to the sedentary life he led--became fastidious, insisting on
_recherch√©_ bits. I mention all these details to you--as I shall
mention others--not because they have the least connection with the
tragedy as it subsequently occurred, but merely because I know them,
and you have requested me to state all I know.'

'Yes,' he answered, with a suspicion of _ennui_, 'you are right. I may
as well hear the whole--if I must hear a part.'

'Meanwhile, Randolph appears to have visited the earl at least once a
day. In such retirement did he, too, live that many of his friends
still supposed him to be in India. There was only one respect in which
he broke through this privacy. You know, of course, that the Orvens
are, and, I believe, always have been, noted as the most obstinate, the
most crabbed of Conservatives in politics. Even among the
past-enamoured families of England, they stand out conspicuously in
this respect. Is it credible to you, then, that Randolph should offer
himself to the Radical Association of the Borough of Orven as a
candidate for the next election in opposition to the sitting member? It
is on record, too, that he spoke at three public meetings--reported in
local papers--at which he avowed his political conversion; afterwards
laid the foundation-stone of a new Baptist chapel; presided at a
Methodist tea-meeting; and taking an abnormal interest in the debased
condition of the labourers in the villages round, fitted up as a
class-room an apartment on the top floor at Orven Hall, and gathered
round him on two evenings in every week a class of yokels, whom he
proceeded to cram with demonstrations in elementary mechanics.'

'Mechanics!' cried Zaleski, starting upright for a moment, 'mechanics
to agricultural labourers! Why not elementary chemistry? Why not
elementary botany? _Why_ mechanics?'

This was the first evidence of interest he had shown in the story. I
was pleased, but answered:

'The point is unimportant; and there really is no accounting for the
vagaries of such a man. He wished, I imagine, to give some idea to the
young illiterates of the simple laws of motion and force. But now I
come to a new character in the drama--the chief character of all. One
day a woman presented herself at Orven Hall and demanded to see its
owner. She spoke English with a strong French accent. Though
approaching middle life she was still beautiful, having wild black
eyes, and creamy pale face. Her dress was tawdry, cheap, and loud,
showing signs of wear; her hair was unkempt; her manners were not the
manners of a lady. A certain vehemence, exasperation, unrepose
distinguished all she said and did. The footman refused her admission;
Lord Pharanx, he said, was invisible. She persisted violently, pushed
past him, and had to be forcibly ejected; during all which the voice of
the master was heard roaring from the passage red-eyed remonstrance at
the unusual noise. She went away gesticulating wildly, and vowing
vengeance on Lord Pharanx and all the world. It was afterwards found
that she had taken up her abode in one of the neighbouring hamlets,
called Lee.

'This person, who gave the name of Maude Cibras, subsequently called at
the Hall three times in succession, and was each time refused
admittance. It was now, however, thought advisable to inform Randolph
of her visits. He said she might be permitted to see him, if she
returned. This she did on the next day, and had a long interview in
private with him. Her voice was heard raised as if in angry protest by
one Hester Dyett, a servant of the house, while Randolph in low tones
seemed to try to soothe her. The conversation was in French, and no
word could be made out. She passed out at length, tossing her head
jauntily, and smiling a vulgar triumph at the footman who had before
opposed her ingress. She was never known to seek admission to the house
again.

'But her connection with its inmates did not cease. The same Hester
asserts that one night, coming home late through the park, she saw two
persons conversing on a bench beneath the trees, crept behind some
bushes, and discovered that they were the strange woman and Randolph.
The same servant bears evidence to tracking them to other
meeting-places, and to finding in the letter-bag letters addressed to
Maude Cibras in Randolph's hand-writing. One of these was actually
unearthed later on. Indeed, so engrossing did the intercourse become,
that it seems even to have interfered with the outburst of radical zeal
in the new political convert. The _rendezvous_--always held under cover
of darkness, but naked and open to the eye of the watchful
Hester--sometimes clashed with the science lectures, when these latter
would be put off, so that they became gradually fewer, and then almost
ceased.'

'Your narrative becomes unexpectedly interesting,' said Zaleski; 'but
this unearthed letter of Randolph's--what was in it?'

I read as follows:

'"Dear Mdlle. Cibras,--I am exerting my utmost influence for you with
my father. But he shows no signs of coming round as yet. If I could
only induce him to see you! But he is, as you know, a person of
unrelenting will, and meanwhile you must confide in my loyal efforts on
your behalf. At the same time, I admit that the situation is a
precarious one: you are, I am sure, well provided for in the present
will of Lord Pharanx, but he is on the point--within, say, three or
four days--of making another; and exasperated as he is at your
appearance in England, I know there is no chance of your receiving a
_centime_ under the new will. Before then, however, we must hope that
something favourable to you may happen; and in the meantime, let me
implore you not to let your only too just resentment pass beyond the
bounds of reason.

"Sincerely yours,

"RANDOLPH."'

'I like the letter!' cried Zaleski. 'You notice the tone of manly
candour. But the _facts_--were they true? _Did_ the earl make a new
will in the time specified?'

'No,--but that may have been because his death intervened.'

'And in the old will, _was_ Mdlle. Cibras provided for?'

'Yes,--that at least was correct.'

A shadow of pain passed over his face.

'And now,' I went on, 'I come to the closing scene, in which one of
England's foremost men perished by the act of an obscure assassin. The
letter I have read was written to Maude Cibras on the 5th of January.
The next thing that happens is on the 6th, when Lord Pharanx left his
room for another during the whole day, and a skilled mechanic was
introduced into it for the purpose of effecting some alterations. Asked
by Hester Dyett, as he was leaving the house, what was the nature of
his operations, the man replied that he had been applying a patent
arrangement to the window looking out on the balcony, for the better
protection of the room against burglars, several robberies having
recently been committed in the neighbourhood. The sudden death of this
man, however, before the occurrence of the tragedy, prevented his
evidence being heard. On the next day--the 7th--Hester, entering the
room with Lord Pharanx's dinner, fancies, though she cannot tell why
(inasmuch as his back is towards her, he sitting in an arm-chair by the
fire), that Lord Pharanx has been "drinking heavily."

'On the 8th a singular thing befell. The earl was at last induced to
see Maude Cibras, and during the morning of that day, with his own
hand, wrote a note informing her of his decision, Randolph handing the
note to a messenger. That note also has been made public. It reads as
follows:

'"Maude Cibras.--You may come here to-night after dark. Walk to the
south side of the house, come up the steps to the balcony, and pass in
through the open window to my room. Remember, however, that you have
nothing to expect from me, and that from to-night I blot you eternally
from my mind: but I will hear your story, which I know beforehand to be
false. Destroy this note. PHARANX."'

As I progressed with my tale, I came to notice that over the
countenance of Prince Zaleski there grew little by little a singular
fixed aspect. His small, keen features distorted themselves into an
expression of what I can only describe as an abnormal _inquisitiveness_
--an inquisitiveness most impatient, arrogant, in its intensity.
His pupils, contracted each to a dot, became the central _puncta_
of two rings of fiery light; his little sharp teeth seemed to
gnash. Once before I had seen him look thus greedily, when, grasping a
Troglodyte tablet covered with half-effaced hieroglyphics--his fingers
livid with the fixity of his grip--he bent on it that strenuous
inquisition, that ardent questioning gaze, till, by a species of
mesmeric dominancy, he seemed to wrench from it the arcanum it hid from
other eyes; then he lay back, pale and faint from the too arduous
victory.

When I had read Lord Pharanx's letter, he took the paper eagerly from
my hand, and ran his eyes over the passage.

'Tell me--the end,' he said.

'Maude Cibras,' I went on, 'thus invited to a meeting with the earl,
failed to make her appearance at the appointed time. It happened that
she had left her lodgings in the village early that very morning, and,
for some purpose or other, had travelled to the town of Bath. Randolph,
too, went away the same day in the opposite direction to Plymouth. He
returned on the following morning, the 9th; soon after walked over to
Lee; and entered into conversation with the keeper of the inn where
Cibras lodged; asked if she was at home, and on being told that she had
gone away, asked further if she had taken her luggage with her; was
informed that she had, and had also announced her intention of at once
leaving England. He then walked away in the direction of the Hall. On
this day Hester Dyett noticed that there were many articles of value
scattered about the earl's room, notably a tiara of old Brazilian
brilliants, sometimes worn by the late Lady Pharanx. Randolph--who was
present at the time--further drew her attention to these by telling her
that Lord Pharanx had chosen to bring together in his apartment many of
the family jewels; and she was instructed to tell the other servants of
this fact, in case they should notice any suspicious-looking loafers
about the estate.

'On the 10th, both father and son remained in their rooms all day,
except when the latter came down to meals; at which times he would lock
his door behind him, and with his own hands take in the earl's food,
giving as his reason that his father was writing a very important
document, and did not wish to be disturbed by the presence of a
servant. During the forenoon, Hester Dyett, hearing loud noises in
Randolph's room, as if furniture was being removed from place to place,
found some pretext for knocking at his door, when he ordered her on no
account to interrupt him again, as he was busy packing his clothes in
view of a journey to London on the next day. The subsequent conduct of
the woman shows that her curiosity must have been excited to the utmost
by the undoubtedly strange spectacle of Randolph packing his own
clothes. During the afternoon a lad from the village was instructed to
collect his companions for a science lecture the same evening at eight
o'clock. And so the eventful day wore on.

'We arrive now at this hour of eight P.M. on this 10th day of January.
The night is dark and windy; some snow has been falling, but has now
ceased. In an upper room is Randolph engaged in expounding the elements
of dynamics; in the room under that is Hester Dyett--for Hester has
somehow obtained a key that opens the door of Randolph's room, and
takes advantage of his absence upstairs to explore it. Under her is
Lord Pharanx, certainly in bed, probably asleep. Hester, trembling all
over in a fever of fear and excitement, holds a lighted taper in one
hand, which she religiously shades with the other; for the storm is
gusty, and the gusts, tearing through the crevices of the rattling old
casements, toss great flickering shadows on the hangings, which
frighten her to death. She has just time to see that the whole room is
in the wildest confusion, when suddenly a rougher puff blows out the
flame, and she is left in what to her, standing as she was on that
forbidden ground, must have been a horror of darkness. At the same
moment, clear and sharp from right beneath her, a pistol-shot rings out
on her ear. For an instant she stands in stone, incapable of motion.
Then on her dazed senses there supervenes--so she swore--the
consciousness that some object is moving in the room--moving apparently
of its own accord--moving in direct opposition to all the laws of
nature as she knows them. She imagines that she perceives a phantasm--a
strange something--globular-white--looking, as she says, "like a
good-sized ball of cotton"--rise directly from the floor before her,
ascending slowly upward, as if driven aloft by some invisible force. A
sharp shock of the sense of the supernatural deprives her of ordered
reason. Throwing forward her arms, and uttering a shrill scream, she
rushes towards the door. But she never reaches it: midway she falls
prostrate over some object, and knows no more; and when, an hour later,
she is borne out of the room in the arms of Randolph himself, the blood
is dripping from a fracture of her right tibia.

'Meantime, in the upper chamber the pistol-shot and the scream of the
woman have been heard. All eyes turn to Randolph. He stands in the
shadow of the mechanical contrivance on which he has been illustrating
his points; leans for support on it. He essays to speak, the muscles of
his face work, but no sound comes. Only after a time is he able to
gasp: "Did you hear something--from below?" They answer "yes" in
chorus; then one of the lads takes a lighted candle, and together they
troop out, Randolph behind them. A terrified servant rushes up with the
news that something dreadful has happened in the house. They proceed
for some distance, but there is an open window on the stairs, and the
light is blown out. They have to wait some minutes till another is
obtained, and then the procession moves forward once more. Arrived at
Lord Pharanx's door, and finding it locked, a lantern is procured, and
Randolph leads them through the house and out on the lawn. But having
nearly reached the balcony, a lad observes a track of small
woman's-feet in the snow; a halt is called, and then Randolph points
out another track of feet, half obliterated by the snow, extending from
a coppice close by up to the balcony, and forming an angle with the
first track. These latter are great big feet, made by ponderous
labourers' boots. He holds the lantern over the flower-beds, and shows
how they have been trampled down. Some one finds a common scarf, such
as workmen wear; and a ring and a locket, dropped by the burglars in
their flight, are also found by Randolph half buried in the snow. And
now the foremost reach the window. Randolph, from behind, calls to them
to enter. They cry back that they cannot, the window being closed. At
this reply he seems to be overcome by surprise, by terror. Some one
hears him murmur the words, "My God, what can have happened now?" His
horror is increased when one of the lads bears to him a revolting
trophy, which has been found just outside the window; it is the front
phalanges of three fingers of a human hand. Again he utters the
agonised moan, "My God!" and then, mastering his agitation, makes for
the window; he finds that the catch of the sash has been roughly
wrenched off, and that the sash can be opened by merely pushing it up:
does so, and enters. The room is in darkness: on the floor under the
window is found the insensible body of the woman Cibras. She is alive,
but has fainted. Her right fingers are closed round the handle of a
large bowie-knife, which is covered with blood; parts of the left are
missing. All the jewelry has been stolen from the room. Lord Pharanx
lies on the bed, stabbed through the bedclothes to the heart. Later on
a bullet is also found imbedded in his brain. I should explain that a
trenchant edge, running along the bottom of the sash, was the obvious
means by which the fingers of Cibras had been cut off. This had been
placed there a few days before by the workman I spoke of. Several
secret springs had been placed on the inner side of the lower
horizontal piece of the window-frame, by pressing any one of which the
sash was lowered; so that no one, ignorant of the secret, could pass
out from within, without resting the hand on one of these springs, and
so bringing down the armed sash suddenly on the underlying hand.

'There was, of course, a trial. The poor culprit, in mortal terror of
death, shrieked out a confession of the murder just as the jury had
returned from their brief consultation, and before they had time to
pronounce their verdict of "guilty." But she denied shooting Lord
Pharanx, and she denied stealing the jewels; and indeed no pistol and
no jewels were found on her, or anywhere in the room. So that many
points remain mysterious. What part did the burglars play in the
tragedy? Were they in collusion with Cibras? Had the strange behaviour
of at least one of the inmates of Orven Hall no hidden significance?
The wildest guesses were made throughout the country; theories
propounded. But no theory explained _all_ the points. The ferment,
however, has now subsided. To-morrow morning Maude Cibras ends her life
on the gallows.'

Thus I ended my narrative.

Without a word Zaleski rose from the couch, and walked to the organ.
Assisted from behind by Ham, who foreknew his master's every whim, he
proceeded to render with infinite feeling an air from the _Lakm√©_ of
Delibes; long he sat, dreamily uttering the melody, his head sunken on
his breast. When at last he rose, his great expanse of brow was clear,
and a smile all but solemn in its serenity was on his lips. He walked
up to an ivory _escritoire_, scribbled a few words on a sheet of paper,
and handed it to the negro with the order to take my trap and drive
with the message in all haste to the nearest telegraph office.

'That message,' he said, resuming his place on the couch, 'is a last
word on the tragedy, and will, no doubt, produce some modification in
the final stage of its history. And now, Shiel, let us sit together and
confer on this matter. From the manner in which you have expressed
yourself, it is evident that there are points which puzzle you--you do
not get a clean _coup d'oeil_ of the whole regiment of facts, and their
causes, and their consequences, as they occurred. Let us see if out of
that confusion we cannot produce a coherence, a symmetry. A great wrong
is done, and on the society in which it is done is imposed the task of
making it translucent, of seeing it in all its relations, and of
punishing it. But what happens? The society fails to rise to the
occasion; on the whole, it contrives to make the opacity more opaque,
does not see the crime in any human sense; is unable to punish it. Now
this, you will admit, whenever it occurs, is a woful failure: woful I
mean, not very in itself, but very in its significance: and there must
be a precise cause for it. That cause is the lack of something not
merely, or specially, in the investigators of the wrong, but in the
world at large--shall we not boldly call it the lack of culture? Do
not, however, misunderstand me: by the term I mean not so much
attainment in general, as _mood_ in particular. Whether or when such
mood may become universal may be to you a matter of doubt. As for me, I
often think that when the era of civilisation begins--as assuredly it
shall some day begin--when the races of the world cease to be
credulous, ovine mobs and become critical, human nations, then will be
the ushering in of the ten thousand years of a _clairvoyant_ culture.
But nowhere, and at no time during the very few hundreds of years that
man has occupied the earth, has there been one single sign of its
presence. In individuals, yes--in the Greek Plato, and I think in your
English Milton and Bishop Berkeley--but in humanity, never; and hardly
in any individual outside those two nations. The reason, I fancy, is
not so much that man is a hopeless fool, as that Time, so far as he is
concerned, has, as we know, only just begun: it being, of course,
conceivable that the creation of a perfect society of men, as the first
requisite to a _r√©gime_ of culture, must nick to itself a longer loop
of time than the making of, say, a stratum of coal. A loquacious
person--he is one of your cherished "novel"-writers, by the way, if
that be indeed a Novel in which there is nowhere any pretence at
novelty--once assured me that he could never reflect without swelling
on the greatness of the age in which he lived, an age the mighty
civilisation of which he likened to the Augustan and Periclean. A
certain stony gaze of anthropological interest with which I regarded
his frontal bone seemed to strike the poor man dumb, and he took a
hurried departure. Could he have been ignorant that ours is, in
general, greater than the Periclean for the very reason that the
Divinity is neither the devil nor a bungler; that three thousand years
of human consciousness is not nothing; that a whole is greater than its
part, and a butterfly than a chrysalis? But it was the assumption that
it was therefore in any way great in the abstract that occasioned my
profound astonishment, and indeed contempt. Civilisation, if it means
anything, can only mean the art by which men live musically
together--to the lutings, as it were, of Panpipes, or say perhaps, to
triumphant organ-bursts of martial, marching dithyrambs. Any formula
defining it as "the art of lying back and getting elaborately tickled,"
should surely at this hour be _too_ primitive--_too_ Opic--to bring
anything but a smile to the lips of grown white-skinned men; and the
very fact that such a definition can still find undoubting acceptance
in all quarters may be an indication that the true [Greek: _id√©a_]
which this condition of being must finally assume is far indeed--far,
perhaps, by ages and aeons--from becoming part of the general
conception. Nowhere since the beginning has the gross problem of living
ever so much as approached solution, much less the delicate and
intricate one of living _together: √† propos_ of which your body
corporate not only still produces criminals (as the body-natural
fleas), but its very elementary organism cannot so much as catch a
really athletic one as yet. Meanwhile _you_ and _I_ are handicapped.
The individual travaileth in pain. In the struggle for quality, powers,
air, he spends his strength, and yet hardly escapes asphyxiation. He
can no more wriggle himself free of the psychic gravitations that
invest him than the earth can shake herself loose of the sun, or he of
the omnipotences that rivet him to the universe. If by chance one
shoots a downy hint of wings, an instant feeling of contrast puffs him
with self-consciousness: a tragedy at once: the unconscious being "the
alone complete." To attain to anything, he must needs screw the head up
into the atmosphere of the future, while feet and hands drip dark
ichors of despair from the crucifying cross of the crude present--_a
horrid strain_! Far up a nightly instigation of stars he sees: but he
may not strike them with the head. If earth were a boat, and mine, I
know well toward what wild azimuths I would compel her helm: but
gravity, gravity--chiefest curse of Eden's sin!--is hostile. When
indeed (as is ordained), the old mother swings herself into a sublimer
orbit, we on her back will follow: till then we make to ourselves
Icarian "organa" in vain. I mean to say that it is the plane of station
which is at fault: move that upward, you move all. But meantime is it
not Goethe who assures us that "further reacheth no man, make he what
stretching he will"? For Man, you perceive, is not many, but One. It is
absurd to suppose that England can be free while Poland is enslaved;
Paris is _far_ from the beginnings of civilisation whilst Toobooloo and
Chicago are barbaric. Probably no ill-fated, microcephalous son of Adam
ever tumbled into a mistake quite so huge, so infantile, as did Dives,
if he imagined himself rich while Lazarus sat pauper at the gate. Not
many, I say, but one. Even Ham and I here in our retreat are not alone;
we are embarrassed by the uninvited spirit of the present; the adamant
root of the mountain on whose summit we stand is based ineradicably in
the low world. Yet, thank Heaven, Goethe was not _quite_ right--as,
indeed, he proved in his proper person. I tell you, Shiel, I _know_
whether Mary did or did not murder Darnley; I know--as clearly, as
precisely, as a man can know--that Beatrice Cenci was not "guilty" as
certain recently-discovered documents "prove" her, but that the Shelley
version of the affair, though a guess, is the correct one. It _is_
possible, by taking thought, to add one cubit--or say a hand, or a
dactyl--to your stature; you may develop powers slightly--very
slightly, but distinctly, both in kind and degree--in advance of those
of the mass who live in or about the same cycle of time in which you
live. But it is only when the powers to which I refer are shared by the
mass--when what, for want of another term, I call the age of the
Cultured Mood has at length arrived--that their exercise will become
easy and familiar to the individual; and who shall say what
presciences, prisms, _s√©ances_, what introspective craft, Genie
apocalypses, shall not _then_ become possible to the few who stand
spiritually in the van of men.

'All this, you will understand, I say as some sort of excuse for
myself, and for you, for any hesitation we may have shown in loosening
the very little puzzle you have placed before me--one which we
certainly must not regard as difficult of solution. Of course, looking
at all the facts, the first consideration that must inevitably rivet
the attention is that arising from the circumstance that Viscount
Randolph has strong reasons to wish his father dead. They are avowed
enemies; he is the _fianc√©_ of a princess whose husband he is probably
too poor to become, though he will very likely be rich enough when his
father dies; and so on. All that appears on the surface. On the other
hand, we--you and I--know the man: he is a person of gentle blood, as
moral, we suppose, as ordinary people, occupying a high station in the
world. It is impossible to imagine that such a person would commit an
assassination, or even countenance one, for any or all of the reasons
that present themselves. In our hearts, with or without clear proof, we
could hardly believe it of him. Earls' sons do not, in fact, go about
murdering people. Unless, then, we can so reason as to discover other
motives--strong, adequate, irresistible--and by "irresistible" I mean a
motive which must be _far_ stronger than even the love of life
itself--we should, I think, in fairness dismiss him from our mind.

'And yet it must be admitted that his conduct is not free of blame. He
contracts a sudden intimacy with the acknowledged culprit, whom he does
not seem to have known before. He meets her by night, corresponds with
her. Who and what is this woman? I think we could not be far wrong in
guessing some very old flame of Lord Pharanx's of _Th√©√¢tre des
Vari√©t√©s_ type, whom he has supported for years, and from whom, hearing
some story to her discredit, he threatens to withdraw his supplies.
However that be, Randolph writes to Cibras--a violent woman, a woman of
lawless passions--assuring her that in four or five days she will be
excluded from the will of his father; and in four or five days Cibras
plunges a knife into his father's bosom. It is a perfectly natural
sequence--though, of course, the _intention_ to produce by his words
the actual effect produced might have been absent; indeed, the letter
of Lord Pharanx himself, had it been received, would have tended to
produce that very effect; for it not only gives an excellent
opportunity for converting into action those evil thoughts which
Randolph (thoughtlessly or guiltily) has instilled, but it further
tends to rouse her passions by cutting off from her all hopes of
favour. If we presume, then, as is only natural, that there was no such
intention on the part of the earl, we _may_ make the same presumption
in the case of the son. Cibras, however, never receives the earl's
letter: on the morning of the same day she goes away to Bath, with the
double object, I suppose, of purchasing a weapon, and creating an
impression that she has left the country. How then does she know the
exact _locale_ of Lord Pharanx's room? It is in an unusual part of the
mansion, she is unacquainted with any of the servants, a stranger to
the district. Can it be possible that Randolph _had told her_? And here
again, even in that case, you must bear in mind that Lord Pharanx also
told her in his note, and you must recognise the possibility of the
absence of evil intention on the part of the son. Indeed, I may go
further and show you that in all but every instance in which his
actions are in themselves _outr√©_, suspicious, they are rendered, not
less _outr√©_, but less suspicious, by the fact that Lord Pharanx
himself knew of them, shared in them. There was the cruel barbing of
that balcony window; about it the crudest thinker would argue thus to
himself: "Randolph practically incites Maude Cibras to murder his
father on the 5th, and on the 6th he has that window so altered in
order that, should she act on his suggestion, she will be caught on
attempting to leave the room, while he himself, the actual culprit
being discovered _en flagrant d√©lit_, will escape every shadow of
suspicion." But, on the other hand, we know that the alteration was
made with Lord Pharanx's consent, most likely on his initiative--for he
leaves his favoured room during a whole day for that very purpose. So
with the letter to Cibras on the 8th--Randolph despatches it, but the
earl writes it. So with the disposal of the jewels in the apartment on
the 9th. There had been some burglaries in the neighbourhood, and the
suspicion at once arises in the mind of the crude reasoner: Could
Randolph--finding now that Cibras has "left the country," that, in
fact, the tool he had expected to serve his ends has failed him--could
he have thus brought those jewels there, and thus warned the servants
of their presence, in the hope that the intelligence might so get
abroad and lead to a burglary, in the course of which his father might
lose his life? There are evidences, you know, tending to show that the
burglary did actually at last take place, and the suspicion is, in view
of that, by no means unreasonable. And yet, militating against it, is
our knowledge that it was Lord Pharanx who "_chose_" to gather the
jewels round him; that it was in his presence that Randolph drew the
attention of the servant to them. In the matter, at least, of the
little political comedy the son seems to have acted alone; but you
surely cannot rid yourself of the impression that the radical speeches,
the candidature, and the rest of it, formed all of them only a very
elaborate, and withal clumsy, set of preliminaries to the _class_.
Anything, to make the perspective, the sequence of _that_ seem natural.
But in the class, at any rate, we have the tacit acquiescence, or even
the cooperation of Lord Pharanx. You have described the conspiracy of
quiet which, for some reason or other, was imposed on the household; in
that reign of silence the bang of a door, the fall of a plate, becomes
a domestic tornado. But have you ever heard an agricultural labourer in
clogs or heavy boots ascend a stair? The noise is terrible. The tramp
of an army of them through the house and overhead, probably jabbering
uncouthly together, would be insufferable. Yet Lord Pharanx seems to
have made no objection; the novel institution is set up in his own
mansion, in an unusual part of it, probably against his own principles;
but we hear of no murmur from him. On the fatal day, too, the calm of
the house is rudely broken by a considerable commotion in Randolph's
room just overhead, caused by his preparation for "a journey to
London." But the usual angry remonstrance is not forthcoming from the
master. And do you not see how all this more than acquiescence of Lord
Pharanx in the conduct of his son deprives that conduct of half its
significance, its intrinsic suspiciousness?

'A hasty reasoner then would inevitably jump to the conclusion that
Randolph was guilty of something--some evil intention--though of
precisely what he would remain in doubt. But a more careful reasoner
would pause: he would reflect that _as_ the father was implicated in
those acts, and _as_ he was innocent of any such intention, so might
possibly, even probably, be the son. This, I take it, has been the view
of the officials, whose logic is probably far in advance of their
imagination. But supposing we can adduce one act, undoubtedly actuated
by evil intention on the part of Randolph--one act in which his father
certainly did _not_ participate--what follows next? Why, that we revert
at once to the view of the hasty reasoner, and conclude that _all_ the
other acts in the same relation were actuated by the same evil motive;
and having reached that point, we shall be unable longer to resist the
conclusion that those of them in which his father had a share _might_
have sprung from a like motive in _his_ mind also; nor should the mere
obvious impossibility of such a condition of things have even the very
least influence on us, as thinkers, in causing us to close our mind
against its logical possibility. I therefore make the inference, and
pass on.

'Let us then see if we can by searching find out any absolutely certain
deviation from right on the part of Randolph, in which we may be quite
sure that his father was not an abettor. At eight on the night of the
murder it is dark; there has been some snow, but the fall has
ceased--how long before I know not, but so long that the interval
becomes sufficiently appreciable to cause remark. Now the party going
round the house come on two tracks of feet meeting at an angle. Of one
track we are merely told that it was made by the small foot of a woman,
and of it we know no more; of the other we learn that the feet were big
and the boots clumsy, and, it is added, the marks were _half
obliterated by the snow_. Two things then are clear: that the persons
who made them came from different directions, and probably made them at
different times. That, alone, by the way, may be a sufficient answer to
your question as to whether Cibras was in collusion with the
"burglars." But how does Randolph behave with reference to these
tracks? Though he carries the lantern, he fails to perceive the
first--the woman's--the discovery of which is made by a lad; but the
second, half hidden in the snow, he notices readily enough, and at once
points it out. He explains that burglars have been on the war-path. But
examine his horror of surprise when he hears that the window is closed;
when he sees the woman's bleeding fingers. He cannot help exclaiming,
"My God! what has happened _now_?" But why "now"? The word cannot refer
to his father's death, for that he knew, or guessed, beforehand, having
heard the shot. Is it not rather the exclamation of a man whose schemes
destiny has complicated? Besides, he should have _expected_ to find the
window closed: no one except himself, Lord Pharanx, and the workman,
who was now dead, knew the secret of its construction; the burglars
therefore, having entered and robbed the room, one of them, intending
to go out, would press on the ledge, and the sash would fall on his
hand with what result we know. The others would then either break the
glass and so escape; or pass through the house; or remain prisoners.
That immoderate surprise was therefore absurdly illogical, after seeing
the burglar-track in the snow. But how, above all, do you account for
Lord Pharanx's silence during and after the burglars' visit--if there
was a visit? He was, you must remember, alive all that time; _they_ did
not kill him; certainly they did not shoot him, for the shot is heard
after the snow has ceased to fall,--that is, after, long after, they
have left, since it was the falling snow that had half obliterated
their tracks; nor did they stab him, for to this Cibras confesses. Why
then, being alive, and not gagged, did he give no token of the presence
of his visitors? There were in fact no burglars at Orven Hall that
night.'

'But the track!' I cried, 'the jewels found in the snow--the
neckerchief!'

Zaleski smiled.

'Burglars,' he said, 'are plain, honest folk who have a just notion of
the value of jewelry when they see it. They very properly regard it as
mere foolish waste to drop precious stones about in the snow, and would
refuse to company with a man weak enough to let fall his neckerchief on
a cold night. The whole business of the burglars was a particularly
inartistic trick, unworthy of its author. The mere facility with which
Randolph discovered the buried jewels by the aid of a dim lantern,
should have served as a hint to an educated police not afraid of facing
the improbable. The jewels had been _put_ there with the object of
throwing suspicion on the imaginary burglars; with the same design the
catch of the window had been wrenched off, the sash purposely left
open, the track made, the valuables taken from Lord Pharanx's room. All
this was deliberately done by some one--would it be rash to say at once
by whom?

'Our suspicions having now lost their whole character of vagueness, and
begun to lead us in a perfectly definite direction, let us examine the
statements of Hester Dyett. Now, it is immediately comprehensible to me
that the evidence of this woman at the public examinations was looked
at askance. There can be no doubt that she is a poor specimen of
humanity, an undesirable servant, a peering, hysterical caricature of a
woman. Her statements, if formally recorded, were not believed; or if
believed, were believed with only half the mind. No attempt was made to
deduce anything from them. But for my part, if I wanted specially
reliable evidence as to any matter of fact, it is precisely from such a
being that I would seek it. Let me draw you a picture of that class of
intellect. They have a greed for information, but the information, to
satisfy them, must relate to actualities; they have no sympathy with
fiction; it is from their impatience of what seems to be that springs
their curiosity of what _is_. Clio is their muse, and she alone. Their
whole lust is to gather knowledge through a hole, their whole faculty
is to _peep_. But they are destitute of imagination, and do not lie; in
their passion for realities they would esteem it a sacrilege to distort
history. They make straight for the substantial, the indubitable. For
this reason the Peniculi and Ergasili of Plautus seem to me far more
true to nature than the character of Paul Pry in Jerrold's comedy. In
one instance, indeed, the evidence of Hester Dyett appears, on the
surface of it, to be quite false. She declares that she sees a round
white object moving upward in the room. But the night being gloomy, her
taper having gone out, she must have been standing in a dense darkness.
How then could she see this object? Her evidence, it was argued, must
be designedly false, or else (as she was in an ecstatic condition) the
result of an excited fancy. But I have stated that such persons,
nervous, neurotic even as they may be, are not fanciful. I therefore
accept her evidence as true. And now, mark the consequence of that
acceptance. I am driven to admit that there must, from some source,
have been light in the room--a light faint enough, and diffused enough,
to escape the notice of Hester herself. This being so, it must have
proceeded from around, from below, or from above. There are no other
alternatives. Around these was nothing but the darkness of the night;
the room beneath, we know, was also in darkness. The light then came
from the room above--from the mechanic class-room. But there is only
one possible means by which the light from an upper can diffuse a lower
room. It _must_ be by a hole in the intermediate boards. We are thus
driven to the discovery of an aperture of some sort in the flooring of
that upper chamber. Given this, the mystery of the round white object
"driven" upward disappears. We at once ask, why not _drawn_ upward
through the newly-discovered aperture by a string too small to be
visible in the gloom? Assuredly it was drawn upward. And now having
established a hole in the ceiling of the room in which Hester stands,
is it unreasonable--even without further evidence--to suspect another
in the flooring? But we actually have this further evidence. As she
rushes to the door she falls, faints, and fractures the lower part of
her leg. Had she fallen _over_ some object, as you supposed, the result
might have been a fracture also, but in a different part of the body;
being where it was, it could only have been caused by placing the foot
inadvertently in a hole while the rest of the body was in rapid motion.
But this gives us an approximate idea of the _size_ of the lower hole;
it was at least big enough to admit the foot and lower leg, big enough
therefore to admit that "good-sized ball of cotton" of which the woman
speaks: and from the lower we are able to conjecture the size of the
upper. But how comes it that these holes are nowhere mentioned in the
evidence? It can only be because no one ever saw them. Yet the rooms
must have been examined by the police, who, if they existed, must have
seen them. They therefore did not exist: that is to say, the pieces
which had been removed from the floorings had by that time been neatly
replaced, and, in the case of the lower one, covered by the carpet, the
removal of which had caused so much commotion in Randolph's room on the
fatal day. Hester Dyett would have been able to notice and bring at
least one of the apertures forward in evidence, but she fainted before
she had time to find out the cause of her fall, and an hour later it
was, you remember, Randolph himself who bore her from the room. But
should not the aperture in the top floor have been observed by the
class? Undoubtedly, if its position was in the open space in the middle
of the room. But it was not observed, and therefore its position was
not there, but in the only other place left--behind the apparatus used
in demonstration. That then was _one_ useful object which the
apparatus--and with it the elaborate hypocrisy of class, and speeches,
and candidature--served: it was made to act as a curtain, a screen. But
had it no other purpose? That question we may answer when we know its
name and its nature. And it is not beyond our powers to conjecture this
with something like certainty. For the only "machines" possible to use
in illustration of simple mechanics are the screw, the wedge, the
scale, the lever, the wheel-and-axle, and Atwood's machine. The
mathematical principles which any of these exemplify would, of course,
be incomprehensible to such a class, but the first five most of all,
and as there would naturally be some slight pretence of trying to make
the learners understand, I therefore select the last; and this
selection is justified when we remember that on the shot being heard,
Randolph leans for support on the "machine," and stands in its shadow;
but any of the others would be too small to throw any appreciable
shadow, except one--the wheel, and-axle--and that one would hardly
afford support to a tall man in the erect position. The Atwood's
machine is therefore forced on us; as to its construction, it is, as
you are aware, composed of two upright posts, with a cross-bar fitted
with pulleys and strings, and is intended to show the motion of bodies
acting under a constant force--the force of gravity, to wit. But now
consider all the really glorious uses to which those same pulleys may
be turned in lowering and lifting unobserved that "ball of cotton"
through the two apertures, while the other strings with the weights
attached are dangling before the dull eyes of the peasants. I need only
point out that when the whole company trooped out of the room, Randolph
was the last to leave it, and it is not now difficult to conjecture
why.

'Of what, then, have we convicted Randolph? For one thing, we have
shown that by marks of feet in the snow preparation was made beforehand
for obscuring the cause of the earl's death. That death must therefore
have been at least expected, foreknown. Thus we convict him of
expecting it. And then, by an independent line of deduction, we can
also discover the _means_ by which he expected it to occur. It is clear
that he did not expect it to occur when it did by the hand of Maude
Cibras--for this is proved by his knowledge that she had left the
neighbourhood, by his evidently genuine astonishment at the sight of
the closed window, and, above all, by his truly morbid desire to
establish a substantial, an irrefutable _alibi_ for himself by going to
Plymouth on the day when there was every reason to suppose she would do
the deed--that is, on the 8th, the day of the earl's invitation. On the
fatal night, indeed, the same morbid eagerness to build up a clear
_alibi_ is observable, for he surrounds himself with a cloud of
witnesses in the upper chamber. But that, you will admit, is not nearly
so perfect a one as a journey, say, to Plymouth would have been. Why
then, expecting the death, did he not take some such journey? Obviously
because on _this_ occasion his personal presence was necessary. When,
_in conjunction_ with this, we recall the fact that during the
intrigues with Cibras the lectures were discontinued, and again resumed
immediately on her unlooked-for departure, we arrive at the conclusion
that the means by which Lord Pharanx's death was expected to occur was
the personal presence of Randolph _in conjunction_ with the political
speeches, the candidature, the class, the apparatus.

'But though he stands condemned of foreknowing, and being in some sort
connected with, his father's death, I can nowhere find any indication
of his having personally accomplished it, or even of his ever having
had any such intention. The evidence is evidence of complicity--and
nothing more. And yet--and yet--even of _this_ we began by acquitting
him unless we could discover, as I said, some strong, adequate,
altogether irresistible motive for such complicity. Failing this, we
ought to admit that at some point our argument has played us false, and
led us into conclusions wholly at variance with our certain knowledge
of the principles underlying human conduct in general. Let us therefore
seek for such a motive--something deeper than personal enmity, stronger
than personal ambition, _than the love of life itself!_ And now, tell
me, at the time of the occurrence of this mystery, was the whole past
history of the House of Orven fully investigated?'

'Not to my knowledge,' I answered; 'in the papers there were, of
course, sketches of the earl's career, but that I think was all.'

'Yet it cannot be that their past was unknown, but only that it was
ignored. Long, I tell you, long and often, have I pondered on that
history, and sought to trace with what ghastly secret has been pregnant
the destiny, gloomful as Erebus and the murk of black-peplosed Nux,
which for centuries has hung its pall over the men of this ill-fated
house. Now at last I know. Dark, dark, and red with gore and horror is
that history; down the silent corridors of the ages have these
blood-soaked sons of Atreus fled shrieking before the pursuing talons
of the dread Eumenides. The first earl received his patent in 1535 from
the eighth Henry. Two years later, though noted as a rabid "king's
man," he joined the Pilgrimage of Grace against his master, and was
soon after executed, with Darcy and some other lords. His age was then
fifty. His son, meantime, had served in the king's army under Norfolk.
It is remarkable, by the way, that females have all along been rare in
the family, and that in no instance has there been more than one son.
The second earl, under the sixth Edward, suddenly threw up a civil
post, hastened to the army, and fell at the age of forty at the battle
of Pinkie in 1547. He was accompanied by his son. The third in 1557,
under Mary, renounced the Catholic faith, to which, both before and
since, the family have passionately clung, and suffered (at the age of
forty) the last penalty. The fourth earl died naturally, but suddenly,
in his bed at the age of fifty during the winter of 1566. At midnight
_of the same day_ he was laid in the grave by his son. This son was
later on, in 1591, seen by _his_ son to fall from a lofty balcony at
Orven Hall, while walking in his sleep at high noonday. Then for some
time nothing happens; but the eighth earl dies mysteriously in 1651 at
the age of forty-five. A fire occurring in his room, he leapt from a
window to escape the flames. Some of his limbs were thereby fractured,
but he was in a fair way to recovery when there was a sudden relapse,
soon ending in death. He was found to have been poisoned by _radix
aconiti indica_, a rare Arabian poison not known in Europe at that time
except to _savants_, and first mentioned by Acosta some months before.
An attendant was accused and tried, but acquitted. The then son of the
House was a Fellow of the newly-founded Royal Society, and author of a
now-forgotten work on Toxicology, which, however, I have read. No
suspicion, of course, fell on _him_.'

As Zaleski proceeded with this retrospect, I could not but ask myself
with stirrings of the most genuine wonder, whether he could possess
this intimate knowledge of _all_ the great families of Europe! It was
as if he had spent a part of his life in making special study of the
history of the Orvens.

'In the same manner,' he went on, 'I could detail the annals of the
family from that time to the present. But all through they have been
marked by the same latent tragic elements; and I have said enough to
show you that in each of the tragedies there was invariably something
large, leering, something of which the mind demands explanation, but
seeks in vain to find it. Now we need no longer seek. Destiny did not
design that the last Lord of Orven should any more hide from the world
the guilty secret of his race. It was the will of the gods--and he
betrayed himself. "Return," he writes, "the beginning of the end is
come." What end?

_The_ end--perfectly well known to Randolph, needing no explanation for
_him_. The old, old end, which in the ancient dim time led the first
lord, loyal still at heart, to forsake his king; and another, still
devout, to renounce his cherished faith, and yet another to set fire to
the home of his ancestors. You have called the two last scions of the
family "a proud and selfish pair of beings"; proud they were, and
selfish too, but you are in error if you think their selfishness a
personal one: on the contrary, they were singularly oblivious of self
in the ordinary sense of the word. Theirs was the pride and the
selfishness of _race_. What consideration, think you, other than the
weal of his house, could induce Lord Randolph to take on himself the
shame--for as such he certainly regards it--of a conversion to
radicalism? He would, I am convinced, have _died_ rather than make this
pretence for merely personal ends. But he does it--and the reason? It
is because he has received that awful summons from home; because "the
end" is daily coming nearer, and it must not find him unprepared to
meet it; it is because Lord Pharanx's senses are becoming _too_ acute;
because the clatter of the servants' knives at the other end of the
house inflames him to madness; because his excited palate can no longer
endure any food but the subtlest delicacies; because Hester Dyett is
able from the posture in which he sits to conjecture that he is
intoxicated; because, in fact, he is on the brink of the dreadful
malady which physicians call "_General Paralysis of the Insane_." You
remember I took from your hands the newspaper containing the earl's
letter to Cibras, in order to read it with my own eyes. I had my
reasons, and I was justified. That letter contains three mistakes in
spelling: "here" is printed "hear," "pass" appears as "pas," and "room"
as "rume." Printers' errors, you say? But not so--one might be, two in
that short paragraph could hardly be, three would be impossible. Search
the whole paper through, and I think you will not find another. Let us
reverence the theory of probabilities: the errors were the writer's,
not the printer's. General Paralysis of the Insane is known to have
this effect on the writing. It attacks its victims about the period of
middle age--the age at which the deaths of all the Orvens who died
mysteriously occurred. Finding then that the dire heritage of his
race--the heritage of madness--is falling or fallen on him, he summons
his son from India. On himself he passes sentence of death: it is the
tradition of the family, the secret vow of self-destruction handed down
through ages from father to son. But he must have aid: in these days it
is difficult for a man to commit the suicidal act without
detection--and if madness is a disgrace to the race, equally so is
suicide. Besides, the family is to be enriched by the insurances on his
life, and is thereby to be allied with royal blood; but the money will
be lost if the suicide be detected. Randolph therefore returns and
blossoms into a popular candidate.

'For a time he is led to abandon his original plans by the appearance
of Maude Cibras; he hopes that _she_ may be made to destroy the earl;
but when she fails him, he recurs to it--recurs to it all suddenly, for
Lord Pharanx's condition is rapidly becoming critical, patent to all
eyes, could any eye see him--so much so that on the last day none of
the servants are allowed to enter his room. We must therefore regard
Cibras as a mere addendum to, an extraneous element in, the tragedy,
not as an integral part of it. She did not shoot the noble lord, for
she had no pistol; nor did Randolph, for he was at a distance from the
bed of death, surrounded by witnesses; nor did the imaginary burglars.
The earl therefore shot himself; and it was the small globular silver
pistol, such as this'--here Zaleski drew a little embossed Venetian
weapon from a drawer near him--'that appeared in the gloom to the
excited Hester as a "ball of cotton," while it was being drawn upward
by the Atwood's machine. But if the earl shot himself he could not have
done so after being stabbed to the heart. Maude Cibras, therefore,
stabbed a dead man. She would, of course, have ample time for stealing
into the room and doing so after the shot was fired, and before the
party reached the balcony window, on account of the delay on the stairs
in procuring a second light; in going to the earl's door; in examining
the tracks, and so on. But having stabbed a dead man, she is not guilty
of murder. The message I just now sent by Ham was one addressed to the
Home Secretary, telling him on no account to let Cibras die to-morrow.
He well knows my name, and will hardly be silly enough to suppose me
capable of using words without meaning. It will be perfectly easy to
prove my conclusions, for the pieces removed from, and replaced in, the
floorings can still be detected, if looked for; the pistol is still, no
doubt, in Randolph's room, and its bore can be compared with the bullet
found in Lord Pharanx's brain; above all, the jewels stolen by the
"burglars" are still safe in some cabinet of the new earl, and may
readily be discovered I therefore expect that the d√©no√ªment will now
take a somewhat different turn.'

That the d√©no√ªment did take a different turn, and pretty strictly in
accordance with Zaleski's forecast, is now matter of history, and the
incidents, therefore, need no further comment from me in this place.




THE STONE OF THE EDMUNDSBURY MONKS


'Russia,' said Prince Zaleski to me one day, when I happened to be on a
visit to him in his darksome sanctuary--'Russia may be regarded as land
surrounded by ocean; that is to say, she is an island. In the same way,
it is sheer gross irrelevancy to speak of _Britain_ as an island,
unless indeed the word be understood as a mere _modus loquendi_ arising
out of a rather poor geographical pleasantry. Britain, in reality, is a
small continent. Near her--a little to the south-east--is situated the
large island of Europe. Thus, the enlightened French traveller passing
to these shores should commune within himself: "I now cross to the
Mainland"; and retracing his steps: "I now return to the fragment rent
by wrack and earthshock from the Mother-country." And this I say not in
the way of paradox, but as the expression of a sober truth. I have in
my mind merely the relative depth and extent--the _non-insularity_, in
fact--of the impressions made by the several nations on the world. But
this island of Europe has herself an island of her own: the name of it,
Russia. She, of all lands, is the _terra incognita_, the unknown land;
till quite lately she was more--she was the undiscovered, the
unsuspected land. She _has_ a literature, you know, and a history, and
a language, and a purpose--but of all this the world has hardly so much
as heard. Indeed, she, and not any Antarctic Sea whatever, is the real
Ultima Thule of modern times, the true Island of Mystery.'

I reproduce these remarks of Zaleski here, not so much on account of
the splendid tribute to my country contained in them, as because it
ever seemed to me--and especially in connection with the incident I am
about to recall--that in this respect at least he was a genuine son of
Russia; if she is the Land, so truly was he the Man, of Mystery. I who
knew him best alone knew that it was impossible to know him. He was a
being little of the present: with one arm he embraced the whole past;
the fingers of the other heaved on the vibrant pulse of the future. He
seemed to me--I say it deliberately and with forethought--to possess
the unparalleled power not merely of disentangling in retrospect, but
of unravelling in prospect, and I have known him to relate _coming_
events with unimaginable minuteness of precision. He was nothing if not
superlative: his diatribes, now culminating in a very _extravaganza_ of
hyperbole--now sailing with loose wing through the downy, witched,
Dutch cloud-heaps of some quaintest tramontane Nephelococcugia of
thought--now laying down law of the Medes for the actual world of
to-day--had oft-times the strange effect of bringing back to my mind
the very singular old-epic epithet, [Greek: aenemoen]--_airy_--as
applied to human thought. The mere grip of his memory was not simply
extraordinary, it had in it a token, a hint, of the strange, the
pythic--nay, the sibylline. And as his reflecting intellect, moreover,
had all the lightness of foot of a chamois kid, unless you could
contrive to follow each dazzlingly swift successive step, by the sum of
which he attained his Alp-heights, he inevitably left on you the
astounding, the confounding impression of mental omnipresence.

I had brought with me a certain document, a massive book bound in iron
and leather, the diary of one Sir Jocelin Saul. This I had abstracted
from a gentleman of my acquaintance, the head of a firm of inquiry
agents in London, into whose hand, only the day before, it had come. A
distant neighbour of Sir Jocelin, hearing by chance of his extremity,
had invoked the assistance of this firm; but the aged baronet, being in
a state of the utmost feebleness, terror, and indeed hysterical
incoherence, had been able to utter no word in explanation of his
condition or wishes, and, in silent abandonment, had merely handed the
book to the agent.

A day or two after I had reached the desolate old mansion which the
prince occupied, knowing that he might sometimes be induced to take an
absorbing interest in questions that had proved themselves too
profound, or too intricate, for ordinary solution, I asked him if he
was willing to hear the details read out from the diary, and on his
assenting, I proceeded to do so.

The brief narrative had reference to a very large and very valuable
oval gem enclosed in the substance of a golden chalice, which chalice,
in the monastery of St. Edmundsbury, had once lain centuries long
within the Loculus, or inmost coffin, wherein reposed the body of St.
Edmund. By pressing a hidden pivot, the cup (which was composed of two
equal parts, connected by minute hinges) sprang open, and in a hollow
space at the bottom was disclosed the gem. Sir Jocelin Saul, I may say,
was lineally connected with--though, of course, not descendant
from--that same Jocelin of Brakelonda, a brother of the Edmundsbury
convent, who wrote the now so celebrated _Jocelini Chronica_: and the
chalice had fallen into the possession of the family, seemingly at some
time prior to the suppression of the monastery about 1537. On it was
inscribed in old English characters of unknown date the words:

  'Shulde this Ston stalen bee,
  Or shuld it chaunges dre,
  The Houss of Sawl and hys Hed anoon shal de.'

The stone itself was an intaglio, and had engraved on its surface the
figure of a mythological animal, together with some nearly obliterated
letters, of which the only ones remaining legible were those forming
the word 'Has.' As a sure precaution against the loss of the gem,
another cup had been made and engraved in an exactly similar manner,
inside of which, to complete the delusion, another stone of the same
size and cut, but of comparatively valueless material, had been placed.

Sir Jocelin Saul, a man of intense nervosity, lived his life alone in a
remote old manor-house in Suffolk, his only companion being a person of
Eastern origin, named Ul-Jabal. The baronet had consumed his vitality
in the life-long attempt to sound the too fervid Maelstrom of Oriental
research, and his mind had perhaps caught from his studies a tinge of
their morbidness, their esotericism, their insanity. He had for some
years past been engaged in the task of writing a stupendous work on
Pre-Zoroastrian Theogonies, in which, it is to be supposed, Ul-Jabal
acted somewhat in the capacity of secretary. But I will give _verbatim_
the extracts from his diary:

'_June 11_.--This is my birthday. Seventy years ago exactly I slid from
the belly of the great Dark into this Light and Life. My God! My God!
it is briefer than the rage of an hour, fleeter than a mid-day trance.
Ul-Jabal greeted me warmly--seemed to have been looking forward to
it--and pointed out that seventy is of the fateful numbers, its only
factors being seven, five, and two: the last denoting the duality of
Birth and Death; five, Isolation; seven, Infinity. I informed him that
this was also my father's birthday; and _his_ father's; and repeated
the oft-told tale of how the latter, just seventy years ago to-day,
walking at twilight by the churchyard-wall, saw the figure of _himself_
sitting on a grave-stone, and died five weeks later riving with the
pangs of hell. Whereat the sceptic showed his two huge rows of teeth.

'What is his peculiar interest in the Edmundsbury chalice? On each
successive birthday when the cup has been produced, he has asked me to
show him the stone. Without any well-defined reason I have always
declined, but to-day I yielded. He gazed long into its sky-blue depth,
and then asked if I had no idea what the inscription "Has" meant. I
informed him that it was one of the lost secrets of the world.

'_June l5_.--Some new element has entered into our existence here.
Something threatens me. I hear the echo of a menace against my sanity
and my life. It is as if the garment which enwraps me has grown too
hot, too heavy for me. A notable drowsiness has settled on my brain--a
drowsiness in which thought, though slow, is a thousandfold more
fiery-vivid than ever. Oh, fair goddess of Reason, desert not me, thy
chosen child!

'_June 18_.--Ul-Jabal?--that man is _the very Devil incarnate!_

'_June 19_.--So much for my bounty, all my munificence, to this
poisonous worm. I picked him up on the heights of the Mountain of
Lebanon, a cultured savage among cultured savages, and brought him here
to be a prince of thought by my side. What though his plundered
wealth--the debt I owe him--has saved me from a sort of ruin? Have not
_I_ instructed him in the sweet secret of Reason?

'I lay back on my bed in the lonely morning watches, my soul heavy as
with the distilled essence of opiates, and in vivid vision knew that he
had entered my apartment. In the twilight gloom his glittering rows of
shark's teeth seemed impacted on my eyeball--I saw _them_, and nothing
else. I was not aware when he vanished from the room. But at daybreak I
crawled on hands and knees to the cabinet containing the chalice. The
viperous murderer! He has stolen my gem, well knowing that with it he
has stolen my life. The stone is gone--gone, my precious gem. A
weakness overtook me, and I lay for many dreamless hours naked on the
marble floor.

'Does the fool think to hide ought from my eyes? Can he imagine that I
shall not recover my precious gem, my stone of Saul?

'_June 20_.--Ah, Ul-Jabal--my brave, my noble Son of the Prophet of
God! He has replaced the stone! He would not slay an aged man. The
yellow ray of his eye, it is but the gleam of the great thinker,
not--not--the gleam of the assassin. Again, as I lay in
semi-somnolence, I saw him enter my room, this time more distinctly. He
went up to the cabinet. Shaking the chalice in the dawning, some hours
after he had left, I heard with delight the rattle of the stone. I
might have known he would replace it; I should not have doubted his
clemency to a poor man like me. But the strange being!--he has taken
the _other_ stone from the _other_ cup--a thing of little value to any
man! Is Ul-Jabal mad or I?

'_June 21_.--Merciful Lord in Heaven! he has _not_ replaced it--not
_it_--but another instead of it. To-day I actually opened the chalice,
and saw. He has put a stone there, the same in size, in cut, in
engraving, but different in colour, in quality, in value--a stone I
have never seen before. How has he obtained it--whence? I must brace
myself to probe, to watch; I must turn myself into an eye to search
this devil's-bosom. My life, this subtle, cunning Reason of mine, hangs
in the balance.

'_June 22_.--Just now he offered me a cup of wine. I almost dashed it
to the ground before him. But he looked steadfastly into my eye. I
flinched: and drank--drank.

'Years ago, when, as I remember, we were at Balbec, I saw him one day
make an almost tasteless preparation out of pure black nicotine, which
in mere wanton lust he afterwards gave to some of the dwellers by the
Caspian to drink. But the fiend would surely never dream of giving to
me that browse of hell--to me an aged man, and a thinker, a seer.

'_June 23_.--The mysterious, the unfathomable Ul-Jabal! Once again, as
I lay in heavy trance at midnight, has he invaded, calm and noiseless
as a spirit, the sanctity of my chamber. Serene on the swaying air,
which, radiant with soft beams of vermil and violet light, rocked me
into variant visions of heaven, I reclined and regarded him unmoved.
The man has replaced the valueless stone in the modern-made chalice,
and has now stolen the false stone from the other, which _he himself_
put there! In patience will I possess this my soul, and watch what
shall betide. My eyes shall know no slumber!

'_June 24_.--No more--no more shall I drink wine from the hand of
Ul-Jabal. My knees totter beneath the weight of my lean body. Daggers
of lambent fever race through my brain incessant. Some fibrillary
twitchings at the right angle of the mouth have also arrested my
attention.

'_June 25_.--He has dared at open mid-day to enter my room. I watched
him from an angle of the stairs pass along the corridor and open my
door. But for the terrifying, death-boding thump, thump of my heart, I
should have faced the traitor then, and told him that I knew all his
treachery. Did I say that I had strange fibrillary twitchings at the
right angle of my mouth, and a brain on fire? I have ceased to write my
book--the more the pity for the world, not for me.

'_June 26_.--Marvellous to tell, the traitor, Ul-Jabal, has now placed
_another_ stone in the Edmundsbury chalice--also identical in nearly
every respect with the original gem. This, then, was the object of his
entry into my room yesterday. So that he has first stolen the real
stone and replaced it by another; then he has stolen this other and
replaced it by yet another; he has beside stolen the valueless stone
from the modern chalice, and then replaced it. Surely a man gone rabid,
a man gone dancing, foaming, raving mad!

'_June 28_.--I have now set myself to the task of recovering my jewel.
It is here, and I shall find it. Life against life--and which is the
best life, mine or this accursed Ishmaelite's? If need be, I will do
murder--I, with this withered hand--so that I get back the heritage
which is mine.

'To-day, when I thought he was wandering in the park, I stole into his
room, locking the door on the inside. I trembled exceedingly, knowing
that his eyes are in every place. I ransacked the chamber, dived among
his clothes, but found no stone. One singular thing in a drawer I saw:
a long, white beard, and a wig of long and snow-white hair. As I passed
out of the chamber, lo, he stood face to face with me at the door in
the passage. My heart gave one bound, and then seemed wholly to cease
its travail. Oh, I must be sick unto death, weaker than a bruised reed!
When I woke from my swoon he was supporting me in his arms. "Now," he
said, grinning down at me, "now you have at last delivered all into my
hands." He left me, and I saw him go into his room and lock the door
upon himself. What is it I have delivered into the madman's hands?

'_July 1_.--Life against life--and his, the young, the stalwart, rather
than mine, the mouldering, the sere. I love life. Not _yet_ am I ready
to weigh anchor, and reeve halliard, and turn my prow over the watery
paths of the wine-brown Deeps. Oh no. Not yet. Let _him_ die. Many and
many are the days in which I shall yet see the light, walk, think. I am
averse to end the number of my years: there is even a feeling in me at
times that this worn body shall never, never taste of death. The
chalice predicts indeed that I and my house shall end when the stone is
lost--a mere fiction _at first_, an idler's dream _then_, but
now--now--that the prophecy has stood so long a part of the reality of
things, and a fact among facts--no longer fiction, but Adamant, stern
as the very word of God. Do I not feel hourly since it has gone how the
surges of life ebb, ebb ever lower in my heart? Nay, nay, but there is
hope. I have here beside me an Arab blade of subtle Damascene steel,
insinuous to pierce and to hew, with which in a street of Bethlehem I
saw a Syrian's head cleft open--a gallant stroke! The edges of this I
have made bright and white for a nuptial of blood.

'_July 2_.--I spent the whole of the last night in searching every nook
and crack of the house, using a powerful magnifying lens. At times I
thought Ul-Jabal was watching me, and would pounce out and murder me.
Convulsive tremors shook my frame like earthquake. Ah me, I fear I am
all too frail for this work. Yet dear is the love of life.

'_July 7_.--The last days I have passed in carefully searching the
grounds, with the lens as before. Ul-Jabal constantly found pretexts
for following me, and I am confident that every step I took was known
to him. No sign anywhere of the grass having been disturbed. Yet my
lands are wide, and I cannot be sure. The burden of this mighty task is
greater than I can bear. I am weaker than a bruised reed. Shall I not
slay my enemy, and make an end?

'_July_ 8.--Ul-Jabal has been in my chamber again! I watched him
through a crack in the panelling. His form was hidden by the bed, but I
could see his hand reflected in the great mirror opposite the door.
First, I cannot guess why, he moved to a point in front of the mirror
the chair in which I sometimes sit. He then went to the box in which
lie my few garments--and opened it. Ah, I have the stone--safe--safe!
He fears my cunning, ancient eyes, and has hidden it in the one place
where I would be least likely to seek it--_in my own trunk_! And yet I
dread, most intensely I dread, to look.

'_July_ 9.--The stone, alas, is not there! At the last moment he must
have changed his purpose. Could his wondrous sensitiveness of intuition
have made him feel that my eyes were looking in on him?

'_July 10_.--In the dead of night I knew that a stealthy foot had gone
past my door. I rose and threw a mantle round me; I put on my head my
cap of fur; I took the tempered blade in my hands; then crept out into
the dark, and followed. Ul-Jabal carried a small lantern which revealed
him to me. My feet were bare, but he wore felted slippers, which to my
unfailing ear were not utterly noiseless. He descended the stairs to
the bottom of the house, while I crouched behind him in the deepest
gloom of the corners and walls. At the bottom he walked into the
pantry: there stopped, and turned the lantern full in the direction of
the spot where I stood; but so agilely did I slide behind a pillar,
that he could not have seen me. In the pantry he lifted the trap-door,
and descended still further into the vaults beneath the house. Ah, the
vaults,--the long, the tortuous, the darksome vaults,--how had I
forgotten them? Still I followed, rent by seismic shocks of terror. I
had not forgotten the weapon: could I creep near enough, I felt that I
might plunge it into the marrow of his back. He opened the iron door of
the first vault and passed in. If I could lock him in?--but he held the
key. On and on he wound his way, holding the lantern near the ground,
his head bent down. The thought came to me _then_, that, had I but the
courage, one swift sweep, and all were over. I crept closer, closer.
Suddenly he turned round, and made a quick step in my direction. I saw
his eyes, the murderous grin of his jaw. I know not if he saw
me--thought forsook me. The weapon fell with clatter and clangor from
my grasp, and in panic fright I fled with extended arms and the
headlong swiftness of a stripling, through the black labyrinths of the
caverns, through the vacant corridors of the house, till I reached my
chamber, the door of which I had time to fasten on myself before I
dropped, gasping, panting for very life, on the floor.

'_July 11_.--I had not the courage to see Ul-Jabal to-day. I have
remained locked in my chamber all the time without food or water. My
tongue cleaves to the roof of my mouth.

'_July 12_.--I took heart and crept downstairs. I met him in the study.
He smiled on me, and I on him, as if nothing had happened between us.
Oh, our old friendship, how it has turned into bitterest hate! I had
taken the false stone from the Edmundsbury chalice and put it in the
pocket of my brown gown, with the bold intention of showing it to him,
and asking him if he knew aught of it. But when I faced him, my courage
failed again. We drank together and ate together as in the old days of
love.

'July l3.--I cannot think that I have not again imbibed some
soporiferous drug. A great heaviness of sleep weighed on my brain till
late in the day. When I woke my thoughts were in wild distraction, and
a most peculiar condition of my skin held me fixed before the mirror.
It is dry as parchment, and brown as the leaves of autumn.

'July l4.--Ul-Jabal is gone! And I am left a lonely, a desolate old
man! He said, though I swore it was false, that I had grown to mistrust
him! that I was hiding something from him! that he could live with me
no more! No more, he said, should I see his face! The debt I owe him he
would forgive. He has taken one small parcel with him,--and is gone!

'July l5.--Gone! gone! In mazeful dream I wander with uncovered head
far and wide over my domain, seeking I know not what. The stone he has
with him--the precious stone of Saul. I feel the life-surge ebbing,
ebbing in my heart.'

Here the manuscript abruptly ended.

Prince Zaleski had listened as I read aloud, lying back on his Moorish
couch and breathing slowly from his lips a heavy reddish vapour, which
he imbibed from a very small, carved, bismuth pipette. His face, as far
as I could see in the green-grey crepuscular atmosphere of the
apartment, was expressionless. But when I had finished he turned fully
round on me, and said:

'You perceive, I hope, the sinister meaning of all this?'

'_Has_ it a meaning?'

Zaleski smiled.

'Can you doubt it? in the shape of a cloud, the pitch of a thrush's
note, the _nuance_ of a sea-shell you would find, had you only insight
_enough_, inductive and deductive cunning _enough_, not only a meaning,
but, I am convinced, a quite endless significance. Undoubtedly, in a
human document of this kind, there is a meaning; and I may say at once
that this meaning is entirely transparent to me. Pity only that you did
not read the diary to me before.'

'Why?'

'Because we might, between us, have prevented a crime, and saved a
life. The last entry in the diary was made on the 15th of July. What
day is this?'

'This is the 20th.'

'Then I would wager a thousand to one that we are too late. There is
still, however, the one chance left. The time is now seven o'clock:
seven of the evening, I think, not of the morning; the houses of
business in London are therefore closed. But why not send my man, Ham,
with a letter by train to the private address of the person from whom
you obtained the diary, telling him to hasten immediately to Sir
Jocelin Saul, and on no consideration to leave his side for a moment?
Ham would reach this person before midnight, and understanding that the
matter was one of life and death, he would assuredly do your bidding.'

As I was writing the note suggested by Zaleski, I turned and asked him:

'From whom shall I say that the danger is to be expected--from the
Indian?'

'From Ul-Jabal, yes; but by no means Indian--Persian.'

Profoundly impressed by this knowledge of detail derived from sources
which had brought me no intelligence, I handed the note to the negro,
telling him how to proceed, and instructing him before starting from
the station to search all the procurable papers of the last few days,
and to return in case he found in any of them a notice of the death of
Sir Jocelin Saul. Then I resumed my seat by the side of Zaleski.

'As I have told you,' he said, 'I am fully convinced that our messenger
has gone on a bootless errand. I believe you will find that what has
really occurred is this: either yesterday, or the day before, Sir
Jocelin was found by his servant--I imagine he had a servant, though no
mention is made of any--lying on the marble floor of his chamber, dead.
Near him, probably by his side, will be found a gem--an oval stone,
white in colour--the same in fact which Ul-Jabal last placed in the
Edmundsbury chalice. There will be no marks of violence--no trace of
poison--the death will be found to be a perfectly natural one. Yet, in
this case, a particularly wicked murder has been committed. There are,
I assure you, to my positive knowledge forty-three--and in one island
in the South Seas, forty-four--different methods of doing murder, any
one of which would be entirely beyond the scope of the introspective
agencies at the ordinary disposal of society.

'But let us bend our minds to the details of this matter. Let us ask
first, _who_ is this Ul-Jabal? I have said that he is a Persian, and of
this there is abundant evidence in the narrative other than his mere
name. Fragmentary as the document is, and not intended by the writer to
afford the information, there is yet evidence of the religion of this
man, of the particular sect of that religion to which he belonged, of
his peculiar shade of colour, of the object of his stay at the
manor-house of Saul, of the special tribe amongst whom he formerly
lived. "What," he asks, when his greedy eyes first light on the
long-desired gem, "what is the meaning of the inscription 'Has'"--the
meaning which _he_ so well knew. "One of the lost secrets of the
world," replies the baronet. But I can hardly understand a learned
Orientalist speaking in that way about what appears to me a very patent
circumstance: it is clear that he never earnestly applied himself to
the solution of the riddle, or else--what is more likely, in spite of
his rather high-flown estimate of his own "Reason"--that his mind, and
the mind of his ancestors, never was able to go farther back in time
than the Edmundsbury Monks. But _they_ did not make the stone, nor did
they dig it from the depths of the earth in Suffolk--they got it from
some one, and it is not difficult to say with certainty from whom. The
stone, then, might have been engraved by that someone, or by the
someone from whom _he_ received it, and so on back into the dimnesses
of time. And consider the character of the engraving--it consists of _a
mythological animal_, and some words, of which the letters "Has" only
are distinguishable. But the animal, at least, is pure Persian. The
Persians, you know, were not only quite worthy competitors with the
Hebrews, the Egyptians, and later on the Greeks, for excellence in the
glyptic art, but this fact is remarkable, that in much the same way
that the figure of the _scarabaeus_ on an intaglio or cameo is a pretty
infallible indication of an Egyptian hand, so is that of a priest or a
grotesque animal a sure indication of a Persian. We may say, then, from
that evidence alone--though there is more--that this gem was certainly
Persian. And having reached that point, the mystery of "Has" vanishes:
for we at once jump at the conclusion that that too is Persian. But
Persian, you say, written in English characters? Yes, and it was
precisely this fact that made its meaning one of what the baronet
childishly calls "the lost secrets of the world": for every successive
inquirer, believing it part of an English phrase, was thus hopelessly
led astray in his investigation. "Has" is, in fact, part of the word
"Hasn-us-Sabah," and the mere circumstance that some of it has been
obliterated, while the figure of the mystic animal remains intact,
shows that it was executed by one of a nation less skilled in the art
of graving in precious stones than the Persians,--by a rude, mediaeval
Englishman, in short,--the modern revival of the art owing its origin,
of course, to the Medici of a later age. And of this Englishman--who
either graved the stone himself, or got some one else to do it for
him--do we know nothing? We know, at least, that he was certainly a
fighter, probably a Norman baron, that on his arm he bore the cross of
red, that he trod the sacred soil of Palestine. Perhaps, to prove this,
I need hardly remind you who Hasn-us-Sabah was. It is enough if I say
that he was greatly mixed up in the affairs of the Crusaders, lending
his irresistible arms now to this side, now to that. He was the chief
of the heterodox Mohammedan sect of the Assassins (this word, I
believe, is actually derived from his name); imagined himself to be an
incarnation of the Deity, and from his inaccessible rock-fortress of
Alamut in the Elburz exercised a sinister influence on the intricate
politics of the day. The Red Cross Knights called him Shaikh-ul-Jabal
--the Old Man of the Mountains, that very nickname connecting
him infallibly with the Ul-Jabal of our own times. Now three
well-known facts occur to me in connection with this stone of the House
of Saul: the first, that Saladin met in battle, and defeated, _and
plundered_, in a certain place, on a certain day, this Hasn-us-Sabah,
or one of his successors bearing the same name; the second, that about
this time there was a cordial _rapprochement_ between Saladin and
Richard the Lion, and between the Infidels and the Christians
generally, during which a free interchange of gems, then regarded as of
deep mystic importance, took place--remember "The Talisman," and the
"Lee Penny"; the third, that soon after the fighters of Richard, and
then himself, returned to England, the Loculus or coffin of St. Edmund
(as we are informed by the _Jocelini Chronica_) was _opened by the
Abbot_ at midnight, and the body of the martyr exposed. On such
occasions it was customary to place gems and relics in the coffin, when
it was again closed up. Now, the chalice with the stone was taken from
this loculus; and is it possible not to believe that some knight, to
whom it had been presented by one of Saladin's men, had in turn
presented it to the monastery, first scratching uncouthly on its
surface the name of Hasn to mark its semi-sacred origin, or perhaps
bidding the monks to do so? But the Assassins, now called, I think, "al
Hasani" or "Ismaili"--"that accursed _Ishmaelite_," the baronet
exclaims in one place--still live, are still a flourishing sect
impelled by fervid religious fanaticisms. And where think you is their
chief place of settlement? Where, but on the heights of that same
"Lebanon" on which Sir Jocelin "picked up" his too doubtful scribe and
literary helper?

'It now becomes evident that Ul-Jabal was one of the sect of the
Assassins, and that the object of his sojourn at the manor-house, of
his financial help to the baronet, of his whole journey perhaps to
England, was the recovery of the sacred gem which once glittered on the
breast of the founder of his sect. In dread of spoiling all by
over-rashness, he waits, perhaps for years, till he makes sure that the
stone is the right one by seeing it with his own eyes, and learns the
secret of the spring by which the chalice is opened. He then proceeds
to steal it. So far all is clear enough. Now, this too is conceivable,
that, intending to commit the theft, he had beforehand provided himself
with another stone similar in size and shape--these being well known to
him--to the other, in order to substitute it for the real stone, and
so, for a time at least, escape detection. It is presumable that the
chalice was not often _opened_ by the baronet, and this would therefore
have been a perfectly rational device on the part of Ul-Jabal. But
assuming this to be his mode of thinking, how ludicrously absurd
appears all the trouble he took to _engrave_ the false stone in an
exactly similar manner to the other. _That_ could not help him in
producing the deception, for that he did not contemplate the stone
being _seen_, but only _heard_ in the cup, is proved by the fact that
he selected a stone of a different _colour_. This colour, as I shall
afterwards show you, was that of a pale, brown-spotted stone. But we
are met with something more extraordinary still when we come to the
last stone, the white one--I shall prove that it was white--which
Ul-Jabal placed in the cup. Is it possible that he had provided _two_
substitutes, and that he had engraved these _two_, without object, in
the same minutely careful manner? Your mind refuses to conceive it; and
_having_ done this, declines, in addition, to believe that he had
prepared even one substitute; and I am fully in accord with you in this
conclusion.

'We may say then that Ul-Jabal had not _prepared_ any substitute; and
it may be added that it was a thing altogether beyond the limits of the
probable that he could _by chance_ have possessed two old gems exactly
similar in every detail down to the very half-obliterated letters of
the word "Hasn-us-Sabah." I have now shown, you perceive, that he did
not make them purposely, and that he did not possess them accidentally.
Nor were they the baronet's, for we have his declaration that he had
never seen them before. Whence then did the Persian obtain them? That
point will immediately emerge into clearness, when we have sounded his
motive for replacing the one false stone by the other, and, above all,
for taking away the valueless stone, and then replacing it. And in
order to lead you up to the comprehension of this motive, I begin by
making the bold assertion that Ul-Jabal had not in his possession the
real St. Edmundsbury stone at all.

'You are surprised; for you argue that if we are to take the baronet's
evidence at all, we must take it in this particular also, and he
positively asserts that he saw the Persian take the stone. It is true
that there are indubitable signs of insanity in the document, but it is
the insanity of a diseased mind manifesting itself by fantastic
exaggeration of sentiment, rather than of a mind confiding to itself
its own delusions as to matters of fact. There is therefore nothing so
certain as that Ul-Jabal did steal the gem; but these two things are
equally evident: that by some means or other it very soon passed out of
his possession, and that when it had so passed, he, for his part,
believed it to be in the possession of the baronet. "Now," he cries in
triumph, one day as he catches Sir Jocelin in his room--"_now_ you have
delivered all into my hands." "All" what, Sir Jocelin wonders. "All,"
of course, meant the stone. He believes that the baronet has done
precisely what the baronet afterwards believes that _he_ has
done--hidden away the stone in the most secret of all places, in his
own apartment, to wit. The Persian, sure now at last of victory,
accordingly hastens into his chamber, and "locks the door," in order,
by an easy search, to secure his prize. When, moreover, the baronet is
examining the house at night with his lens, he believes that Ul-Jabal
is spying his movements; when he extends his operations to the park,
the other finds pretexts to be near him. Ul-Jabal dogs his footsteps
like a shadow. But supposing he had really had the jewel, and had
deposited it in a place of perfect safety--such as, with or without
lenses, the extensive grounds of the manor-house would certainly have
afforded--his more reasonable _r√¥le_ would have been that of
unconscious _nonchalance_, rather than of agonised interest. But, in
fact, he supposed the owner of the stone to be himself seeking a secure
hiding-place for it, and is resolved at all costs on knowing the
secret. And again in the vaults beneath the house Sir Jocelin reports
that Ul-Jabal "holds the lantern near the ground, with his head bent
down": can anything be better descriptive of the attitude of _search_?
Yet each is so sure that the other possesses the gem, that neither is
able to suspect that both are seekers.

'But, after all, there is far better evidence of the non-possession of
the stone by the Persian than all this--and that is the murder of the
baronet, for I can almost promise you that our messenger will return in
a few minutes. Now, it seems to me that Ul-Jabal was not really
murderous, averse rather to murder; thus the baronet is often in his
power, swoons in his arms, lies under the influence of narcotics in
semi-sleep while the Persian is in his room, and yet no injury is done
him. Still, when the clear necessity to murder--the clear means of
gaining the stone--presents itself to Ul-Jabal, he does not hesitate a
moment--indeed, he has already made elaborate preparations for that
very necessity. And when was it that this necessity presented itself?
It was when the baronet put the false stone in the pocket of a loose
gown for the purpose of confronting the Persian with it. But what kind
of pocket? I think you will agree with me, that male garments,
admitting of the designation "gown," have usually only outer
pockets--large, square pockets, simply sewed on to the outside of the
robe. But a stone of that size _must_ have made such a pocket bulge
outwards. Ul-Jabal must have noticed it. Never before has he been
perfectly sure that the baronet carried the long-desired gem about on
his body; but now at last he knows beyond all doubt. To obtain it,
there are several courses open to him: he may rush there and then on
the weak old man and tear the stone from him; he may ply him with
narcotics, and extract it from the pocket during sleep. But in these
there is a small chance of failure; there is a certainty of near or
ultimate detection, pursuit--and this is a land of Law, swift and
fairly sure. No, the old man must die: only thus--thus surely, and thus
secretly--can the outraged dignity of Hasn-us-Sabah be appeased. On the
very next day he leaves the house--no more shall the mistrustful
baronet, who is "hiding something from him," see his face. He carries
with him a small parcel. Let me tell you what was in that parcel: it
contained the baronet's fur cap, one of his "brown gowns," and a
snow-white beard and wig. Of the cap we can be sure; for from the fact
that, on leaving his room at midnight to follow the Persian through the
_house_, he put it on his head, I gather that he wore it habitually
during all his waking hours; yet after Ul-Jabal has left him he wanders
_far and wide_ "with uncovered head." Can you not picture the
distracted old man seeking ever and anon with absent mind for his
long-accustomed head-gear, and seeking in vain? Of the gown, too, we
may be equally certain: for it was the procuring of this that led
Ul-Jabal to the baronet's trunk; we now know that he did not go there
to _hide_ the stone, for he had it not to hide; nor to _seek_ it, for
he would be unable to believe the baronet childish enough to deposit it
in so obvious a place. As for the wig and beard, they had been
previously seen in his room. But before he leaves the house Ul-Jabal
has one more work to do: once more the two eat and drink together as in
"the old days of love"; once more the baronet is drunken with a deep
sleep, and when he wakes, his skin is "brown as the leaves of autumn."
That is the evidence of which I spake in the beginning as giving us a
hint of the exact shade of the Oriental's colour--it was the
yellowish-brown of a sered leaf. And now that the face of the baronet
has been smeared with this indelible pigment, all is ready for the
tragedy, and Ul-Jabal departs. He will return, but not immediately, for
he will at least give the eyes of his victim time to grow accustomed to
the change of colour in his face; nor will he tarry long, for there is
no telling whether, or whither, the stone may not disappear from that
outer pocket. I therefore surmise that the tragedy took place a day or
two ago. I remembered the feebleness of the old man, his highly
neurotic condition; I thought of those "fibrillary twitchings,"
indicating the onset of a well-known nervous disorder sure to end in
sudden death; I recalled his belief that on account of the loss of the
stone, in which he felt his life bound up, the chariot of death was
urgent on his footsteps; I bore in mind his memory of his grandfather
dying in agony just seventy years ago after seeing his own wraith by
the churchyard-wall; I knew that such a man could not be struck by the
sudden, the terrific shock of seeing _himself_ sitting in the chair
before the mirror (the chair, you remember, had been _placed_ there by
Ul-Jabal) without dropping down stone dead on the spot. I was thus able
to predict the manner and place of the baronet's death--if he _be_
dead. Beside him, I said, would probably be found a white stone. For
Ul-Jabal, his ghastly impersonation ended, would hurry to the pocket,
snatch out the stone, and finding it not the stone he sought, would in
all likelihood dash it down, fly away from the corpse as if from
plague, and, I hope, straightway go and--hang himself.'

It was at this point that the black mask of Ham framed itself between
the python-skin tapestries of the doorway. I tore from him the paper,
now two days old, which he held in his hand, and under the heading,
'Sudden death of a Baronet,' read a nearly exact account of the facts
which Zaleski had been detailing to me.

'I can see by your face that I was not altogether at fault,' he said,
with one of his musical laughs; 'but there still remains for us to
discover whence Ul-Jabal obtained his two substitutes, his motive for
exchanging one for the other, and for stealing the valueless gem; but,
above all, we must find where the real stone was all the time that
these two men so sedulously sought it, and where it now is. Now, let us
turn our attention to this stone, and ask, first, what light does the
inscription on the cup throw on its nature? The inscription assures us
that if "this stone be stolen," or if it "chaunges dre," the House of
Saul and its head "anoon" (i.e. anon, at once) shall die. "Dre," I may
remind you, is an old English word, used, I think, by Burns, identical
with the Saxon "_dreogan_," meaning to "suffer." So that the writer at
least contemplated that the stone might "suffer changes." But what kind
of changes--external or internal? External change--change of
environment--is already provided for when he says, "shulde this Ston
stalen bee"; "chaunges," therefore, in _his_ mind, meant internal
changes. But is such a thing possible for any precious stone, and for
this one in particular? As to that, we might answer when we know the
name of this one. It nowhere appears in the manuscript, and yet it is
immediately discoverable. For it was a "sky-blue" stone; a sky-blue,
sacred stone; a sky-blue, sacred, Persian stone. That at once gives us
its name--it was a _turquoise_. But can the turquoise, to the certain
knowledge of a mediaeval writer, "chaunges dre"? Let us turn for light
to old Anselm de Boot: that is he in pig-skin on the shelf behind the
bronze Hera.'

I handed the volume to Zaleski. He pointed to a passage which read as
follows:

'Assuredly the turquoise doth possess a soul more intelligent than that
of man. But we cannot be wholly sure of the presence of Angels in
precious stones. I do rather opine that the evil spirit doth take up
his abode therein, transforming himself into an angel of light, to the
end that we put our trust not in God, but in the precious stone; and
thus, perhaps, doth he deceive our spirits by the turquoise: for the
turquoise is of two sorts: those which keep their colour, and those
which lose it.'[1]

[Footnote 1: 'Assur√©ment la turquoise a une √¢me plus intelligente que
l'√¢me de l'homme. Mais nous ne pouvons rien establir de certain
touchant la presence des Anges dans les pierres precieuses. Mon
jugement seroit plustot que le mauvais esprit, qui se transforme en
Ange de lumiere se loge dans les pierres precieuses, √† fin que l'on ne
recoure pas √† Dieu, mais que l'on repose sa creance dans la pierre
precieuse; ainsi, peut-√™tre, il de√ßoit nos esprits par la turquoise:
car la turquoise est de deux sortes, les unes qui conservent leur
couleur et les autres qui la perdent.' _Anselm de Boot_, Book II.]

'You thus see,' resumed Zaleski, 'that the turquoise was believed to
have the property of changing its colour--a change which was
universally supposed to indicate the fading away and death of its
owner. The good De Boot, alas, believed this to be a property of too
many other stones beside, like the Hebrews in respect of their urim and
thummim; but in the case of the turquoise, at least, it is a
well-authenticated natural phenomenon, and I have myself seen such a
specimen. In some cases the change is a gradual process; in others it
may occur suddenly within an hour, especially when the gem, long kept
in the dark, is exposed to brilliant sunshine. I should say, however,
that in this metamorphosis there is always an intermediate stage: the
stone first changes from blue to a pale colour spotted with brown, and,
lastly, to a pure white. Thus, Ul-Jabal having stolen the stone, finds
that it is of the wrong colour, and soon after replaces it; he supposes
that in the darkness he has selected the wrong chalice, and so takes
the valueless stone from the other. This, too, he replaces, and,
infinitely puzzled, makes yet another hopeless trial of the Edmundsbury
chalice, and, again baffled, again replaces it, concluding now that the
baronet has suspected his designs, and substituted a false stone for
the real one. But after this last replacement, the stone assumes its
final hue of white, and thus the baronet is led to think that two
stones have been substituted by Ul-Jabal for his own invaluable gem.
All this while the gem was lying serenely in its place in the chalice.
And thus it came to pass that in the Manor-house of Saul there arose a
somewhat considerable Ado about Nothing.'

For a moment Zaleski paused; then, turning round and laying his hand on
the brown forehead of the mummy by his side, he said:

'My friend here could tell you, and he would, a fine tale of the
immensely important part which jewels in all ages have played in human
history, human religions, institutions, ideas. He flourished some five
centuries before the Messiah, was a Memphian priest of Amsu, and, as
the hieroglyphics on his coffin assure me, a prime favourite with one
Queen Amyntas. Beneath these mouldering swaddlings of the grave a great
ruby still cherishes its blood-guilty secret on the forefinger of his
right hand. Most curious is it to reflect how in _all_ lands, and at
_all_ times, precious minerals have been endowed by men with mystic
virtues. The Persians, for instance, believed that spinelle and the
garnet were harbingers of joy. Have you read the ancient Bishop of
Rennes on the subject? Really, I almost think there must be some truth
in all this. The instinct of universal man is rarely far at fault.
Already you have a semi-comic "gold-cure" for alcoholism, and you have
heard of the geophagism of certain African tribes. What if the
scientist of the future be destined to discover that the diamond, and
it alone, is a specific for cholera, that powdered rubellite cures
fever, and the chryso-beryl gout? It would be in exact conformity with
what I have hitherto observed of a general trend towards a certain
inborn perverseness and whimsicality in Nature.'

_Note_.--As some proof of the fineness of intuition evidenced by
Zaleski, as distinct from his more conspicuous powers of reasoning, I
may here state that some years after the occurrence of the tragedy I
have recorded above, the skeleton of a man was discovered in the vaults
of the Manor-house of Saul. I have not the least doubt that it was the
skeleton of Ul-Jabal. The teeth were very prominent. A rotten rope was
found loosely knotted round the vertebrae of his neck.




THE S.S.

'Wohlgeborne, gesunde Kinder bringen viel mit....

'Wenn die Natur verabscheut, so spricht sie es laut aus: das Gesch√∂pf,
das falsch lebt, wird fr√ºh zerst√∂rt. Unfruchtbarkeit, k√ºmmerliches
Dasein, fr√ºhzeitiges Zerfallen, das sind ihre Fl√ºche, die Kennzeichen
ihrer Strenge.' GOETHE. [Footnote: 'Well-made, healthy children bring
much into the world along with them....

'When Nature abhors, she speaks it aloud: the creature that lives with
a false life is soon destroyed. Unfruitfulness, painful existence,
early destruction, these are her curses, the tokens of her
displeasure.']

[Greek: Argos de andron echaerothae outo, oste oi douloi auton eschon
panta ta praegmata, archontes te kai diepontes, es ho epaebaesan hoi
ton apolomenon paides.] HERODOTUS. [Footnote: 'And Argos was so
depleted of Men (i.e. _after the battle with Cleomenes_) that the
slaves usurped everything--ruling and disposing--until such time as the
sons of the slain were grown up.']

To say that there are epidemics of suicide is to give expression to
what is now a mere commonplace of knowledge. And so far are they from
being of rare occurrence, that it has even been affirmed that every
sensational case of _felo de se_ published in the newspapers is sure to
be followed by some others more obscure: their frequency, indeed, is
out of all proportion with the _extent_ of each particular outbreak.
Sometimes, however, especially in villages and small townships, the
wildfire madness becomes an all-involving passion, emulating in its
fury the great plagues of history. Of such kind was the craze in
Versailles in 1793, when about a quarter of the whole population
perished by the scourge; while that at the _H√¥tel des Invalides_ in
Paris was only a notable one of the many which have occurred during the
present century. At such times it is as if the optic nerve of the mind
throughout whole communities became distorted, till in the noseless and
black-robed Reaper it discerned an angel of very loveliness. As a
brimming maiden, out-worn by her virginity, yields half-fainting to the
dear sick stress of her desire--with just such faintings, wanton fires,
does the soul, over-taxed by the continence of living, yield voluntary
to the grave, and adulterously make of Death its paramour.

   'When she sees a bank
   Stuck full of flowers, she, with a sigh, will tell
   Her servants, what a pretty place it were
   To bury lovers in; and make her maids
   Pluck 'em, and strew her over like a corse.'

[Footnote: Beaumont and Fletcher: _The Maid's Tragedy_.]

The _mode_ spreads--then rushes into rage: to breathe is to be
obsolete: to wear the shroud becomes _comme il faut_, this cerecloth
acquiring all the attractiveness and _√©clat_ of a wedding-garment. The
coffin is not too strait for lawless nuptial bed; and the sweet clods
of the valley will prove no barren bridegroom of a writhing progeny.
There is, however, nothing specially mysterious in the operation of a
pestilence of this nature: it is as conceivable, if not yet as
explicable, as the contagion of cholera, mind being at least as
sensitive to the touch of mind as body to that of body.

It was during the ever-memorable outbreak of this obscure malady in the
year 1875 that I ventured to break in on the calm of that deep Silence
in which, as in a mantle, my friend Prince Zaleski had wrapped himself.
I wrote, in fact, to ask him what he thought of the epidemic. His
answer was in the laconic words addressed to the Master in the house of
woe at Bethany:

'Come and see.'

To this, however, he added in postscript: 'but what epidemic?'

I had momentarily lost sight of the fact that Zaleski had so absolutely
cut himself off from the world, that he was not in the least likely to
know anything even of the appalling series of events to which I had
referred. And yet it is no exaggeration to say that those events had
thrown the greater part of Europe into a state of consternation, and
even confusion. In London, Manchester, Paris, and Berlin, especially
the excitement was intense. On the Sunday preceding the writing of my
note to Zaleski, I was present at a monster demonstration held in Hyde
Park, in which the Government was held up on all hands to the popular
derision and censure--for it will be remembered that to many minds the
mysterious accompaniments of some of the deaths daily occurring
conveyed a still darker significance than that implied in mere
self-destruction, and seemed to point to a succession of purposeless
and hideous murders. The demagogues, I must say, spoke with some
wildness and incoherence. Many laid the blame at the door of the
police, and urged that things would be different were they but placed
under municipal, instead of under imperial, control. A thousand
panaceas were invented, a thousand aimless censures passed. But the
people listened with vacant ear. Never have I seen the populace so
agitated, and yet so subdued, as with the sense of some impending doom.
The glittering eye betrayed the excitement, the pallor of the cheek the
doubt, the haunting _fear_. None felt himself quite safe; men
recognised shuddering the grin of death in the air. To tingle with
affright, and to know not why--that is the transcendentalism of terror.
The threat of the cannon's mouth is trivial in its effect on the mind
in comparison with the menace of a Shadow. It is the pestilence that
walketh _by night_ that is intolerable. As for myself, I confess to
being pervaded with a nameless and numbing awe during all those weeks.
And this feeling appeared to be general in the land. The journals had
but one topic; the party organs threw politics to the winds. I heard
that on the Stock Exchange, as in the Paris _Bourse_, business
decreased to a minimum. In Parliament the work of law-threshing
practically ceased, and the time of Ministers was nightly spent in
answering volumes of angry 'Questions,' and in facing motion after
motion for the 'adjournment' of the House.

It was in the midst of all this commotion that I received Prince
Zaleski's brief 'Come and see.' I was flattered and pleased: flattered,
because I suspected that to me alone, of all men, would such an
invitation, coming from him, be addressed; and pleased, because many a
time in the midst of the noisy city street and the garish, dusty world,
had the thought of that vast mansion, that dim and silent chamber,
flooded my mind with a drowsy sense of the romantic, till, from very
excess of melancholy sweetness in the picture, I was fain to close my
eyes. I avow that that lonesome room--gloomy in its lunar bath of soft
perfumed light--shrouded in the sullen voluptuousness of plushy,
narcotic-breathing draperies--pervaded by the mysterious spirit of its
brooding occupant--grew more and more on my fantasy, till the
remembrance had for me all the cool refreshment shed by a
midsummer-night's dream in the dewy deeps of some Perrhoebian grove of
cornel and lotos and ruby stars of the asphodel. It was, therefore, in
all haste that I set out to share for a time in the solitude of my
friend.

Zaleski's reception of me was most cordial; immediately on my entrance
into his sanctum he broke into a perfect torrent of wild, enthusiastic
words, telling me with a kind of rapture, that he was just then
laboriously engaged in co-ordinating to one of the calculi certain new
properties he had discovered in the parabola, adding with infinite
gusto his 'firm' belief that the ancient Assyrians were acquainted with
all our modern notions respecting the parabola itself, the projection
of bodies in general, and of the heavenly bodies in particular; and
must, moreover, from certain inferences of his own in connection with
the Winged Circle, have been conversant with the fact that light is not
an ether, but only the vibration of an ether. He then galloped on to
suggest that I should at once take part with him in his investigations,
and commented on the timeliness of my visit. I, on my part, was anxious
for his opinion on other and far weightier matters than the concerns of
the Assyrians, and intimated as much to him. But for two days he was
firm in his tacit refusal to listen to my story; and, concluding that
he was disinclined to undergo the agony of unrest with which he was
always tormented by any mystery which momentarily baffled him, I was,
of course, forced to hold my peace. On the third day, however, of his
own accord he asked me to what epidemic I had referred. I then detailed
to him some of the strange events which were agitating the mind of the
outside world. From the very first he was interested: later on that
interest grew into a passion, a greedy soul-consuming quest after the
truth, the intensity of which was such at last as to move me even to
pity.

I may as well here restate the facts as I communicated them to Zaleski.
The concatenation of incidents, it will be remembered, started with the
extraordinary death of that eminent man of science, Professor
Schleschinger, consulting laryngologist to the Charit√© Hospital in
Berlin. The professor, a man of great age, was on the point of
contracting his third marriage with the beautiful and accomplished
daughter of the Herr Geheimrath Otto von Friedrich. The contemplated
union, which was entirely one of those _mariages de convenance_ so
common in good society, sprang out of the professor's ardent desire to
leave behind him a direct heir to his very considerable wealth. By his
first two marriages, indeed, he had had large families, and was at this
very time surrounded by quite an army of little grandchildren, from
whom (all his direct descendants being dead) he might have been content
to select his heir; but the old German prejudices in these matters are
strong, and he still hoped to be represented on his decease by a son of
his own. To this whim the charming Ottilie was marked by her parents as
the victim. The wedding, however, had been postponed owing to a slight
illness of the veteran scientist, and just as he was on the point of
final recovery from it, death intervened to prevent altogether the
execution of his design. Never did death of man create a profounder
sensation; _never was death of man followed by consequences more
terrible_. The _Residenz_ of the scientist was a stately mansion near
the University in the _Unter den Linden_ boulevard, that is to say, in
the most fashionable _Quartier_ of Berlin. His bedroom from a
considerable height looked out on a small back garden, and in this room
he had been engaged in conversation with his colleague and medical
attendant, Dr. Johann Hofmeier, to a late hour of the night. During all
this time he seemed cheerful, and spoke quite lucidly on various
topics. In particular, he exhibited to his colleague a curious strip of
what looked like ancient papyrus, on which were traced certain
grotesque and apparently meaningless figures. This, he said, he had
found some days before on the bed of a poor woman in one of the
horribly low quarters that surround Berlin, on whom he had had occasion
to make a _post-mortem_ examination. The woman had suffered from
partial paralysis. She had a small young family, none of whom, however,
could give any account of the slip, except one little girl, who
declared that she had taken it 'from her mother's mouth' after death.
The slip was soiled, and had a fragrant smell, as though it had been
smeared with honey. The professor added that all through his illness he
had been employing himself by examining these figures. He was
convinced, he said, that they contained some archaeological
significance; but, in any case, he ceased not to ask himself how came a
slip of papyrus to be found in such a situation,--on the bed of a dead
Berlinerin of the poorest class? The story of its being taken from the
_mouth_ of the woman was, of course, unbelievable. The whole incident
seemed to puzzle, while it amused him; seemed to appeal to the
instinct--so strong in him--to investigate, to probe. For days, he
declared, he had been endeavouring, in vain, to make anything of the
figures. Dr. Hofmeier, too, examined the slip, but inclined to believe
that the figures--rude and uncouth as they were--were only such as
might be drawn by any school-boy in an idle moment. They consisted
merely of a man and a woman seated on a bench, with what looked like an
ornamental border running round them. After a pleasant evening's
scientific gossip, Dr. Hofmeier, a little after midnight, took his
departure from the bed-side. An hour later the servants were roused
from sleep by one deep, raucous cry proceeding from the professor's
room. They hastened to his door; it was locked on the inside; all was
still within. No answer coming to their calls, the door was broken in.
They found their master lying calm and dead on his bed. A window of the
room was open, but there was nothing to show that any one had entered
it. Dr. Hofmeier was sent for, and was soon on the scene. After
examining the body, he failed to find anything to account for the
sudden demise of his old friend and chief. One observation, however,
had the effect of causing him to tingle with horror. On his entrance he
had noticed, lying on the side of the bed, the piece of papyrus with
which the professor had been toying in the earlier part of the day, and
had removed it. But, as he was on the point of leaving the room, he
happened to approach the corpse once more, and bending over it, noticed
that the lips and teeth were slightly parted. Drawing open the now
stiffened jaws, he found--to his amazement, to his stupefaction--that,
neatly folded beneath the dead tongue, lay just such another piece of
papyrus as that which he had removed from the bed. He drew it out--it
was clammy. He put it to his nose,--it exhaled the fragrance of honey.
He opened it,--it was covered by figures. He compared them with the
figures on the other slip,--they were just so similar as two
draughtsmen hastily copying from a common model would make them. The
doctor was unnerved: he hurried homeward, and immediately submitted the
honey on the papyrus to a rigorous chemical analysis: he suspected
poison--a subtle poison--as the means of a suicide, grotesquely,
insanely accomplished. He found the fluid to be perfectly
innocuous,--pure honey, and nothing more.

The next day Germany thrilled with the news that Professor
Schleschinger had destroyed himself. For suicide, however, some of the
papers substituted murder, though of neither was there an atom of
actual proof. On the day following, three persons died by their own
hands in Berlin, of whom two were young members of the medical
profession; on the day following that, the number rose to nineteen,
Hamburg, Dresden, and Aachen joining in the frenzied death-dance;
within three weeks from the night on which Professor Schleschinger met
his unaccountable end, eight thousand persons in Germany, France, and
Great Britain, died in that startlingly sudden and secret manner which
we call 'tragic', many of them obviously by their own hands, many, in
what seemed the servility of a fatal imitativeness, with figured,
honey-smeared slips of papyrus beneath their tongues. Even now--now,
after years--I thrill intensely to recall the dread remembrance; but to
live through it, to breathe daily the mawkish, miasmatic atmosphere,
all vapid with the suffocating death--ah, it was terror too deep,
nausea too foul, for mortal bearing. Novalis has somewhere hinted at
the possibility (or the desirability) of a simultaneous suicide and
voluntary return by the whole human family into the sweet bosom of our
ancient Father--I half expected it was coming, had come, _then_. It was
as if the old, good-easy, meek-eyed man of science, dying, had left his
effectual curse on all the world, and had thereby converted
civilisation into one omnivorous grave, one universal charnel-house. I
spent several days in reading out to Zaleski accounts of particular
deaths as they had occurred. He seemed never to tire of listening,
lying back for the most part on the silver-cushioned couch, and wearing
an inscrutable mask. Sometimes he rose and paced the carpet with
noiseless foot-fall, his steps increasing to the swaying, uneven
velocity of an animal in confinement as a passage here or there
attracted him, and then subsiding into their slow regularity again. At
any interruption in the reading, he would instantly turn to me with a
certain impatience, and implore me to proceed; and when our stock of
matter failed, he broke out into actual anger that I had not brought
more with me. Henceforth the negro, Ham, using my trap, daily took a
double journey--one before sunrise, and one at dusk--to the nearest
townlet, from which he would return loaded with newspapers. With
unimaginable eagerness did both Zaleski and I seize, morning after
morning, and evening after evening, on these budgets, to gloat for long
hours over the ever-lengthening tale of death. As for him, sleep
forsook him. He was a man of small reasonableness, scorning the
limitations of human capacity; his palate brooked no meat when his
brain was headlong in the chase; even the mild narcotics which were now
his food and drink seemed to lose something of their power to mollify,
to curb him. Often rising from slumber in what I took to be the dead of
night--though of day or night there could be small certainty in that
dim dwelling--I would peep into the domed chamber, and see him there
under the livid-green light of the censer, the leaden smoke issuing
from his lips, his eyes fixed unweariedly on a square piece of ebony
which rested on the coffin of the mummy near him. On this ebony he had
pasted side by side several woodcuts--snipped from the newspapers--of
the figures traced on the pieces of papyrus found in the mouths of the
dead. I could see, as time passed, that he was concentrating all his
powers on these figures; for the details of the deaths themselves were
all of a dreary sameness, offering few salient points for
investigation. In those cases where the suicide had left behind him
clear evidence of the means by which he had committed the act, there
was nothing to investigate; the others--rich and poor alike, peer and
peasant--trooped out by thousands on the far journey, without leaving
the faintest footprint to mark the road by which they had gone.

This was perhaps the reason that, after a time, Zaleski discarded the
newspapers, leaving their perusal to me, and turned his attention
exclusively to the ebon tablet. Knowing as I full well did the daring
and success of his past spiritual adventures,--the subtlety, the
imagination, the imperial grip of his intellect,--I did not at all
doubt that his choice was wise, and would in the end be justified.
These woodcuts--now so notorious--were all exactly similar in design,
though minutely differing here and there in drawing. The following is a
facsimile of one of them taken by me at random:

[Illustration]

The time passed. It now began to be a grief to me to see the turgid
pallor that gradually overspread the always ashen countenance of
Zaleski; I grew to consider the ravaging life that glared and blazed in
his sunken eye as too volcanic, demonic, to be canny: the mystery, I
decided at last--if mystery there were--was too deep, too dark, for
him. Hence perhaps it was, that I now absented myself more and more
from him in the adjoining room in which I slept. There one day I sat
reading over the latest list of horrors, when I heard a loud cry from
the vaulted chamber. I rushed to the door and beheld him standing,
gazing with wild eyes at the ebon tablet held straight out in front of
him.

'By Heaven!' he cried, stamping savagely with his foot. 'By Heaven!
Then I certainly _am_ a fool! _It is the staff of Phaebus in the hand
of Hermes!'_

I hastened to him. 'Tell me,' I said, 'have you discovered anything?'

'It is possible.'

'And has there really been foul play--murder--in any of these deaths?'

'Of that, at least, I was certain from the first.'

'Great God!' I exclaimed, 'could any son of man so convert himself into
a fiend, a beast of the wilderness....'

'You judge precisely in the manner of the multitude,' he answered
somewhat petulantly. 'Illegal murder is always a mistake, but not
necessarily a crime. Remember Corday. But in cases where the murder of
one is really fiendish, why is it qualitatively less fiendish than the
murder of many? On the other hand, had Brutus slain a thousand
Caesars--each act involving an additional exhibition of the sublimest
self-suppression--he might well have taken rank as a saint in heaven.'

Failing for the moment to see the drift or the connection of the
argument, I contented myself with waiting events. For the rest of that
day and the next Zaleski seemed to have dismissed the matter of the
tragedies from his mind, and entered calmly on his former studies. He
no longer consulted the news, or examined the figures on the tablet.
The papers, however, still arrived daily, and of these he soon
afterwards laid several before me, pointing, with a curious smile, to a
small paragraph in each. These all appeared in the advertisement
columns, were worded alike, and read as follows:

'A true son of Lycurgus, _having news_, desires to know the _time_ and
_place_ of the next meeting of his Phyle. Address Zaleski, at R----
Abbey, in the county of M----.'

I gazed in mute alternation at the advertisement and at him. I may here
stop to make mention of a very remarkable sensation which my
association with him occasionally produced in me. I felt it with
intense, with unpleasant, with irritating keenness at this moment. It
was the sensation of being borne aloft--aloft--by a force external to
myself--such a sensation as might possibly tingle through an earthworm
when lifted into illimitable airy heights by the strongly-daring
pinions of an eagle. It was the feeling of being hurried out beyond
one's depth--caught and whiffed away by the all-compelling sweep of
some rabid vigour into a new, foreign element. Something akin I have
experienced in an 'express' as it raged with me--winged, rocking,
ecstatic, shrilling a dragon Aha!--round a too narrow curve. It was a
sensation very far from agreeable.

'To that,' he said, pointing to the paragraph, 'we may, I think,
shortly expect an answer. Let us only hope that when it comes it may be
immediately intelligible.'

We waited throughout the whole of that day and night, hiding our
eagerness under the pretence of absorption in our books. If by chance I
fell into an uneasy doze, I found him on waking ever watchful, and
poring over the great tome before him. About the time, however, when,
could we have seen it, the first grey of dawn must have been peeping
over the land, his impatience again became painful to witness; he rose
and paced the room, muttering occasionally to himself. This only
ceased, when, hours later, Ham entered the room with an envelope in his
hand. Zaleski seized it--tore it open--ran his eye over the
contents--and dashed it to the ground with an oath.

'Curse it!' he groaned. 'Ah, curse it! unintelligible--every syllable
of it!'

I picked up the missive and examined it. It was a slip of papyrus
covered with the design now so hideously familiar, except only that the
two central figures were wanting. At the bottom was written the date of
the 15th of November--it was then the morning of the 12th--and the name
'Morris.' The whole, therefore, presented the following appearance:

[Illustration]

My eyes were now heavy with sleep, every sense half-drunken with the
vapourlike atmosphere of the room, so that, having abandoned something
of hope, I tottered willingly to my bed, and fell into a profound
slumber, which lasted till what must have been the time of the
gathering in of the shades of night. I then rose. Missing Zaleski, I
sought through all the chambers for him. He was nowhere to be seen. The
negro informed me with an affectionate and anxious tremor in the voice
that his master had left the rooms some hours before, but had said
nothing to him. I ordered the man to descend and look into the sacristy
of the small chapel wherein I had deposited my _cal√®che_, and in the
field behind, where my horse should be. He returned with the news that
both had disappeared. Zaleski, I then concluded, had undoubtedly
departed on a journey.

I was deeply touched by the demeanour of Ham as the hours went by. He
wandered stealthily about the rooms like a lost being. It was like
matter sighing after, weeping over, spirit. Prince Zaleski had never
before withdrawn himself from the _surveillance_ of this sturdy
watchman, and his disappearance now was like a convulsion in their
little cosmos. Ham implored me repeatedly, if I could, to throw some
light on the meaning of this catastrophe. But I too was in the dark.
The Titanic frame of the Ethiopian trembled with emotion as in broken,
childish words he told me that he felt instinctively the approach of
some great danger to the person of his master. So a day passed away,
and then another. On the next he roused me from sleep to hand me a
letter which, on opening, I found to be from Zaleski. It was hastily
scribbled in pencil, dated 'London, Nov. 14th,' and ran thus:

'For my body--should I not return by Friday night--you will, no doubt,
be good enough to make search. _Descend_ the river, keeping constantly
to the left; consult the papyrus; and stop at the _Descensus Aesopi._
Seek diligently, and you will find. For the rest, you know my fancy for
cremation: take me, if you will, to the crematorium of _P√®re-Lachaise._
My whole fortune I decree to Ham, the Lybian.'

Ham was all for knowing the contents of this letter, but I refused to
communicate a word of it. I was dazed, I was more than ever perplexed,
I was appalled by the frenzy of Zaleski. Friday night! It was then
Thursday morning. And I was expected to wait through the dreary
interval uncertain, agonised, inactive! I was offended with my friend;
his conduct bore the interpretation of mental distraction. The leaden
hours passed all oppressively while I sought to appease the keenness of
my unrest with the anodyne of drugged sleep. On the next morning,
however, another letter--a rather massive one--reached me. The covering
was directed in the writing of Zaleski, but on it he had scribbled the
words: 'This need not be opened unless I fail to reappear before
Saturday.' I therefore laid the packet aside unread.

I waited all through Friday, resolved that at six o'clock, if nothing
happened, I should make some sort of effort. But from six I remained,
with eyes strained towards the doorway, until ten. I was so utterly at
a loss, my ingenuity was so entirely baffled by the situation, that I
could devise no course of action which did not immediately appear
absurd. But at midnight I sprang up--no longer would I endure the
carking suspense. I seized a taper, and passed through the door-way. I
had not proceeded far, however, when my light was extinguished. Then I
remembered with a shudder that I should have to pass through the whole
vast length of the building in order to gain an exit. It was an all but
hopeless task in the profound darkness to thread my way through the
labyrinth of halls and corridors, of tumble-down stairs, of bat-haunted
vaults, of purposeless angles and involutions; but I proceeded with
something of a blind obstinacy, groping my way with arms held out
before me. In this manner I had wandered on for perhaps a quarter of an
hour, when my fingers came into distinct momentary contact with what
felt like cold and humid human flesh. I shrank back, unnerved as I
already was, with a murmur of affright.

'Zaleski?' I whispered with bated breath.

Intently as I strained my ears, I could detect no reply. The hairs of
my head, catching terror from my fancies, erected themselves.

Again I advanced, and again I became aware of the sensation of contact.
With a quick movement I passed my hand upward and downward.

It was indeed he. He was half-reclining, half-standing against a wall
of the chamber: that he was not dead, I at once knew by his uneasy
breathing. Indeed, when, having chafed his hands for some time, I tried
to rouse him, he quickly recovered himself, and muttered: 'I fainted; I
want sleep--only sleep.' I bore him back to the lighted room, assisted
by Ham in the latter part of the journey. Ham's ecstasies were
infinite; he had hardly hoped to see his master's face again. His
garments being wet and soiled, the negro divested him of them, and
dressed him in a tightly-fitting scarlet robe of Babylonish pattern,
reaching to the feet, but leaving the lower neck and forearm bare, and
girt round the stomach by a broad gold-orphreyed _ceinture_. With all
the tenderness of a woman, the man stretched his master thus arrayed on
the couch. Here he kept an Argus guard while Zaleski, in one deep
unbroken slumber of a night and a day, reposed before him. When at last
the sleeper woke, in his eye,--full of divine instinct,--flitted the
wonted falchion-flash of the whetted, two-edged intellect; the secret,
austere, self-conscious smile of triumph curved his lip; not a trace of
pain or fatigue remained. After a substantial meal on nuts, autumn
fruits, and wine of Samos, he resumed his place on the couch; and I sat
by his side to hear the story of his wandering. He said:

'We have, Shiel, had before us a very remarkable series of murders, and
a very remarkable series of suicides. Were they in any way connected?
To this extent, I think--that the mysterious, the unparalleled nature
of the murders gave rise to a morbid condition in the public mind,
which in turn resulted in the epidemic of suicide. But though such an
epidemic has its origin in the instinct of imitation so common in men,
you must not suppose that the mental process is a _conscious_ one. A
person feels an impulse to go and do, and is not aware that at bottom
it is only an impulse to go and do _likewise_. He would indeed
repudiate such an assumption. Thus one man destroys himself, and
another imitates him--but whereas the former uses a pistol, the latter
uses a rope. It is rather absurd, therefore, to imagine that in any of
those cases in which the slip of papyrus has been found in the mouth
after death, the cause of death has been the slavish imitativeness of
the suicidal mania,--for this, as I say, is never _slavish._ The
papyrus then--quite apart from the unmistakable evidences of suicide
invariably left by each self-destroyer--affords us definite and certain
means by which we can distinguish the two classes of deaths; and we are
thus able to divide the total number into two nearly equal halves.

'But you start--you are troubled--you never heard or read of murder
such as this, the simultaneous murder of thousands over wide areas of
the face of the globe; here you feel is something outside your
experience, deeper than your profoundest imaginings. To the question
"by whom committed?" and "with what motive?" your mind can conceive no
possible answer. And yet the answer must be, "by man, and for human
motives,"--for the Angel of Death with flashing eye and flaming sword
is himself long dead; and again we can say at once, by no _one_ man,
but by many, a cohort, an army of men; and again, by no _common_ men,
but by men hellish (or heavenly) in cunning, in resource, in strength
and unity of purpose; men laughing to scorn the flimsy prophylactics of
society, separated by an infinity of self-confidence and spiritual
integrity from the ordinary easily-crushed criminal of our days.

'This much at least I was able to discover from the first; and
immediately I set myself to the detection of motive by a careful study
of each case. This, too, in due time, became clear to me,--but to
motive it may perhaps be more convenient to refer later on. What next
engaged my attention was the figures on the papyrus, and devoutly did I
hope that by their solution I might be able to arrive at some more
exact knowledge of the mystery.

'The figures round the border first attracted me, and the mere
_reading_ of them gave me very little trouble. But I was convinced that
behind their meaning thus read lay some deep esoteric significance; and
this, almost to the last, I was utterly unable to fathom. You perceive
that these border figures consist of waved lines of two different
lengths, drawings of snakes, triangles looking like the Greek delta,
and a heart-shaped object with a dot following it. These succeed one
another in a certain definite order on all the slips. What, I asked
myself, were these drawings meant to represent,--letters, numbers,
things, or abstractions? This I was the more readily able to determine
because I have often, in thinking over the shape of the Roman letter S,
wondered whether it did not owe its convolute form to an attempt on the
part of its inventor to make a picture of the _serpent;_ S being the
sibilant or hissing letter, and the serpent the hissing animal. This
view, I fancy (though I am not sure), has escaped the philologists, but
of course you know that all letters were originally _pictures of
things,_ and of what was S a picture, if not of the serpent? I
therefore assumed, by way of trial, that the snakes in the diagram
stood for a sibilant letter, that is, either C or S. And thence,
supposing this to be the case, I deduced: firstly, that all the other
figures stood for letters; and secondly, that they all appeared in the
form of pictures of the things of which those letters were originally
meant to be pictures. Thus the letter "m," one of the four "_liquid_"
consonants, is, as we now write it, only a shortened form of a waved
line; and as a waved line it was originally written, and was the
character by which _a stream of running water_ was represented in
writing; indeed it only owes its name to the fact that when the lips
are pressed together, and "m" uttered by a continuous effort, a certain
resemblance to the murmur of running water is produced. The longer
waved line in the diagram I therefore took to represent "m"; and it at
once followed that the shorter meant "n," for no two letters of the
commoner European alphabets differ only in length (as distinct from
shape) except "m" and "n", and "w" and "v"; indeed, just as the French
call "w" "double-ve," so very properly might "m" be called "double-en."
But, in this case, the longer not being "w," the shorter could not be
"v": it was therefore "n." And now there only remained the heart and
the triangle. I was unable to think of any letter that could ever have
been intended for the picture of a heart, but the triangle I knew to be
the letter #A.# This was originally written without the cross-bar from
prop to prop, and the two feet at the bottom of the props were not
separated as now, but joined; so that the letter formed a true
triangle. It was meant by the primitive man to be a picture of his
primitive house, this house being, of course, hut-shaped, and
consisting of a conical roof without walls. I had thus, with the
exception of the heart, disentangled the whole, which then (leaving a
space for the heart) read as follows:

     { ss
 'mn {    anan ... san.'
     { cc

But 'c' before 'a' being never a sibilant (except in some few so-called
'Romance' languages), but a guttural, it was for the moment discarded;
also as no word begins with the letters 'mn'--except 'mnemonics' and
its fellows--I concluded that a vowel must be omitted between these
letters, and thence that all vowels (except 'a') were omitted; again,
as the double 's' can never come after 'n' I saw that either a vowel
was omitted between the two 's's,' or that the first word ended after
the first 's.' Thus I got

'm ns sanan... san,'

or, supplying the now quite obvious vowels,

'mens sana in... sano.'

The heart I now knew represented the word 'corpore,' the Latin word for
'heart' being 'cor,' and the dot--showing that the word as it stood was
an abbreviation--conclusively proved every one of my deductions.

'So far all had gone flowingly. It was only when I came to consider the
central figures that for many days I spent my strength in vain. You
heard my exclamation of delight and astonishment when at last a ray of
light pierced the gloom. At no time, indeed, was I wholly in the dark
as to the _general_ significance of these figures, for I saw at once
their resemblance to the sepulchral reliefs of classical times. In case
you are not minutely acquainted with the _technique_ of these stones, I
may as well show you one, which I myself removed from an old grave in
Tarentum.'

He took from a niche a small piece of close-grained marble, about a
foot square, and laid it before me. On one side it was exquisitely
sculptured in relief.

'This,' he continued, 'is a typical example of the Greek grave-stone,
and having seen one specimen you may be said to have seen almost all,
for there is surprisingly little variety in the class. You will observe
that the scene represents a man reclining on a couch; in his hand he
holds a _patera,_ or dish, filled with grapes and pomegranates, and
beside him is a tripod bearing the viands from which he is banqueting.
At his feet sits a woman--for the Greek lady never reclined at table.
In addition to these two figures a horse's head, a dog, or a serpent
may sometimes be seen; and these forms comprise the almost invariable
pattern of all grave reliefs. Now, that this was the real model from
which the figures on the papyrus were taken I could not doubt, when I
considered the seemingly absurd fidelity with which in each murder the
papyrus, smeared with honey, was placed under the tongue of the victim.
I said to myself: it can only be that the assassins have bound
themselves to the observance of a strict and narrow ritual from which
no departure is under any circumstances permitted--perhaps for the sake
of signalling the course of events to others at a distance. But what
ritual? That question I was able to answer when I knew the answer to
these others,--why _under the tongue,_ and why _smeared with honey?_
For no reason, except that the Greeks (not the Romans till very late in
their history) always placed an _obolos,_ or penny, beneath the tongue
of the dead to pay his passage across the Stygian river of ghosts; for
no reason, except that to these same Greeks honey was a sacred fluid,
intimately associated in their minds with the mournful subject of
Death; a fluid with which the bodies of the deceased were anointed, and
sometimes--especially in Sparta and the Pelasgic South--embalmed; with
which libations were poured to Hermes Psuchopompos, conductor of the
dead to the regions of shade; with which offerings were made to all the
chthonic deities, and the souls of the departed in general. You
remember, for instance, the melancholy words of Helen addressed to
Hermione in _Orestes:_

 [Greek: _Kai labe choas tasd'en cheroin komas t'emas
 elthousa d'amphi ton Klutaimnaestras taphon
 melikrat'aphes galaktos oinopon t'achnaen._]

And so everywhere. The ritual then of the murderers was a _Greek_
ritual, their cult a Greek cult--preferably, perhaps, a South Greek
one, a Spartan one, for it was here that the highly conservative
peoples of that region clung longest and fondliest to this
semi-barbarous worship. This then being so, I was made all the more
certain of my conjecture that the central figures on the papyrus were
drawn from a Greek model.

'Here, however, I came to a standstill. I was infinitely puzzled by the
rod in the man's hand. In none of the Greek grave-reliefs does any such
thing as a rod make an appearance, except in one well-known example
where the god Hermes--generally represented as carrying the _caduceus_,
or staff, given him by Phoebus--appears leading a dead maiden to the
land of night. But in every other example of which I am aware the
sculpture represents a man _living_, not dead, banqueting _on earth_,
not in Hades, by the side of his living companion. What then could be
the significance of the staff in the hand of this living man? It was
only after days of the hardest struggle, the cruellest suspense, that
the thought flashed on me that the idea of Hermes leading away the dead
female might, in this case, have been carried one step farther; that
the male figure might be no living man, no man at all, but _Hermes
himself_ actually banqueting in Hades with the soul of his disembodied
_prot√©g√©e_! The thought filled me with a rapture I cannot describe, and
you witnessed my excitement. But, at all events, I saw that this was a
truly tremendous departure from Greek art and thought, to which in
general the copyists seemed to cling so religiously. There must
therefore be a reason, a strong reason, for vandalism such as this. And
that, at any rate, it was no longer difficult to discover; for now I
knew that the male figure was no mortal, but a god, a spirit, a DAEMON
(in the Greek sense of the word); and the female figure I saw by the
marked shortness of her drapery to be no Athenian, but a Spartan; no
matron either, but a maiden, a lass, a LASSIE; and now I had forced on
me lassie daemon, _Lacedaemon._

'This then was the badge, the so carefully-buried badge, of this
society of men. The only thing which still puzzled and confounded me at
this stage was the startling circumstance that a _Greek_ society should
make use of a _Latin_ motto. It was clear that either all my
conclusions were totally wrong, or else the motto _mens sana in corpore
sano_ contained wrapped up in itself some acroamatic meaning which I
found myself unable to penetrate, and which the authors had found no
Greek motto capable of conveying. But at any rate, having found this
much, my knowledge led me of itself one step further; for I perceived
that, widely extended as were their operations, the society was
necessarily in the main an _English,_ or at least an English-speaking
one--for of this the word "lassie" was plainly indicative: it was easy
now to conjecture London, the monster-city in which all things lose
themselves, as their head-quarters; and at this point in my
investigations I despatched to the papers the advertisement you have
seen.'

'But,' I exclaimed, 'even now I utterly fail to see by what mysterious
processes of thought you arrived at the wording of the advertisement;
even now it conveys no meaning to my mind.'

'That,' he replied,' will grow clear when we come to a right
understanding of the baleful _motive_ which inspired these men. I have
already said that I was not long in discovering it. There was only one
possible method of doing so--and that was, by all means, by any means,
to find out some condition or other common to every one of the victims
before death. It is true that I was unable to do this in some few
cases, but where I failed, I was convinced that my failure was due to
the insufficiency of the evidence at my disposal, rather than to the
actual absence of the condition. Now, let us take almost any two cases
you will, and seek for this common condition: let us take, for example,
the first two that attracted the attention of the world--the poor woman
of the slums of Berlin, and the celebrated man of science. Separated by
as wide an interval as they are, we shall yet find, if we look closely,
in each case the same pathetic tokens of the still uneliminated
_striae_ of our poor humanity. The woman is not an old woman, for she
has a "small young" family, which, had she lived, might have been
increased: notwithstanding which, she has suffered from hemiplegia,
"partial paralysis." The professor, too, has had not one, but two,
large families, and an "army of grand-children": but note well the
startling, the hideous fact, that _every one of his children is dead!_
The crude grave has gaped before the cock to suck in _every one_ of
those shrunk forms, so indigent of vital impulse, so pauper of civism,
lust, so draughty, so vague, so lean--but not before they have had time
to dower with the ah and wo of their infirmity a whole wretched "army
of grand-children." And yet this man of wisdom is on the point, in his
old age, of marrying once again, of producing for the good of his race
still more of this poor human stuff. You see the lurid significance,
the point of resemblance,--you see it? And, O heaven, is it not too
sad? For me, I tell you, the whole business has a tragic pitifulness
too deep for words. But this brings me to the discussion of a large
matter. It would, for instance, be interesting to me to hear what you,
a modern European, saturated with all the notions of your little day,
what _you_ consider the supreme, the all-important question for the
nations of Europe at this moment. Am I far wrong in assuming that you
would rattle off half a dozen of the moot points agitating rival
factions in your own land, select one of them, and call that "the
question of the hour"? I wish I could see as you see; I wish to God I
did not see deeper. In order to lead you to my point, what, let me ask
you, what _precisely_ was it that ruined the old nations--that brought,
say Rome, to her knees at last? Centralisation, you say, top-heavy
imperialism, dilettante pessimism, the love of luxury. At bottom,
believe me, it was not one of these high-sounding things--it was simply
War; the sum total of the battles of centuries. But let me explain
myself: this is a novel view to you, and you are perhaps unable to
conceive how or why war was so fatal to the old world, because you see
how little harmful it is to the new. If you collected in a promiscuous
way a few millions of modern Englishmen and slew them all
simultaneously, what, think you, would be the effect from the point of
view of the State? The effect, I conceive, would be indefinitely small,
wonderfully transitory; there would, of course, be a momentary lacuna
in the boiling surge: yet the womb of humanity is full of sap, and
uberant; Ocean-tide, wooed of that Ilithyia whose breasts are many,
would flow on, and the void would soon be filled. But the effect would
only be thus insignificant, if, as I said, your millions were taken
promiscuously (as in the modern army), not if they were _picked_
men----in _that_ case the loss (or gain) would be excessive, and
permanent for all time. Now, the war-hosts of the ancient
commonwealths--not dependent on the mechanical contrivances of the
modern army--were necessarily composed of the very best men: the
strong-boned, the heart-stout, the sound in wind and limb. Under these
conditions the State shuddered through all her frame, thrilled adown
every filament, at the death of a single one of her sons in the field.
As only the feeble, the aged, bided at home, their number after each
battle became larger _in proportion to the whole_ than before. Thus the
nation, more and more, with ever-increasing rapidity, declined in
bodily, and of course spiritual, quality, until the _end_ was reached,
and Nature swallowed up the weaklings whole; and thus war, which to the
modern state is at worst the blockhead and indecent _affaires
d'honneur_ of persons in office--and which, surely, before you and I
die will cease altogether--was to the ancient a genuine and
remorselessly fatal scourge.

'And now let me apply these facts to the Europe of our own time. We no
longer have world-serious war--but in its place we have a scourge, the
effect of which on the modern state is _precisely the same_ as the
effect of war on the ancient, only,--in the end,--far more destructive,
far more subtle, sure, horrible, disgusting. The name of this
pestilence is Medical Science. Yes, it is most true, shudder
--shudder--as you will! Man's best friend turns to an asp in his
bosom to sting him to the basest of deaths. The devastating growth of
medical, and especially surgical, science--that, if you like, for us
all, is "the question of the hour!" And what a question! of what
surpassing importance, in the presence of which all other "questions"
whatever dwindle into mere academic triviality. For just as the ancient
State was wounded to the heart through the death of her healthy sons in
the field, just so slowly, just so silently, is the modern receiving
deadly hurt by the botching and tinkering of her unhealthy children.
The net result is in each case the same--the altered ratio of the total
amount of reproductive health to the total amount of reproductive
disease. They recklessly spent their best; we sedulously conserve our
worst; and as they pined and died of anaemia, so we, unless we repent,
must perish in a paroxysm of black-blood apoplexy. And this prospect
becomes more certain, when you reflect that the physician as we know
him is not, like other men and things, a being of gradual growth, of
slow evolution: from Adam to the middle of the last century the world
saw nothing even in the least resembling him. No son of Paian _he_, but
a fatherless, full-grown birth from the incessant matrix of Modern
Time, so motherly of monstrous litters of "Gorgon and Hydra and
Chimaeras dire"; you will understand what I mean when you consider the
quite recent date of, say, the introduction of anaesthetics or
antiseptics, the discovery of the knee-jerk, bacteriology, or even of
such a doctrine as the circulation of the blood. We are at this very
time, if I mistake not, on the verge of new insights which will enable
man to laugh at disease--laugh at it in the sense of over-ruling its
natural tendency to produce death, not by any means in the sense of
destroying its ever-expanding _existence_. Do you know that at this
moment your hospitals are crammed with beings in human likeness
suffering from a thousand obscure and subtly-ineradicable ills, all of
whom, if left alone, would die almost at once, but ninety in the
hundred of whom will, as it is, be sent forth "cured," like
missionaries of hell, and the horrent shapes of Night and Acheron, to
mingle in the pure river of humanity the poison-taint of their protean
vileness? Do you know that in your schools one-quarter of the children
are already purblind? Have you gauged the importance of your tremendous
consumption of quack catholicons, of the fortunes derived from their
sale, of the spread of modern nervous disorders, of toothless youth and
thrice loathsome age among the helot-classes? Do you know that in the
course of my late journey to London, I walked from Piccadilly Circus to
Hyde Park Corner, during which time I observed some five hundred
people, of whom twenty-seven only were perfectly healthy, well-formed
men, and eighteen healthy, beautiful women? On every hand--with a
thrill of intensest joy, I say it!--is to be seen, if not yet
commencing civilisation, then progress, progress--wide as the
world--toward it: only here--at the heart--is there decadence, fatty
degeneration. Brain-evolution--and favouring airs--and the ripening
time--and the silent Will of God, of God--all these in conspiracy seem
to be behind, urging the whole ship's company of us to some undreamable
luxury of glory--when lo, this check, artificial, evitable. Less death,
more disease--that is the sad, the unnatural record; children
especially--so sensitive to the physician's art--living on by hundreds
of thousands, bearing within them the germs of wide-spreading sorrow,
who in former times would have died. And if you consider that the
proper function of the doctor is the strictly limited one of curing the
curable, rather than of self-gloriously perpetuating the incurable, you
may find it difficult to give a quite rational answer to this simple
question: _why?_ Nothing is so sure as that to the unit it is a
cruelty; nothing so certain as that to humanity it is a wrong; to say
that such and such an one was sent by the All Wise, and must
_therefore_ be not merely permitted, but elaborately coaxed and forced,
to live, is to utter a blasphemy against Man at which even the ribald
tongue of a priest might falter; and as a matter of fact, society, in
just contempt for this species of argument, never hesitates to hang,
for its own imagined good, its heaven-sent catholics, protestants,
sheep, sheep-stealers, etc. What then, you ask, would I do with these
unholy ones? To save the State would I pierce them with a sword, or
leave them to the slow throes of their agonies? Ah, do not expect me to
answer that question--I do not know what to answer. The whole spirit of
the present is one of a broad and beautiful, if quite thoughtless,
humanism, and I, a child of the present, cannot but be borne along by
it, coerced into sympathy with it. "Beautiful" I say: for if anywhere
in the world you have seen a sight more beautiful than a group of
hospital _savants_ bending with endless scrupulousness over a little
pauper child, concentering upon its frailty the whole human skill and
wisdom of ages, so have not I. Here have you the full realisation of a
parable diviner than that of the man who went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho. Beautiful then; with at least surface beauty, like the serpent
_lachesis mutus_; but, like many beautiful things, deadly too,
_in_human. And, on the whole, an answer will have to be found. As for
me, it is a doubt which has often agitated me, whether the central
dogma of Judaism and Christianity alike can, after all, be really one
of the inner verities of this our earthly being--the dogma, that by the
shedding of the innocent blood, and by that alone, shall the race of
man find cleansing and salvation. Will no agony of reluctance overcome
the necessity that one man die, "so that the whole people perish not"?
Can it be true that by nothing less than the "three days of pestilence"
shall the land be purged of its stain, and is this old divine
alternative about to confront us in new, modern form? Does the
inscrutable Artemis indeed demand offerings of human blood to suage her
anger? Most sad that man should ever need, should ever have needed, to
foul his hand in the [Greek: musaron aima] of his own veins! But what
is, is. And can it be fated that the most advanced civilisation of the
future shall needs have in it, as the first and chief element of its
glory, the most barbarous of all the rituals of barbarism--the
immolation of hecatombs which wail a muling human wail? Is it indeed
part of man's strange destiny through the deeps of Time that he one day
bow his back to the duty of pruning himself as a garden, so that he run
not to a waste wilderness? Shall the physician, the _accoucheur,_ of
the time to come be expected, and commanded, to do on the ephod and
breast-plate, anoint his head with the oil of gladness, and add to the
function of healer the function of Sacrificial Priest? These you say,
are wild, dark questions. Wild enough, dark enough. We know how
Sparta--the "man-taming Sparta" Simonides calls her--answered them.
Here was the complete subordination of all unit-life to the well-being
of the Whole. The child, immediately on his entry into the world, fell
under the control of the State: it was not left to the judgment of his
parents, as elsewhere, whether he should be brought up or not, but a
commission of the Phyle in which he was born decided the question. If
he was weakly, if he had any bodily unsightliness, he was exposed on a
place called Taygetus, and so perished. It was a consequence of this
that never did the sun in his course light on man half so godly
stalwart, on woman half so houri-lovely, as in stern and stout old
Sparta. Death, like all mortal, they must bear; disease, once and for
all, they were resolved to have done with. The word which they used to
express the idea "ugly," meant also "hateful," "vile," "disgraceful"
--and I need hardly point out to you the significance of that
fact alone; for they considered--and rightly--that there is no
sort of natural reason why every denizen of earth should not be
perfectly hale, integral, sane, beautiful--if only very moderate pains
be taken to procure this divine result. One fellow, indeed, called
Nancleidas, grew a little too fat to please the sensitive eyes of the
Spartans: I believe he was periodically whipped. Under a system so very
barbarous, the super-sweet, egoistic voice of the club-footed poet
Byron would, of course, never have been heard: one brief egoistic
"lament" on Taygetus, and so an end. It is not, however, certain that
the world could not have managed very well without Lord Byron. The one
thing that admits of no contradiction is that it cannot manage without
the holy citizen, and that disease, to men and to nations, can have but
one meaning, annihilation near or ultimate. At any rate, from these
remarks, you will now very likely be able to arrive at some
understanding of the wording of the advertisements which I sent to the
papers.'

Zaleski, having delivered himself of this singular _tirade_, paused:
replaced the sepulchral relief in its niche: drew a drapery of silver
cloth over his bare feet and the hem of his antique garment of Babylon:
and then continued:

'After some time the answer to the advertisement at length arrived; but
what was my disgust to find that it was perfectly unintelligible to me.
I had asked for a date and an address: the reply came giving a date,
and an address, too--but an address wrapped up in cypher, which, of
course, I, as a supposed member of the society, was expected to be able
to read. At any rate, I now knew the significance of the incongruous
circumstance that the Latin proverb _mens sana etc._ should be adopted
as the motto of a Greek society; the significance lay in this, that the
motto _contained an address_--the address of their meeting-place, or at
least, of their chief meeting-place. I was now confronted with the task
of solving--and of solving quickly, without the loss of an hour--this
enigma; and I confess that it was only by the most violent and
extraordinary concentration of what I may call the dissecting faculty,
that I was able to do so in good time. And yet there was no special
difficulty in the matter. For looking at the motto as it stood in
cypher, the first thing I perceived was that, in order to read the
secret, the heart-shaped figure must be left out of consideration, if
there was any _consistency_ in the system of cyphers at all, for it
belonged to a class of symbols quite distinct from that of all the
others, not being, like them, a picture-letter. Omitting this,
therefore, and taking all the other vowels and consonants whether
actually represented in the device or not, I now got the proverb in the
form _mens sana in ... pore sano._ I wrote this down, and what
instantly struck me was the immense, the altogether unusual, number of
_liquids_ in the motto--six in all, amounting to no less than one-third
of the total number of letters! Putting these all together you get
_mnnnnr_, and you can see that the very appearance of the "m's" and
"n's" (especially when _written_) running into one another, of itself
suggests a stream of water. Having previously arrived at the conclusion
of London as the meeting-place, I could not now fail to go on to the
inference of _the Thames_; there, or near there, would I find those
whom I sought. The letters "mnnnnr," then, meant the Thames: what did
the still remaining letters mean? I now took these remaining letters,
placing them side by side: I got aaa, sss, ee, oo, p and i. Juxtaposing
these nearly in the order indicated by the frequency of their
occurrence, and their place in the Roman alphabet, you at once and
inevitably get the word _Aesopi._ And now I was fairly startled by this
symmetrical proof of the exactness of my own deductions in other
respects, but, above all, far above all, by the occurrence of that word
_"Aesopi."_ For who was Aesopus? He was a slave who was freed for his
wise and witful sallies: he is therefore typical of the liberty of the
wise--their moral manumission from temporary and narrow law; he was
also a close friend of Croesus: he is typical, then, of the union of
wisdom with wealth--true wisdom with real wealth; lastly, and above
all, he was thrown by the Delphians from a rock on account of his wit:
he is typical, therefore, of death--the shedding of blood--as a result
of wisdom, this thought being an elaboration of Solomon's great maxim,
"in much wisdom is much sorrow." But how accurately all this fitted in
with what would naturally be the doctrines of the men on whose track I
was! I could no longer doubt the justness of my reasonings, and
immediately, while you slept, I set off for London.

'Of my haps in London I need not give you a very particular account.
The meeting was to be held on the 15th, and by the morning of the 13th
I had reached a place called Wargrave, on the Thames. There I hired a
light canoe, and thence proceeded down the river in a somewhat zig-zag
manner, narrowly examining the banks on either side, and keeping a
sharp out-look for some board, or sign, or house, that would seem to
betoken any sort of connection with the word "Aesopi." In this way I
passed a fruitless day, and having reached the shipping region, made
fast my craft, and in a spirit of _diablerie_ spent the night in a
common lodging-house, in the company of the most remarkable human
beings, characterised by an odour of alcohol, and a certain obtrusive
_bonne camaraderie_ which the prevailing fear of death could not
altogether repress. By dawn of the 14th I was on my journey again--on,
and ever on. Eagerly I longed for a sight of the word I sought: but I
had misjudged the men against whose cunning I had measured my own. I
should have remembered more consistently that they were no ordinary
men. As I was destined to find, there lay a deeper, more cabalistic
meaning in the motto than any I had been able to dream of. I had
proceeded on my pilgrimage down the river a long way past Greenwich,
and had now reached a desolate and level reach of land stretching away
on either hand. Paddling my boat from the right to the left bank, I
came to a spot where a little arm of the river ran up some few yards
into the land. The place wore a specially dreary and deserted aspect:
the land was flat, and covered with low shrubs. I rowed into this arm
of shallow water and rested on my oar, wearily bethinking myself what
was next to be done. Looking round, however, I saw to my surprise that
at the end of this arm there was a short narrow pathway--a winding
road--leading from the river-bank. I stood up in the boat and followed
its course with my eyes. It was met by another road also winding among
the bushes, but in a slightly different direction. At the end of this
was a little, low, high-roofed, round house, without doors or windows.
And then--and then--tingling now with a thousand raptures--I beheld a
pool of water near this structure, and then another low house, a
counterpart of the first--and then, still leading on in the same
direction, another pool--and then a great rock, heart-shaped--and then
another winding road--and then another pool of water. All was a
model--_exact to the minutest particular_--of the device on the
papyrus! The first long-waved line was the river itself; the three
short-waved lines were the arm of the river and the two pools; the
three snakes were the three winding roads; the two triangles
representing the letter #A# were the two high-roofed round houses; the
heart was the rock! I sprang, now thoroughly excited, from the boat,
and ran in headlong haste to the end of the last lake. Here there was a
rather thick and high growth of bushes, but peering among them, my eye
at once caught a white oblong board supported on a stake: on this, in
black letters, was marked the words, "DESCENSUS AESOPI." It was
necessary, therefore, to go _down_: the meeting-place was subterranean.
It was without difficulty that I discovered a small opening in the
ground, half hidden by the underwood; from the orifice I found that a
series of wooden steps led directly downwards, and I at once boldly
descended. No sooner, however, had I touched the bottom than I was
confronted by an ancient man in Hellenic apparel, armed with the Greek
_ziphos_ and _pelt√®_. His eyes, accustomed to the gloom, pierced me
long with an earnest scrutiny.

'"You are a Spartan?" he asked at length.

'"Yes," I answered promptly.

'"Then how is it you do not know that I am stone deaf?"

'I shrugged, indicating that for the moment I had forgotten the fact.

'"You _are_ a Spartan?" he repeated.

'I nodded with emphasis.

'"Then, how is it you omit to make the sign?"

'Now, you must not suppose that at this point I was nonplussed, for in
that case you would not give due weight to the strange inherent power
of the mind to rise to the occasion of a sudden emergency--to stretch
itself long to the length of an event; I do not hesitate to say that
_no_ combination of circumstances can defeat a vigorous brain fully
alert, and in possession of itself. With a quickness to which the
lightning-flash is tardy, I remembered that this was a spot indicated
by the symbols on the papyrus: I remembered that this same papyrus was
always placed under the _tongue_ of the dead; I remembered, too, that
among that very nation whose language had afforded the motto, to "turn
up the _thumb_" (_pollicem vertere_) was a symbol significant of death.
I touched the under surface of my tongue with the tip of my thumb. The
aged man was appeased. I passed on, and examined the place.

'It was simply a vast circular hall, the arched roof of which was
supported on colonnades of what I took to be pillars of porphyry. Down
the middle and round the sides ran tables of the same material; the
walls were clothed in hangings of sable velvet, on which, in infinite
reproduction, was embroidered in cypher the motto of the society. The
chairs were cushioned in the same stuff. Near the centre of the circle
stood a huge statue, of what really seemed to me to be pure beaten
gold. On the great ebon base was inscribed the word [Greek: LUKURGOS].
From the roof swung by brazen chains a single misty lamp.

'Having seen this much I reascended to the land of light, and being
fully resolved on attending the meeting on the next day or night, and
not knowing what my fate might then be, I wrote to inform you of the
means by which my body might be traced.  'But on the next day a new
thought occurred to me: I reasoned thus: "these men are not common
assassins; they wage a too rash warfare against diseased life, but not
against life in general. In all probability they have a quite
immoderate, quite morbid reverence for the sanctity of healthy life.
They will not therefore take mine, _unless_ they suppose me to be the
only living outsider who has a knowledge of their secret, and therefore
think it absolutely necessary for the carrying out of their beneficent
designs that my life should be sacrificed. I will therefore prevent
such a motive from occurring to them by communicating to another their
whole secret, and--if the necessity should arise--_letting them know_
that I have done so, without telling them who that other is. Thus my
life will be assured." I therefore wrote to you on that day a full
account of all I had discovered, giving you to understand, however, on
the envelope, that you need not examine the contents for some little
time.

'I waited in the subterranean vault during the greater part of the next
day; but not till midnight did the confederates gather. What happened
at that meeting I shall not disclose, even to you. All was
sacred--solemn--full of awe. Of the choral hymns there sung, the
hierophantic ritual, liturgies, paeans, the gorgeous symbolisms--of the
wealth there represented, the culture, art, self-sacrifice--of the
mingling of all the tongues of Europe--I shall not speak; nor shall I
repeat names which you would at once recognise as familiar to
you--though I may, perhaps, mention that the "Morris," whose name
appears on the papyrus sent to me is a well-known _litt√©rateur_ of that
name. But this in confidence, for some years at least.

'Let me, however, hurry to a conclusion. My turn came to speak. I rose
undaunted, and calmly disclosed myself; during the moment of hush, of
wide-eyed paralysis that ensued, I declared that fully as I coincided
with their views in general, I found myself unable to regard their
methods with approval--these I could not but consider too rash, too
harsh, too premature. My voice was suddenly drowned by one universal,
earth-shaking roar of rage and contempt, during which I was surrounded
on all sides, seized, pinioned, and dashed on the central table. All
this time, in the hope and love of life, I passionately shouted that I
was not the only living being who shared in their secret. But my voice
was drowned, and drowned again, in the whirling tumult. None heard me.
A powerful and little-known anaesthetic--the means by which all their
murders have been accomplished--was now produced. A cloth, saturated
with the fluid, was placed on my mouth and nostrils. I was stifled.
Sense failed. The incubus of the universe blackened down upon my brain.
How I tugged at the mandrakes of speech! was a locked pugilist with
language! In the depth of my extremity the half-thought, I remember,
floated, like a mist, through my fading consciousness, that now
perhaps--now--there was silence around me; that _now,_ could my palsied
lips find dialect, I should be heard, and understood. My whole soul
rose focussed to the effort--my body jerked itself upwards. At that
moment I knew my spirit truly great, genuinely sublime. For I _did_
utter something--my dead and shuddering tongue _did_ babble forth some
coherency. Then I fell back, and all was once more the ancient Dark. On
the next day when I woke, I was lying on my back in my little boat,
placed there by God knows whose hands. At all events, one thing was
clear--I _had_ uttered something--I was saved. With what of strength
remained to me I reached the place where I had left your _cal√®che_, and
started on my homeward way. The necessity to sleep was strong upon me,
for the fumes of the anaesthetic still clung about my brain; hence,
after my long journey, I fainted on my passage through the house, and
in this condition you found me.

'Such then is the history of my thinkings and doings in connection with
this ill-advised confraternity: and now that their cabala is known to
others--to how many others _they_ cannot guess--I think it is not
unlikely that we shall hear little more of the Society of Sparta.'

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Prince Zaleski, by M.P. Shiel

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10709 ***
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The AEneids of Virgil, by Virgil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The AEneids of Virgil
       Done into English Verse

Author: Virgil

Translator: William Morris

Release Date: July 9, 2009 [EBook #29358]
[Last updated: September 25, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AENEIDS OF VIRGIL ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net







THE AENEIDS OF VIRGIL

DONE INTO ENGLISH VERSE

BY

WILLIAM MORRIS

AUTHOR OF 'THE EARTHLY PARADISE'

_THIRD IMPRESSION_

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
NEW YORK AND BOMBAY

1900




THE AENEIDS OF VIRGIL.




BOOK I.

ARGUMENT.

AENEAS AND HIS TROJANS BEING DRIVEN TO LIBYA BY A TEMPEST, HAVE GOOD
WELCOME OF DIDO, QUEEN OF CARTHAGE.

    _Lo I am he who led the song through slender reed to cry,_
    _And then, come forth from out the woods, the fields that are thereby_
    _In woven verse I bade obey the hungry tillers' need:_
    _Now I, who sang their merry toil, sing Mars and dreadful deed._


    I sing of arms, I sing of him, who from the Trojan land
    Thrust forth by Fate, to Italy and that Lavinian strand
    First came: all tost about was he on earth and on the deep
    By heavenly might for Juno's wrath, that had no mind to sleep:
    And plenteous war he underwent ere he his town might frame
    And set his Gods in Latian earth, whence is the Latin name,
    And father-folk of Alba-town, and walls of mighty Rome.

    Say, Muse, what wound of godhead was whereby all this must come,
    How grieving, she, the Queen of Gods, a man so pious drave
    To win such toil, to welter on through such a troublous wave:         10
    --Can anger in immortal minds abide so fierce and fell?

    There was a city of old time where Tyrian folk did dwell,
    Called Carthage, facing far away the shores of Italy
    And Tiber-mouth; fulfilled of wealth and fierce in arms was she,
    And men say Juno loved her well o'er every other land,
    Yea e'en o'er Samos: there were stored the weapons of her hand,
    And there her chariot: even then she cherished the intent
    To make her Lady of all Lands, if Fate might so be bent;
    Yet had she heard how such a stem from Trojan blood should grow,
    As, blooming fair, the Tyrian towers should one day overthrow,        20
    That thence a folk, kings far and wide, most noble lords of fight,
    Should come for bane of Libyan land: such web the Parcae dight.
    The Seed of Saturn, fearing this, and mindful how she erst
    For her beloved Argive walls by Troy the battle nursed--
    --Nay neither had the cause of wrath nor all those hurts of old
    Failed from her mind: her inmost heart still sorely did enfold
    That grief of body set at nought in Paris' doomful deed,
    The hated race, and honour shed on heaven-rapt Ganymede--
    So set on fire, that Trojan band o'er all the ocean tossed,
    Those gleanings from Achilles' rage, those few the Greeks had lost,   30
    She drave far off the Latin Land: for many a year they stray
    Such wise as Fate would drive them on by every watery way.
    --Lo, what there was to heave aloft in fashioning of Rome!

    Now out of sight of Sicily the Trojans scarce were come
    And merry spread their sails abroad and clave the sea with brass,
    When Juno's heart, who nursed the wound that never thence would pass,
    Spake out:
               "And must I, vanquished, leave the deed I have begun,
    Nor save the Italian realm a king who comes of Teucer's son?
    The Fates forbid it me forsooth? And Pallas, might not she
    Burn up the Argive fleet and sink the Argives in the sea              40
    For Oileus' only fault and fury that he wrought?
    She hurled the eager fire of Jove from cloudy dwelling caught,
    And rent the ships and with the wind the heaped-up waters drew,
    And him a-dying, and all his breast by wildfire smitten through,
    The whirl of waters swept away on spiky crag to bide.
    While I, who go forth Queen of Gods, the very Highest's bride
    And sister, must I wage a war for all these many years
    With one lone race? What! is there left a soul that Juno fears
    Henceforth? or will one suppliant hand gifts on mine altar lay?"

    So brooding in her fiery heart the Goddess went her way               50
    Unto the fatherland of storm, full fruitful of the gale,
    AEolia hight, where AEolus is king of all avail,
    And far adown a cavern vast the bickering of the winds
    And roaring tempests of the world with bolt and fetter binds:
    They set the mountains murmuring much, a-growling angrily
    About their bars, while AEolus sits in his burg on high,
    And, sceptre-holding, softeneth them, and strait their wrath doth keep:
    Yea but for that the earth and sea, and vault of heaven the deep,
    They eager-swift would roll away and sweep adown of space:
    For fear whereof the Father high in dark and hollow place             60
    Hath hidden them, and high above a world of mountains thrown
    And given them therewithal a king, who, taught by law well known,
    Now draweth, and now casteth loose the reins that hold them in:
    To whom did suppliant Juno now in e'en such words begin:

    "The Father of the Gods and men hath given thee might enow,
    O AEolus, to smooth the sea, and make the storm-wind blow.
    Hearken! a folk, my very foes, saileth the Tyrrhene main
    Bearing their Troy to Italy, and Gods that were but vain:
    Set on thy winds, and overwhelm their sunken ships at sea,
    Or prithee scattered cast them forth, things drowned diversedly.      70
    Twice seven nymphs are in my house of body passing fair:
    Of whom indeed Deiopea is fairest fashioned there.
    I give her thee in wedlock sure, and call her all thine own
    To wear away the years with thee, for thy deserving shown
    To me this day; of offspring fair she too shall make thee sire."

    To whom spake AEolus: "O Queen, to search out thy desire
    Is all thou needest toil herein; from me the deed should wend.
    Thou mak'st my realm; the sway of all, and Jove thou mak'st my friend,
    Thou givest me to lie with Gods when heavenly feast is dight,
    And o'er the tempest and the cloud thou makest me of might."          80

    Therewith against the hollow hill he turned him spear in hand
    And hurled it on the flank thereof, and as an ordered band
    By whatso door the winds rush out o'er earth in whirling blast,
    And driving down upon the sea its lowest deeps upcast.
    The East, the West together there, the Afric, that doth hold
    A heart fulfilled of stormy rain, huge billows shoreward rolled.
    Therewith came clamour of the men and whistling through the shrouds
    And heaven and day all suddenly were swallowed by the clouds
    Away from eyes of Teucrian men; night on the ocean lies,
    Pole thunders unto pole, and still with wildfire glare the skies,     90
    And all things hold the face of death before the seamen's eyes.

    Now therewithal AEneas' limbs grew weak with chilly dread,
    He groaned, and lifting both his palms aloft to heaven, he said:
    "O thrice and four times happy ye, that had the fate to fall
    Before your fathers' faces there by Troy's beloved wall!
    Tydides, thou of Danaan folk the mightiest under shield,
    Why might I never lay me down upon the Ilian field,
    Why was my soul forbid release at thy most mighty hand,
    Where eager Hector stooped and lay before Achilles' wand,
    Where huge Sarpedon fell asleep, where Simois rolls along            100
    The shields of men, and helms of men, and bodies of the strong?"

    Thus as he cried the whistling North fell on with sudden gale
    And drave the seas up toward the stars, and smote aback the sail;
    Then break the oars, the bows fall off, and beam on in the trough
    She lieth, and the sea comes on a mountain huge and rough.
    These hang upon the topmost wave, and those may well discern
    The sea's ground mid the gaping whirl: with sand the surges churn.
    Three keels the South wind cast away on hidden reefs that lie
    Midmost the sea, the Altars called by men of Italy,
    A huge back thrusting through the tide: three others from the deep   110
    The East toward straits, and swallowing sands did miserably sweep,
    And dashed them on the shoals, and heaped the sand around in ring:
    And one, a keel the Lycians manned, with him, the trusty King
    Orontes, in AEneas' sight a toppling wave o'erhung,
    And smote the poop, and headlong rolled, adown the helmsman flung;
    Then thrice about the driving flood hath hurled her as she lay,
    The hurrying eddy swept above and swallowed her from day:
    And lo! things swimming here and there, scant in the unmeasured seas,
    The arms of men, and painted boards, and Trojan treasuries.
    And now Ilioneus' stout ship, her that Achates leal                  120
    And Abas ferried o'er the main, and old Aletes' keel
    The storm hath overcome; and all must drink the baneful stream
    Through opening leaky sides of them that gape at every seam.

    But meanwhile Neptune, sorely moved, hath felt the storm let go,
    And all the turmoil of the main with murmur great enow;
    The deep upheaved from all abodes the lowest that there be:
    So forth he put his placid face o'er topmost of the sea,
    And there he saw AEneas' ships o'er all the main besprent,
    The Trojans beaten by the flood and ruin from heaven sent.
    But Juno's guile and wrathful heart her brother knew full well:      130
    So East and West he called to him, and spake such words to tell:

    "What mighty pride of race of yours hath hold upon your minds,
    That earth and sea ye turmoil so without my will, O winds;
    That such upheaval and so great ye dare without my will?
    Whom I--But first it comes to hand the troubled flood to still:
    For such-like fault henceforward though with nought so light ye pay.
    Go get you gone, and look to it this to your king to say:
    That ocean's realm and three-tined spear of dread are given by Fate
    Not unto him but unto me? he holds the cliffs o'ergreat,
    Thine houses, Eurus; in that hall I bid him then be bold,            140
    Thine AEolus, and lord it o'er his winds in barred hold."

    So saying and swifter than his word he layed the troubled main,
    And put to flight the gathered clouds, and brought the sun again;
    And with him Triton fell to work, and fair Cymothoe,
    And thrust the ships from spiky rocks; with triple spear wrought he
    To lift, and opened swallowing sands, and laid the waves alow.
    Then on light wheels o'er ocean's face soft gliding did he go.
    And, like as mid a people great full often will arise
    Huge riot, and all the low-born herd to utter anger flies,
    And sticks and stones are in the air, and fury arms doth find:       150
    Then, setting eyes perchance on one of weight for noble mind,
    And noble deeds, they hush them then and stand with pricked-up ears,
    And he with words becomes their lord, and smooth their anger wears;
    --In such wise fell all clash of sea when that sea-father rose,
    And looked abroad: who turned his steeds, and giving rein to those,
    Flew forth in happy-gliding car through heaven's all-open way.

    AEneas' sore forewearied host the shores that nearest lay
    Stretch out for o'er the sea, and turn to Libyan land this while.
    There goes a long firth of the sea, made haven by an isle,           159
    Against whose sides thrust out abroad each wave the main doth send
    Is broken, and must cleave itself through hollow bights to wend:
    Huge rocks on this hand and on that, twin horns of cliff, cast dread
    On very heaven; and far and wide beneath each mighty head
    Hushed are the harmless waters; lo, the flickering wood above
    And wavering shadow cast adown by darksome hanging grove:
    In face hereof a cave there is of rocks o'erhung, made meet
    With benches of the living stone and springs of water sweet,
    The house of Nymphs: a-riding there may way-worn ships be bold
    To lie without the hawser's strain or anchor's hooked hold.

    That bight with seven of all his tale of ships AEneas gained,         170
    And there, by mighty love of land the Trojans sore constrained,
    Leap off-board straight, and gain the gift of that so longed-for sand,
    And lay their limbs with salt sea fouled adown upon the strand:
    And first Achates smote alive the spark from out the flint,
    And caught the fire in tinder-leaves, and never gift did stint
    Of feeding dry; and flame enow in kindled stuff he woke;
    Then Ceres' body spoilt with sea, and Ceres' arms they took,
    And sped the matter spent with toil, and fruit of furrows found
    They set about to parch with fire and 'twixt of stones to pound.

    Meanwhile AEneas scaled the cliff and far and wide he swept           180
    The main, if anywhere perchance the sea his Antheus kept,
    Tossed by the wind, if he might see the twi-banked Phrygians row;
    If Capys, or Caicus' arms on lofty deck might show.
    Nor any ship there was in sight, but on the strand he saw
    Three stags a-wandering at their will, and after them they draw
    The whole herd following down the dales long strung out as they feed:
    So still he stood, and caught in hand his bow and shafts of speed,
    The weapons that Achates staunch was bearing then and oft;
    And first the very lords of those, that bore their heads aloft
    With branching horns, he felled, and then the common sort, and so    190
    Their army drave he with his darts through leafy woods to go:
    Nor held his hand till on the earth were seven great bodies strown,
    And each of all his ships might have one head of deer her own.
    Thence to the haven gat he gone with all his folk to share,
    And that good wine which erst the casks Acestes made to bear,
    And gave them as they went away on that Trinacrian beach,
    He shared about; then fell to soothe their grieving hearts with speech:

    "O fellows, we are used ere now by evil ways to wend;
    O ye who erst bore heavier loads, this too the Gods shall end.
    Ye, ye have drawn nigh Scylla's rage and rocks that inly roar,       200
    And run the risk of storm of stones upon the Cyclops' shore:
    Come, call aback your ancient hearts and put your fears away!
    This too shall be for joy to you remembered on a day.
    Through diverse haps, through many risks wherewith our way is strown,
    We get us on to Latium, the land the Fates have shown
    To be for peaceful seats for us: there may we raise up Troy.
    Abide, endure, and keep yourselves for coming days of joy."

    So spake his voice: but his sick heart did mighty trouble rack,
    As, glad of countenance, he thrust the heavy anguish back.
    But they fall to upon the prey, and feast that was to dight,         210
    And flay the hide from off the ribs, and bare the flesh to sight.
    Some cut it quivering into steaks which on the spits they run,
    Some feed the fire upon the shore, and set the brass thereon.
    And so meat bringeth might again, and on the grass thereby,
    Fulfilled with fat of forest deer and ancient wine, they lie.
    But when all hunger was appeased and tables set aside,
    Of missing fellows how they fared the talk did long abide;
    Whom, weighing hope and weighing fear, either alive they trow,
    Or that the last and worst has come, that called they hear not now.
    And chief of all the pious King AEneas moaned the pass                220
    Of brisk Orontes, Amycus, and cruel fate that was
    Of Lycus, and of Bias strong, and strong Cloanthus gone.

    But now an end of all there was, when Jove a-looking down
    From highest lift on sail-skimmed sea, and lands that round it lie,
    And shores and many folk about, in topmost burg of sky
    Stood still, and fixed the eyes of God on Libya's realm at last:
    To whom, as through his breast and mind such cares of godhead passed,
    Spake Venus, sadder than her due with bright eyes gathering tears:

    "O thou, who rulest with a realm that hath no days nor years,
    Both Gods and men, and mak'st them fear thy thunder lest it fall,    230
    What then hath mine AEneas done so great a crime to call?
    What might have Trojan men to sin? So many deaths they bore
    'Gainst whom because of Italy is shut the wide world's door.
    Was it not surely promised me that as the years rolled round
    The blood of Teucer come again should spring from out the ground,
    The Roman folk, such very lords, that all the earth and sea
    Their sway should compass? Father, doth the counsel shift in thee?
    This thing indeed atoned to me for Troy in ashes laid,
    And all the miserable end, as fate 'gainst fate I weighed:
    But now the self-same fortune dogs men by such troubles driven       240
    So oft and oft. What end of toil then giv'st thou, King of heaven?
    Antenor was of might enow to 'scape the Achaean host,
    And safe to reach the Illyrian gulf and pierce Liburnia's coast,
    And through the inmost realms thereof to pass Timavus' head,
    Whence through nine mouths midst mountain roar is that wild water shed,
    To cast itself on fields below with all its sounding sea:
    And there he made Patavium's town and Teucrian seats to be,
    And gave the folk their very name and Trojan arms did raise:
    Now settled in all peace and rest he passeth quiet days.
    But we, thy children, unto whom thou giv'st with bowing head         250
    The heights of heaven, our ships are lost, and we, O shame! betrayed,
    Are driven away from Italy for anger but of one.
    Is this the good man's guerdon then? is this the promised throne?"

    The Sower of the Gods and men a little smiled on her
    With such a countenance as calms the storms and upper air;
    He kissed his daughter on the lips, and spake such words to tell:
    "O Cytherean, spare thy dread! unmoved the Fates shall dwell
    Of thee and thine, and thou shalt see the promised city yet,
    E'en that Lavinium's walls, and high amidst the stars shalt set
    Great-souled AEneas: nor in me doth aught of counsel shift            260
    But since care gnaws upon thine heart, the hidden things I lift
    Of Fate, and roll on time for thee, and tell of latter days.
    Great war he wars in Italy, and folk full wild of ways
    He weareth down, and lays on men both laws and walled steads,
    Till the third summer seeth him King o'er the Latin heads,
    And the third winter's wearing brings the fierce Rutulians low.
    Thereon the lad Ascanius, Iulus by-named now,
    (And Ilus was he once of old, when Ilium's city was,)
    Fulfilleth thirty orbs of rule with rolling months that pass,
    And from the town Lavinium shifts the dwelling of his race,          270
    And maketh Alba-town the Long a mighty fenced place.
    Here when for thrice an hundred years untouched the land hath been
    Beneath the rule of Hector's folk, lo Ilia, priestess-queen,
    Goes heavy with the love of Mars, and bringeth twins to birth.
    'Neath yellow hide of foster-wolf thence, mighty in his mirth,
    Comes Romulus to bear the folk, and Mavors' walls to frame,
    And by the word himself was called the Roman folk to name.
    On them I lay no bonds of time, no bonds of earthly part;
    I give them empire without end: yea, Juno, hard of heart,
    Who wearieth now with fear of her the heavens and earth and sea,     280
    Shall gather better counsel yet, and cherish them with me;
    The Roman folk, the togaed men, lords of all worldly ways.
    Such is the doom. As weareth time there come those other days,
    Wherein Assaracus shall bind Mycenae of renown,
    And Phthia, and shall lord it o'er the Argives beaten down.
    Then shall a Trojan Caesar come from out a lovely name,
    The ocean-stream shall bound his rule, the stars of heaven his fame,
    Julius his name from him of old, the great Iulus sent:
    Him too in house of heaven one day 'neath spoils of Eastlands bent
    Thou, happy, shalt receive; he too shall have the prayers of men.    290
    The wars of old all laid aside, the hard world bettereth then,
    And Vesta and the hoary Faith, Quirinus and his twin
    Now judge the world; the dreadful doors of War now shut within
    Their iron bolts and strait embrace the godless Rage of folk,
    Who, pitiless, on weapons set, and bound in brazen yoke
    Of hundred knots aback of him foams fell from bloody mouth."

    Such words he spake, and from aloft he sent down Maia's youth
    To cause the lands and Carthage towers new-built to open gate
    And welcome in the Teucrian men; lest Dido, fooled of fate,          299
    Should drive them from her country-side. The unmeasured air he beat
    With flap of wings, and speedily in Libya set his feet:
    And straightway there his bidding wrought, and from the Tyrians fall,
    God willing it, their hearts of war; and Dido first of all
    Took peace for Teucrians to her soul, and quiet heart and kind.

    Now good AEneas through the night had many things in mind,
    And set himself to fare abroad at first of holy day
    To search the new land what it was, and on what shore he lay
    Driven by the wind; if manfolk there abode, or nought but deer,
    (For waste it seemed), and tidings true back to his folk to bear.
    So in that hollow bight of groves beneath the cavern cleft,          310
    All hidden by the leafy trees and quavering shades, he left
    His ships: and he himself afoot went with Achates lone,
    Shaking in hand two slender spears with broad-beat iron done.
    But as he reached the thicket's midst his mother stood before,
    Who virgin face, and virgin arms, and virgin habit bore,
    A Spartan maid; or like to her who tames the Thracian horse,
    Harpalyce, and flies before the hurrying Hebrus' course.
    For huntress-wise on shoulder she had hung the handy bow,
    And given all her hair abroad for any wind to blow,
    And, naked-kneed, her kirtle long had gathered in a lap:             320
    She spake the first:
                         "Ho youths," she said, "tell me by any hap
    If of my sisters any one ye saw a wandering wide
    With quiver girt, and done about with lynx's spotted hide,
    Or following of the foaming boar with shouts and eager feet?"

    So Venus; and so Venus' son began her words to meet:
    "I have not seen, nor have I heard thy sisters nigh this place,
    O maid:--and how to call thee then? for neither is thy face
    Of mortals, nor thy voice of men: O very Goddess thou!
    What! Phoebus' sister? or of nymphs whom shall I call thee now?
    But whosoe'er thou be, be kind and lighten us our toil,              330
    And teach us where beneath the heavens, which spot of earthly soil
    We are cast forth; unlearned of men, unlearned of land we stray,
    By might of wind and billows huge here driven from out our way.
    Our right hands by thine altar-horns shall fell full many a host."

    Spake Venus: "Nowise am I worth so much of honour's cost:
    The Tyrian maids are wont to bear the quiver even as I,
    And even so far upon the leg the purple shoe-thong tie.
    The Punic realm thou seest here, Agenor's town and folk,
    But set amidst of Libyan men unused to bear the yoke.
    Dido is Lady of the Land, who fled from Tyre the old,                340
    And from her brother: weary long were all the ill deed told,
    And long its winding ways, but I light-foot will overpass.
    Her husband was Sychaeus hight, of land most rich he was
    Of all Phoenicians: she, poor wretch! loved him with mighty love,
    Whose father gave her, maid, to him, and first the rites did move
    Of wedlock: but as King of Tyre her brother did abide,
    Pygmalion, more swollen up in sin than any man beside:
    Mad hatred yoked the twain of them, he blind with golden lust,
    Godless with stroke of iron laid Sychaeus in the dust
    Unwares before the altar-horns; nor of the love did reck             350
    His sister had, but with vain hope played on the lover sick,
    And made a host of feignings false, and hid the matter long.
    Till in her sleep the image came of that unburied wrong,
    Her husband dead; in wondrous wise his face was waxen pale:
    His breast with iron smitten through, the altar of his bale,
    The hooded sin of evil house, to her he open laid,
    And speedily to flee away from fatherland he bade;
    And for the help of travel showed earth's hidden wealth of old,
    A mighty mass that none might tell of silver and of gold.
    Sore moved hereby did Dido straight her flight and friends prepare:  360
    They meet together, such as are or driven by biting fear,
    Or bitter hatred of the wretch: such ships as hap had dight
    They fall upon and lade with gold; forth fare the treasures bright
    Of wretch Pygmalion o'er the sea, a woman first therein.
    And so they come unto the place where ye may see begin
    The towers of Carthage, and the walls new built that mighty grow,
    And bought the Byrsa-field good cheap, as still the name shall show,
    So much of land as one bull's hide might scantly go about
    --But ye forsooth, what men are ye, from what land fare ye out,
    And whither go ye on your ways?"                                     370
                                     Her questioning in speech
    He answered, and a heavy sigh from inmost heart did reach:
    "O Goddess, might I tread again first footsteps of our way,
    And if the annals of our toil thine hearkening ears might stay,
    Yet Vesper first on daylight dead should shut Olympus' door.
    From Troy the old, if yet perchance your ears have felt before
    That name go by, do we come forth, and, many a water past,
    A chance-come storm hath drifted us on Libyan shores at last.
    I am AEneas, God-lover; I snatched forth from the foe
    My Gods to bear aboard with me, a fame for heaven to know.
    I seek the Italian fatherland, and Jove-descended line;              380
    Twice ten the ships were that I manned upon the Phrygian brine,
    My Goddess-mother led the way, we followed fate god-given;
    And now scarce seven are left to me by wave and east-wind riven;
    And I through Libyan deserts stray, a man unknown and poor,
    From Asia cast, from Europe cast,"
                                       She might abide no more
    To hear his moan: she thrusts a word amidst his grief and saith:
    "Nay thou art not God's castaway, who drawest mortal breath,
    And fairest to the Tyrian town, if aught thereof I know.
    Set on to Dido's threshold then e'en as the way doth show.
    For take the tidings of thy ships and folk brought back again        390
    By shifting of the northern wind all safe from off the main:
    Unless my parents learned me erst of soothsaying to wot
    But idly. Lo there twice seven swans disporting in a knot,
    Whom falling from the plain of air drave down the bird of Jove
    From open heaven: strung out at length they hang the earth above,
    And now seem choosing where to pitch, now on their choice to gaze,
    As wheeling round with whistling wings they sport in diverse ways
    And with their band ring round the pole and cast abroad their song.
    Nought otherwise the ships and youth that unto thee belong
    Hold haven now, or else full sail to harbour-mouth are come.         400
    Set forth, set forth and tread the way e'en as it leadeth home."

    She spake, she turned, from rosy neck the light of heaven she cast,
    And from her hair ambrosial the scent of Gods went past
    Upon the wind, and o'er her feet her skirts fell shimmering down,
    And very God she went her ways. Therewith his mother known,
    With such a word he followed up a-fleeing from his eyes:

    "Ah cruel as a God! and why with images and lies
    Dost thou beguile me? wherefore then is hand to hand not given
    And we to give and take in words that come from earth and heaven?"

    Such wise he chided her, and then his footsteps townward bent:       410
    But Venus with a dusky air did hedge them as they went,
    And widespread cloak of cloudy stuff the Goddess round them wrapped,
    Lest any man had seen them there, or bodily had happed
    Across their road their steps to stay, and ask their dealings there.
    But she to Paphos and her home went glad amidst the air:
    There is her temple, there they stand, an hundred altars meet,
    Warm with Sabaean incense-smoke, with new-pulled blossoms sweet.

    But therewithal they speed their way as led the road along;
    And now they scale a spreading hill that o'er the town is hung,
    And looking downward thereupon hath all the burg in face.            420
    AEneas marvels how that world was once a peasants' place,
    He marvels at the gates, the roar and rattle of the ways.
    Hot-heart the Tyrians speed the work, and some the ramparts raise,
    Some pile the burg high, some with hand roll stones up o'er the ground;
    Some choose a place for dwelling-house and draw a trench around;
    Some choose the laws, and lords of doom, the holy senate choose.
    These thereaway the havens dig, and deep adown sink those
    The founding of the theatre walls, or cleave the living stone
    In pillars huge, one day to show full fair the scene upon.
    As in new summer 'neath the sun the bees are wont to speed           430
    Their labour in the flowery fields, whereover now they lead
    The well-grown offspring of their race, or when the cells they store
    With flowing honey, till fulfilled of sweets they hold no more;
    Or take the loads of new-comers, or as a watch well set
    Drive off the lazy herd of drones that they no dwelling get;
    Well speeds the work, and thymy sweet the honey's odour is.

    "Well favoured of the Fates are ye, whose walls arise in bliss!"
    AEneas cries, a-looking o'er the housetops spread below;
    Then, wonderful to tell in tale, hedged round with cloud doth go
    Amid the thickest press of men, and yet of none is seen.             440

    A grove amid the town there is, a pleasant place of green,
    Where erst the Tyrians, beat by waves and whirling of the wind,
    Dug out the token Juno once had bidden them hope to find,
    An eager horse's head to wit: for thus their folk should grow
    Far-famed in war for many an age, of victual rich enow.
    There now did Dido, Sidon-born, uprear a mighty fane
    To Juno, rich in gifts, and rich in present godhead's gain:
    On brazen steps its threshold rose, and brass its lintel tied,
    And on their hinges therewithal the brazen door-leaves cried.
    And now within that grove again a new thing thrusting forth          450
    'Gan lighten fear; for here to hope AEneas deemed it worth,
    And trust his fortune beaten down that yet it might arise.
    For there while he abode the Queen, and wandered with his eyes
    O'er all the temple, musing on the city's fate to be,
    And o'er the diverse handicraft and works of mastery,
    Lo there, set out before his face the battles that were Troy's,
    And wars, whereof all folk on earth had heard the fame and noise;
    King Priam, the Atridae twain, Achilles dire to both.
    He stood, and weeping spake withal:
                                        "Achates, lo! forsooth
    What place, what land in all the earth but with our grief is stored?  460
    Lo Priam! and even here belike deed hath its own reward.
    Lo here are tears for piteous things that touch men's hearts anigh:
    Cast off thy fear! this fame today shall yet thy safety buy."

    And with the empty painted thing he feeds his mind withal,
    Sore groaning, and a very flood adown his face did fall.
    For there he saw, as war around of Pergamus they cast,
    Here fled the Greeks, the Trojan youth for ever following fast;
    There fled the Phrygians, on their heels high-helmed Achilles' car;
    Not far off, fair with snowy cloths, the tents of Rhesus are;
    He knew them weeping: they of old in first of sleep betrayed,        470
    Tydides red with many a death a waste of nothing made,
    And led those fiery steeds to camp ere ever they might have
    One mouthful of the Trojan grass, or drink of Xanthus' wave.
    And lo again, where Troilus is fleeing weaponless,
    Unhappy youth, and all too weak to bear Achilles' stress,
    By his own horses, fallen aback, at empty chariot borne,
    Yet holding on the reins thereof; his neck, his tresses torn
    O'er face of earth, his wrested spear a-writing in the dust.
    Meanwhile were faring to the fane of Pallas little just
    The wives of Troy with scattered hair, bearing the gown refused,     480
    Sad they and suppliant, whose own hands their very bosoms bruised,
    While fixed, averse, the Goddess kept her eyes upon the ground.
    Thrice had Achilles Hector dragged the walls of Troy around,
    And o'er his body, reft of soul, was chaffering now for gold.
    Deep groaned AEneas from his heart in such wise to behold
    The car, the spoils, the very corpse of him, his fellow dead,
    To see the hands of Priam there all weaponless outspread.
    Yea, thrust amidst Achaean lords, his very self he knew;
    The Eastland hosts he saw, and arms of Memnon black of hue.
    There mad Penthesilea leads the maids of moony shield,               490
    The Amazons, and burns amidst the thousands of the field,
    And with her naked breast thrust out above the golden girth,
    The warrior maid hath heart to meet the warriors of the earth.

    But while AEneas, Dardan lord, beholds the marvels there,
    And, all amazed, stands moving nought with eyes in one set stare,
    Lo cometh Dido, very queen of fairest fashion wrought,
    By youths close thronging all about unto the temple brought.
    Yea, e'en as on Eurotas' rim or Cynthus' ridges high
    Diana leadeth dance about, a thousandfold anigh
    The following Oreads gather round, with shoulder quiver-hung         500
    She overbears the Goddesses her swift feet fare among,
    And great Latona's silent breast the joys of godhead touch.
    Lo, such was Dido; joyously she bore herself e'en such
    Amidst them, eager for the work and ordered rule to come;
    Then through the Goddess' door she passed, and midmost 'neath the dome,
    High raised upon a throne she sat, with weapons hedged about,
    And doomed, and fashioned laws for men, and fairly sifted out
    And dealt their share of toil to them, or drew the lot as happed.
    There suddenly AEneas sees amidst a concourse wrapped
    Antheus, Sergestus, and the strong Cloanthus draw anigh,             510
    And other Teucrians whom the whirl, wild, black, all utterly
    Had scattered into other lands afar across the sea.
    Amazed he stood, nor stricken was Achates less than he
    By joy, by fear: they hungered sore hand unto hand to set;
    But doubt of dealings that might be stirred in their hearts as yet;
    So lurking, cloaked in hollow cloud they note what things betide
    Their fellows there, and on what shore the ships they manned may bide,
    And whence they come; for chosen out of all the ships they bear
    Bidding of peace, and, crying out, thus temple-ward they fare.

    But now when they were entered in, and gained the grace of speech,   520
    From placid heart Ilioneus the elder 'gan beseech:
    "O Queen, to whom hath Jove here given a city new to raise,
    And with thy justice to draw rein on men of wilful ways,
    We wretched Trojans, tossed about by winds o'er every main,
    Pray thee forbid it from our ships, the dreadful fiery bane.
    Spare pious folk, and look on us with favouring kindly eyes!
    We are not come with sword to waste the Libyan families,
    Nor drive adown unto the strand the plunder of the strong:
    No such high hearts, such might of mind to vanquished folk belong.
    There is a place, Hesperia called of Greeks in days that are,        530
    An ancient land, a fruitful soil, a mighty land in war.
    Oenotrian folk first tilled the land, whose sons, as rumours run,
    Now call it nought but Italy from him who led them on.
    And thitherward our course was turned,
    When sudden, stormy, tumbling seas, Orion rose on us,
    And wholly scattering us abroad with fierce blasts from the south,
    Drave us, sea-swept, by shallows blind, to straits with wayless mouth:
    But to thy shores we few have swum, and so betake us here.
    What men among men are ye then? what country's soil may bear
    Such savage ways? ye grudge us then the welcome of your sand,        540
    And fall to arms, and gainsay us a tide-washed strip of strand.
    But if men-folk and wars of men ye wholly set at nought,
    Yet deem the Gods bear memory still of good and evil wrought
    AEneas was the king of us; no juster was there one,
    No better lover of the Gods, none more in battle shone:
    And if the Fates have saved that man, if earthly air he drink,
    Nor 'neath the cruel deadly shades his fallen body shrink,
    Nought need we fear, nor ye repent to strive in kindly deed
    With us: we have in Sicily fair cities to our need.
    And fields we have; Acestes high of Trojan blood is come.            550
    Now suffer us our shattered ships in haven to bring home,
    To cut us timber in thy woods, and shave us oars anew.
    Then if the Italian cruise to us, if friends and king are due,
    To Italy and Latium then full merry wend we on.
    But if, dear father of our folk, hope of thy health be gone,
    And thee the Libyan water have, nor hope Iulus give,
    Then the Sicanian shores at least, and seats wherein to live,
    Whence hither came we, and the King Acestes let us seek."

    So spake he, and the others made as they the same would speak,
    The Dardan-folk with murmuring mouth.                                560

    But Dido, with her head hung down, in few words answer gave:
    "Let fear fall from you, Teucrian men, and set your cares aside;
    Hard fortune yet constraineth me and this my realm untried
    To hold such heed, with guard to watch my marches up and down.
    Who knoweth not AEneas' folk? who knoweth not Troy-town,
    The valour, and the men, and all the flame of such a war?
    Nay, surely nought so dull as this the souls within us are,
    Nor turns the sun from Tyrian town, so far off yoking steed.
    So whether ye Hesperia great, and Saturn's acres need,
    Or rather unto Eryx turn, and King Acestes' shore,                   570
    Safe, holpen will I send you forth, and speed you with my store:
    Yea and moreover, have ye will in this my land to bide.
    This city that I build is yours: here leave your ships to ride:
    Trojan and Tyrian no two wise at hands of me shall fare.
    And would indeed the King himself, AEneas, with us were,
    Driven by that self-same southern gale: but sure men will I send,
    And bid them search through Libya from end to utmost end,
    Lest, cast forth anywhere, he stray by town or forest part."

    Father AEneas thereupon high lifted up his heart,
    Nor stout Achates less, and both were fain the cloud to break;       580
    And to AEneas first of all the leal Achates spake:

    "O Goddess-born, what thought hereof ariseth in thy mind?
    All safe thou seest thy ships; thy folk fair welcomed dost thou find:
    One is away, whom we ourselves saw sunken in the deep;
    But all things else the promised word thy mother gave us keep."

    Lo, even as he spake the word the cloud that wrapped them cleaves,
    And in the open space of heaven no dusk behind it leaves;
    And there AEneas stood and shone amid the daylight clear,
    With face and shoulders of a God: for loveliness of hair
    His mother breathed upon her son, and purple light of youth,         590
    And joyful glory of the eyes: e'en as in very sooth
    The hand gives ivory goodliness, or when the Parian stone,
    Or silver with the handicraft of yellow gold is done:
    And therewithal unto the Queen doth he begin to speak,
    Unlooked-for of all men:
                            "Lo here the very man ye seek,
    Trojan AEneas, caught away from Libyan seas of late!
    Thou, who alone of toils of Troy hast been compassionate,
    Who takest us, the leavings poor of Danaan sword, outworn
    With every hap of earth and sea, of every good forlorn,
    To city and to house of thine: to thank thee to thy worth,           600
    Dido, my might may compass not; nay, scattered o'er the earth
    The Dardan folk, for what thou dost may never give thee meed:
    But if somewhere a godhead is the righteous man to heed,
    If justice is, or any soul to note the right it wrought,
    May the Gods give thee due reward. What joyful ages brought
    Thy days to birth? what mighty ones gave such an one today?
    Now while the rivers seaward run, and while the shadows stray
    O'er hollow hills, and while the pole the stars is pasturing wide,
    Still shall thine honour and thy name, still shall thy praise abide
    What land soever calleth me."                                        610
                                  Therewith his right hand sought
    His very friend Ilioneus, his left Serestus caught,
    And then the others, Gyas strong, Cloanthus strong in fight.

    Sidonian Dido marvelled much, first at the hero's sight,
    Then marvelled at the haps he had, and so such word doth say:

    "O Goddess-born, what fate is this that ever dogs thy way
    With such great perils? What hath yoked thy life to this wild shore?
    And art thou that AEneas then, whom holy Venus bore
    Unto Anchises, Dardan lord, by Phrygian Simois' wave?
    Of Teucer unto Sidon come a memory yet I have,
    Who, driven from out his fatherland, was seeking new abode           620
    By Belus' help: but Belus then, my father, over-rode
    Cyprus the rich, and held the same as very conquering lord:
    So from that tide I knew of Troy and bitter Fate's award,
    I knew of those Pelasgian kings--yea, and I knew thy name.
    He then, a foeman, added praise to swell the Teucrian fame,
    And oft was glad to deem himself of ancient Teucer's line.
    So hasten now to enter in 'neath roofs of me and mine.
    Me too a fortune such as yours, me tossed by many a toil,
    Hath pleased to give abiding-place at last upon this soil,
    Learned in illhaps full wise am I unhappy men to aid."               630

    Such tale she told, and therewith led to house full kingly made
    AEneas, bidding therewithal the Gods with gifts to grace;
    Nor yet their fellows she forgat upon the sea-beat place,
    But sendeth them a twenty bulls, an hundred bristling backs
    Of swine, an hundred fatted lambs, whereof his ewe none lacks,
    And gifts and gladness of the God.
    Meanwhile the gleaming house within with kingly pomp is dight,
    And in the midmost of the hall a banquet they prepare:
    Cloths laboured o'er with handicraft, and purple proud is there;
    Great is the silver on the board, and carven out of gold             640
    The mighty deeds of father-folk, a long-drawn tale, is told,
    Brought down through many and many an one from when their race began.

    AEneas, through whose father's heart unquiet love there ran,
    Sent on the swift Achates now unto the ships to speed,
    To bear Ascanius all these haps, and townward him to lead;
    For on Ascanius well beloved was all his father's thought:
    And therewithal gifts good to give from Ilium's ruin caught
    He bade him bring: a cope all stiff with golden imagery;
    With saffron soft acanthus twine a veil made fair to see;
    The Argive Helen's braveries, brought from Mycenae erst,              650
    When she was seeking Pergamos and wedding all accursed:
    Her mother Leda gave her these and marvellous they were.
    A sceptre too that Ilione in days agone did bear,
    The eldest-born of Priam's maids; a neckchain pearl bestrown,
    And, doubly wrought with gold and gems, a kingly-fashioned crown.
    So to the ships Achates went these matters forth to speed.

    But Cytherea in her heart turned over new-wrought rede,
    New craft; how, face and fashion changed, her son the very Love
    For sweet Ascanius should come forth, and, gift-giving, should move
    The Queen to madness, make her bones the yoke-fellows of flame.      660
    Forsooth the doubtful house she dreads, the two-tongued Tyrian name;
    And bitter Juno burneth her, and care the night doth wake:
    Now therefore to the winged Love such words as this she spake:

    "O son, my might, my only might, who fearest nought at all
    How his, the highest Father's bolts, Typhoeus' bane, may fall,
    To thee I flee, and suppliant so thy godhead's power beseech:
    Thy brother, e'en AEneas, tossed on every sea-side beach
    Thou knowest; all the fashioning of wrongful Juno's hate
    Thou knowest; oft upon my grief with sorrow wouldst thou wait.
    Him now Phoenician Dido holds, and with kind words enow              670
    Delays him there, but unto what Junonian welcomes grow
    I fear me: will she hold her hand when thus the hinge is dight?
    Now therefore am I compassing to catch their craft in flight,
    To ring the Queen about with flame that her no power may turn,
    That she may cling to me and sore for mine AEneas yearn.
    Now hearken how I counsel thee to bring about my will:
    The kingly boy his father calls, he whom I cherish still,
    To that Sidonian city now is ready dight to fare,
    And gifts, the gleanings of the sea and flames of Troy, doth bear,
    Whom soaked in sleep forthwith will I in high Cythera hide,          680
    Or in Idalium's holy place where I am wont to bide,
    Lest any one the guile should know and thrust themselves between:
    But thou with craft his fashion feign, and with his face be seen
    Well known of all, for no more space than one night's wearing by;
    And so, when Dido, gladdest grown, shall take thee up to lie
    Upon her breast 'twixt queenly board and great Lyaeus' wave,
    And thou the winding of her arms and kisses sweet shalt have,
    Then breathe the hidden flame in her and forge thy venomed guile."

    His lovesome mother Love obeyed, and doffed his wings awhile,
    And as Iulus goeth now rejoicing on his way.                         690
    But Venus all Ascanius' limbs in quiet rest doth lay,
    And cherished in her goddess' breast unto Idalian groves
    She bears him, where the marjoram still soft about him moves
    And breatheth sweet from scented shade and blossoms on the air.
    Love wrought her will, and bearing now those royal gifts and rare,
    Unto the Tyrians joyous went, e'en as Achates led.
    But when he came into the house, there on her golden bed
    With hangings proud Queen Dido lay amidmost of the place:
    The father then, AEneas, then the youth of Trojan race,
    There gather, and their bodies cast on purple spread abroad.         700
    Folk serve them water for their hands, and speed the baskets stored
    With Ceres, and the towels soft of close-clipped nap they bear.
    Within were fifty serving-maids, whose long array had care
    To furnish forth the meat and drink, and feed the house-gods' flame;
    An hundred more, and youths withal of age and tale the same,
    Set on the meat upon the board and lay the cups about.
    And now through that wide joyous door came thronging from without
    The Tyrians, and, so bidden, lie on benches painted fair.
    They wonder at AEneas' gifts, and at Iulus there,
    The flaming countenance of God, and speech so feigned and fine;      710
    They wonder at the cope and veil with that acanthus twine.
    And chiefly that unhappy one doomed to the coming ill,
    Nor hungry hollow of her heart nor burning eyes may fill
    With all beholding: gifts and child alike her heart do move.
    But he, when he had satisfied his feigned father's love,
    And clipped AEneas all about, and round his neck had hung,
    Went to the Queen, who with her eyes and heart about him clung,
    And whiles would strain him to her breast--poor Dido! knowing nought
    What God upon her bosom sat; who ever had in thought
    His Acidalian mother's word, and slowly did begin                    720
    To end Sychaeus quite, and with a living love to win
    Her empty soul at rest, and heart unused a weary tide.

    But when the feasting first was stayed, and boards were done aside,
    Great beakers there they set afoot, and straight the wine they crowned.
    A shout goes up within the house, great noise they roll around
    The mighty halls: the candles hang adown from golden roof
    All lighted, and the torches' flame keeps dusky night aloof.
    And now a heavy bowl of gold and gems the Queen bade bring
    And fill with all unwatered wine, which erst used Belus king,        729
    And all from Belus come: therewith through the hushed house she said:

    "O Jupiter! they say by thee the guesting laws were made;
    Make thou this day to Tyrian folk, and folk come forth from Troy,
    A happy day, and may our sons remember this our joy!
    Mirth-giver Bacchus, fail thou not from midst our mirth! be kind,
    O Juno! and ye Tyrian folk, be glad this bond to bind!"

    She spake, and on the table poured the glorious wave of wine,
    Then touched the topmost of the bowl with dainty lip and fine,
    And, egging on, to Bitias gave: nought slothful to be told
    The draught he drained, who bathed himself within the foaming gold;
    Then drank the other lords of them: long-haired Iopas then           740
    Maketh the golden harp to sing, whom Atlas most of men
    Erst taught: he sings the wandering moon and toiling of the sun,
    And whence the kind of men and beasts, how rain and fire begun,
    Arcturus, the wet Hyades, and twin-wrought Northern Bears:
    And why so swift the winter sun unto his sea-bath fares,
    And what delayeth night so long upon the daylight's hem.
    Then praise on praise the Tyrians shout, the Trojans follow them.

    Meanwhile unhappy Dido wore the night-tide as it sank
    In diverse talk, and evermore long draughts of love she drank,
    And many a thing of Priam asked, of Hector many a thing:             750
    With what-like arms Aurora's son had come unto the King;
    What were the steeds of Diomed, how great Achilles was.
    At last she said:
                      "But come, O guest, tell all that came to pass
    From earliest tide; of Danaan craft, and how thy land was lorn,
    And thine own wanderings; for as now the seventh year is worn
    That thee a-straying wide away o'er earth and sea hath borne."




BOOK II.

ARGUMENT.

AENEAS TELLETH TO DIDO AND THE TYRIANS THE STORY OF TROY'S OVERTHROW.


    All hearkened hushed, and fixed on him was every face of man,
    As from the couch high set aloft AEneas thus began:

    "Unutterable grief, O Queen, thou biddest me renew
    The falling of the Trojan weal and realm that all shall rue
    'Neath Danaan might; which thing myself unhappy did behold,
    Yea, and was no small part thereof. What man might hear it told
    Of Dolopes, or Myrmidons, or hard Ulysses' band,
    And keep the tears back? Dewy night now falleth from the land
    Of heaven, and all the setting stars are bidding us to sleep:
    But if to know our evil hap thy longing is so deep,                   10
    If thou wilt hear a little word of Troy's last agony,
    Though memory shuddereth, and my heart shrunk up in grief doth lie,
    I will begin.
                 By battle broke, and thrust aback by Fate
    Through all the wearing of the years, the Danaan lords yet wait
    And build a horse up mountain-huge by Pallas' art divine,
    Fair fashioning the ribs thereof with timbers of the pine,
    And feign it vowed for safe return, and let the fame fly forth.
    Herein by stealth a sort of men chosen for bodies' worth
    Amid its darkness do they shut; the caverns inly lost
    Deep in the belly of the thing they fill with armed host.             20

    In sight of Troy lies Tenedos, an island known of all,
    And rich in wealth before the realm of Priam had its fall,
    Now but a bay and roadstead poor, where scarcely ships may ride.
    So thither now they sail away in desert place to hide.
    We thought them gone, and that they sought Mycenae on a wind,
    Whereat the long-drawn grief of Troy fell off from every mind.

    The gates are opened; sweet it is the Dorian camp to see,
    The dwellings waste, the shore all void where they were wont to be:
    Here dwelt the band of Dolopes, here was Achilles set,                29
    And this was where their ships were beached; here edge to edge we met.
    Some wonder at unwedded maid Minerva's gift of death,
    That baneful mountain of a horse; and first Thymoetes saith
    'Twere good in walls to lead the thing, on topmost burg to stand;
    Whether such word the fate of Troy or evil treason planned
    I know not: Capys and the rest, who better counsel have,
    Bid take the fashioned guile of Greeks, the doubtful gift they gave,
    To tumble it adown to sea, with piled-up fire to burn,
    Or bore the belly of the beast its hidden holes to learn;
    So cleft atwain is rede of men abiding there in doubt.

    But first before all others now with much folk all about              40
    Laocoon the fiery man runs from the burg adown,
    And shouts from far:
                        'O wretched men, how hath such madness grown?
    Deem ye the foe hath fared away? Deem ye that Danaan gifts
    May ever lack due share of guile? Are these Ulysses' shifts?
    For either the Achaeans lurk within this fashioned tree,
    Or 'tis an engine wrought with craft bane of our walls to be,
    To look into our very homes, and scale the town perforce:
    Some guile at least therein abides: Teucrians, trust not the horse!
    Whatso it is, the Danaan folk, yea gift-bearing I fear.'              49

    Thus having said, with valiant might he hurled a huge-wrought spear
    Against the belly of the beast swelled out with rib and stave;
    It stood a-trembling therewithal; its hollow caverns gave
    From womb all shaken with the stroke a mighty sounding groan.
    And but for God's heart turned from us, for God's fate fixed and known,
    He would have led us on with steel to foul the Argive den,
    And thou, O Troy, wert standing now, thou Priam's burg as then!

    But lo, where Dardan shepherds lead, with plenteous clamour round,
    A young man unto Priam's place with hands behind him bound,
    Who privily had thrust himself before their way e'en now
    The work to crown, and into Troy an open way to show                  60
    Unto the Greeks; a steadfast soul, prepared for either end,
    Or utterly to work his craft or unto death to bend.
    Eager to see him as he went around the Trojans flock
    On every side, and each with each contend the man to mock.
    Lo now, behold the Danaan guile, and from one wrong they wrought
    Learn ye what all are like to be.
    For as he stood in sight of all, bewildered, weaponless,
    And let his eyes go all around the gazing Phrygian press,
    He spake:
             'What land shall have me now, what sea my head shall hide?
    What then is left of deed to do that yet I must abide?                70
    No place I have among the Greeks, and Dardan folk withal
    My foemen are, and bloody end, due doom, upon me call.'

    And with that wail our hearts were turned, and somewhat backward hung
    The press of men: we bade him say from whence his blood was sprung,
    And what he did, and if indeed a captive we might trust;
    So thus he spake when now all fear from off his heart was thrust:

    'Whatso betide, to thee, O King, the matter's verity
    Will I lay bare unto the end, nor Argive blood deny:
    This firstly; for if Fate indeed shaped Sinon for all bale
    To make him liar and empty fool her worst may not avail.              80
    Perchance a rumour of men's talk about your ears hath gone,
    Telling of Palamedes' fame and glory that he won,
    The son of Belus: traitors' word undid him innocent;
    By unjust doom for banning war the way of death he went,
    Slain by Pelasgian men, that now his quenched light deplore.
    Fellow to him, and nigh akin, I went unto the war,
    Sent by my needy father forth, e'en from my earliest years;
    Now while he reigned in health, a king fair blooming mid his peers
    In council of the kings, I too had share of name and worth.
    But after he had gone his way from land of upper earth,               90
    Thrust down by sly Ulysses' hate, (I tell all men's belief),
    Then beaten down I dragged my life through shadowy ways of grief,
    And heavily I took the death of him my sackless friend,
    Nor held my peace, O fool! but vowed revenge if time should send
    A happy tide; if I should come to Argos any more,
    A victor then: so with my words I drew down hatred sore.
    This was the first fleck of my ill; Ulysses ever now
    Would threaten with some new-found guilt, and mid the folk would sow
    Dark sayings, and knowing what was toward, sought weapons new at need;
    Nor wearied till with Calchas now to help him to the deed.--         100
    --But why upturn these ugly things, or spin out time for nought?
    For if ye deem all Greekish men in one same mould are wrought:
    It is enough. Come make an end; Ulysses' hope fulfil!
    With great price would the Atridae buy such working of their will.'

    Then verily to know the thing and reach it deep we burned,
    So little in Pelasgian guile and evil were we learned.
    He takes the tale up; fluttering-voiced from lying heart he speaks:

    'The longing to be gone from Troy fell oft upon the Greeks,
    And oft they fain had turned their backs on war without an end,
    (I would they had), and oft as they were e'en at point to wend       110
    A tempest would forbid the sea, or southern gale would scare,
    And chiefly when with maple-beams this horse that standeth here
    They fashioned, mighty din of storm did all the heavens fulfil.
    So held aback, Eurypylus we sent to learn the will
    Of Phoebus: from the shrine he brought such heavy words as these:
    _With blood and with a virgin's death did ye the winds appease_
    _When first ye came, O Danaan folk, unto the Ilian shore;_
    _With blood and with an Argive soul the Gods shall ye adore_
    _For your return._
                    'Now when that word men's ears had gone about
    Their hearts stood still, and tremors cold took all their bones for doubt
    What man the Fates had doomed thereto, what man Apollo would.        121
    Amidst us then the Ithacan drags in with clamour rude
    Calchas the seer, and wearieth him the Gods' will to declare.
    Of that craftsmaster's cruel guile had many bade beware
    In words, and many silently foresaw the coming death.
    Twice five days Calchas holdeth peace and, hidden, gainsayeth
    To speak the word that any man to very death should cast,
    Till hardly, by Ulysses' noise sore driven, at the last
    He brake out with the speech agreed, and on me laid the doom;
    All cried assent, and what each man feared on himself might come,    130
    'Gainst one poor wretch's end of days with ready hands they bear.
    Now came the evil day; for me the rites do men prepare,
    The salted cakes, the holy strings to do my brows about.
    I needs must say I brake my bonds, from Death's house gat me out,
    And night-long lay amid the sedge by muddy marish side
    Till they spread sail, if they perchance should win their sailing tide.
    Nor have I hope to see again my fatherland of old;
    My longed-for father and sweet sons I never shall behold;
    On whom the guilt of me who fled mayhappen men will lay,
    And with their death for my default the hapless ones shall pay.      140
    But by the might of very God, all sooth that knoweth well,
    By all the unstained faith that yet mid mortal men doth dwell,
    If aught be left, I pray you now to pity such distress!
    Pity a heart by troubles tried beyond its worthiness!'

    His weeping won his life of us, and pity thereunto,
    And Priam was the first who bade his irons to undo,
    And hand-bonds, and in friendly words unto the man he speaks:

    'Whoso thou art, henceforward now forget thy missing Greeks;
    Thou shalt be ours: but learn me now, who fain the sooth would wot,
    Wherefore they built this world of horse, what craftsman him begot,  150
    And what to do? What gift for Gods; what gin of war is he?'

    He spake. The other, wise in guile and Greekish treachery,
    Both palms of his from bonds new-freed raised toward the stars above,
    And, 'O eternal fires!' he cried, 'O might that none may move,
    Bear witness now! ye altar-stones, ye wicked swords I fled,
    Ye holy fillets of the Gods bound round my fore-doomed head,
    That I all hallowed Greekish rites may break and do aright,
    That I may hate the men and bring all hidden things to light
    If aught lie hid; nor am I held by laws my country gave!
    But thou, O Troy, abide by troth, and well thy saviour save,         160
    If truth I bear thee, if great things for great I pay thee o'er!

    'All hope the Danaans had, all trust for speeding on the war
    On Pallas' aid was ever set: yet came a day no less
    When godless Diomed and he, well-spring of wickedness,
    Ulysses, brake the holy place that they by stealth might gain
    The fate-fulfilled Palladium, when, all the burg-guards slain,
    They caught the holy image up, and durst their bloody hands
    Lay on the awful Goddess there and touch her holy bands:
    The flood-tide of the Danaan hope ebbed from that very day;
    Might failed them, and the Goddess-maid turned all her heart away:   170
    Token whereof Tritonia gave by portent none might doubt:
    Scarce was the image set in camp when suddenly flashed out
    Fierce fire from staring eyes of her, and salt sweat oozed and fell
    O'er all her limbs, and she from earth, O wonderful to tell!
    Leapt thrice, still holding in her hand the quivering spear and shield:
    Then Calchas bade us turn to flight across the wavy field,
    Singing how ruin of Pergamos the Argive steel shall lack,
    Till Argos give the signs again, and we the God bring back
    In hollow of the curved keel across the tumbling main.
    And this is why they sought their home, Mycenae's land, again,        180
    And there they dight them arms and God, and presently unwares
    Will be on you across the sea--Calchas such doom declares.
    So warned hereby for Godhead's hurt, in stolen Palladium's stead,
    Atonement for their heavy guilt, this horse they fashioned.
    But him indeed did Calchas bid to pile so mountain-high
    With such a might of mingled beams, and lead up to the sky,
    Lest it within the gates should come, or mid the walls, and lest
    Beneath their ancient Pallas-faith the people safe should rest.
    For if upon Minerva's gift ye lay a godless hand,
    Then mighty ruin (and would to God before his face might stand       190
    That ruin instead) on Priam's might, and Phrygian folk shall fall.
    But if your hands shall lead it up within the city wall,
    Then Asia, free and willing it, to Pelops' house shall come
    With mighty war; and that same fate our sons shall follow home.'

    Caught by such snares and crafty guile of Sinon the forsworn,
    By lies and lies, and tears forced forth there were we overborne;
    We, whom Tydides might not tame, nor Larissaean king
    Achilles; nor the thousand ships, and ten years' wearying.

    But now another, greater hap, a very birth of fear,
    Was thrust before us wretched ones, our sightless hearts to stir.    200
    Laocoon, chosen out by lot for mighty Neptune's priest,
    Would sacrifice a mighty bull at altars of the feast;
    When lo, away from Tenedos, o'er quiet of the main
    (I tremble in the tale) we see huge coils of serpents twain
    Breasting the sea, and side by side swift making for the shore;
    Whose fronts amid the flood were strained, and high their crests upbore
    Blood-red above the waves, the rest swept o'er the sea behind,
    And all the unmeasured backs of them coil upon coil they wind,
    While sends the sea great sound of foam. And now the meads they gained,
    The burning eyes with flecks of blood and streaks of fire are stained,
    Their mouths with hisses all fulfilled are licked by flickering tongue.  211
    Bloodless we flee the sight, but they fare steadfastly along
    Unto Laocoon; and first each serpent round doth reach
    One little body of his sons, and knitting each to each,
    And winding round and round about, the unhappy body gnaws:
    And then himself, as sword in hand anigh for help he draws,
    They seize and bind about in coils most huge, and presently
    Are folded twice about his midst, twice round his neck they tie
    Their scaly backs, and hang above with head and toppling mane,
    While he both striveth with his hands to rend their folds atwain,    220
    His fillets covered o'er with blood and venom black and fell,
    And starward sendeth forth withal a cry most horrible,
    The roaring of a wounded bull who flees the altar-horn
    And shaketh from his crest away the axe unhandy borne.

    But fleeing to the shrines on high do those two serpents glide,
    And reach the hard Tritonia's house, and therewithin they hide
    Beneath the Goddess' very feet and orbed shield of dread;
    Then through our quaking hearts indeed afresh the terror spread,
    And all men say Laocoon hath paid but worthily
    For guilt of his, and hurt of steel upon the holy tree,              230
    When that unhappy wicked spear against its flank he threw.
    They cry to lead the image on to holy house and due,
    And Pallas' godhead to adore.
    We break adown our rampart walls and bare the very town:
    All gird themselves unto the work, set wheels that it may glide
    Beneath his feet, about his neck the hempen bond is tied
    To warp it on: up o'er the walls so climbs the fateful thing
    Fruitful of arms; and boys about and unwed maidens sing
    The holy songs, and deem it joy hand on the ropes to lay.
    It enters; through the city's midst it wends its evil way.           240
    --O land! O Ilium, house of Gods! O glorious walls of war!
    O Dardan walls!--four times amidst the threshold of our door
    It stood: four times with sound of arms the belly of it rung;
    But heedless, maddened hearts and blind, hard on the ropes we hung,
    Nor but amidst the holy burg the monster's feet we stay.
    And then Cassandra oped her mouth to tell the fateful day,--
    Her mouth that by the Gods' own doom the Teucrians ne'er might trow.
    Then on this day that was our last we bear the joyous bough,
    Poor wretches! through the town to deck each godhead's holy place.

    Meanwhile the heavens are faring round, night falls on ocean's face,  250
    Enwrapping in her mighty shade all earthly things and sky,
    And all the guile of Myrmidons: silent the Teucrians lie
    Through all the town, and Sleep her arms o'er wearied bodies slips.

    And now the Argive host comes forth upon its ordered ships
    From Tenedos, all hushed amid the kind moon's silent ways,
    Seeking the well-known strand, when forth there breaks the bale-fire's blaze
    On the king's deck: and Sinon, kept by Gods' unequal fate,
    For Danaans hid in horse's womb undoes the piny gate
    In stealthy wise: them now the horse, laid open to the air,
    Gives forth again, and glad from out the hollow wood they fare;      260
    Thessandrus, Sthenelus, the dukes, and dire Ulysses pass;
    Slipped down along a hanging rope, Thoas and Acamas,
    Peleian Neoptolemus, and Machaon the first,
    And Menelaues, and the man who forged the guile accursed,
    Epeos. Through the city sunk in sleep and wine they break,
    Slain are the guards, at gates all oped their fellows in they take,
    Till all their bands confederate are met at last in one.

    It was the time when that first peace of sick men hath begun,
    By very gift of God o'er all in sweetest wise to creep,
    When Hector comes before mine eyes amid the dreams of sleep,         270
    Most sorrowful to see he was, and weeping plenteous flood,
    And e'en as torn behind the car, black with the dust and blood,
    His feet all swollen with the thong that pierced them through and through.
    Woe worth the while for what he was! How changed from him we knew!
    The Hector come from out the fight in arms Achilles lost,
    The Hector that on Danaan decks the Phrygian firebrands tost.
    Foul was his beard, and all his hair was matted up with gore,
    And on his body were the wounds, the many wounds he bore
    Around his Troy. I seemed in sleep, I weeping e'en as he,
    To speak unto the hero first in voice of misery:                     280

    'O Light of Troy, most faithful hope of all the Teucrian men,
    What stay hath held thee back so long? from what shore com'st thou then,
    Long-looked-for Hector? that at last, so many died away,
    Such toil of city, toil of men, we see thy face today,
    We so forewearied? What hath fouled in such an evil wise
    Thy cheerful face? what mean these hurts thou showest to mine eyes?'

    Nought: nor my questions void and vain one moment turned his speech;
    Who from the inmost of his heart a heavy groan did reach:
    'O Goddess-born, flee forth,' he said, 'and snatch thee from the fire!
    The foeman hath the walls, and Troy is down from topmost spire.      290
    For Priam and for country now enough. If any hand
    Might have kept Pergamos, held up by mine it yet should stand.
    Her holy things and household gods Troy gives in charge to thee;
    Take these as fellows of thy fate: go forth the walls to see,
    The great walls thou shalt build, when thou the sea hast wandered o'er.'

    He spake, and from the inner shrine forth in his hands he bore
    Great Vesta, and the holy bands, and fire that never dies.

    Meanwhile the city's turmoiled woe was wrought in diverse wise,
    And though my father's house aback apart from all was set,
    And hedged about with many trees, clearer and clearer yet            300
    The sounds grew on us, ever swelled the weapons' dread and din.
    I shake off sleep and forthwithal climb up aloft and win
    To topmost roof: with ears pricked up I stand to hearken all.
    As when before the furious South the driven flame doth fall
    Among the corn: or like as when the hill-flood rolls in haste
    To waste the fields and acres glad, the oxen's toil to waste,
    Tearing the headlong woods along, while high upon a stone
    The unready shepherd stands amazed, and hears the sound come on.

    Then was their faith made manifest, then Danaan guile lay bare;
    Deiphobus' wide house e'en now, o'ertopped by Vulcan's flare,
    Shows forth its fall; Ucalegon's is burning by its side:             310
    The narrow seas Sigaeum guards gleam litten far and wide.
    The shout of men ariseth now, and blaring of the horn,
    And mad, I catch my weapons up though idly they be borne;
    But burned my heart to gather folk for battle, and set forth
    Upon the burg in fellowship; for fury and great wrath
    Thrust on my heart: to die in arms, it seemed a good reward.

    But lo, now Panthus newly slipped from 'neath the Achean sword,
    Panthus the son of Othrys, priest of Phoebus' house on high;
    His holy things and vanquished Gods, his little lad thereby          320
    He drags, and as a madman runs, to gain our doorway set.
    'Panthus, how fares it at the worst? what stronghold keep we yet?'
    Scarce had I said, when from his mouth a groan and answer fares:

    'Troy's latest day has come on us, a tide no struggling wears:
    Time was, the Trojans were; time was, and Ilium stood; time was,
    And glory of the Teucrian folk! Jove biddeth all to pass
    To Argos now: in Troy afire the Danaans now are lords;
    The horse high set amidst the town pours forth a flood of swords,
    And Sinon, of the victors now, the flame is driving home
    High mocking: by the open gates another sort is come,                330
    As many thousands as ere flocked from great Mycenae yet:
    Others with weapons ready dight the narrow ways beset,
    And ban all passage; point and edge are glittering drawn and bare
    Ready for death: and scarcely now the first few gatewards dare
    The battle, and blind game of Mars a little while debate.'

    Spurred by such speech of Othrys' son, and force of godhead great,
    Mid fire and steel I follow on as grim Erinnys shows,
    Where call the cries, where calls the shout that ever heavenward goes,
    Rhipeus therewith, and Epytus the mighty under shield,
    Dymas and Hypanis withal their fellowship now yield;                 340
    Met by the moon they join my side with young Coroebus; he
    The son of Mygdon, at that tide in Troy-town chanced to be;
    Drawn thither by Cassandra's love that burned within his heart.
    So he to Priam service gave, and helped the Phrygian part:
    Unhappy! that the warning word of his God-maddened love
    He might not hearken on that day.
    Now when I see them gathered so to dare the battle's pain,
    Thus I begin:
                 'O fellows fair, O hardy hearts in vain!
    If now ye long to follow me who dares the utterance
    And certain end, ye see indeed what wise our matters chance.         350
    The Gods, who in the other days our lordship mighty made,
    Are gone from altar and from shrine: a town of flames ye aid.
    Fall on a very midst the fire and die in press of war!
    One hope there is for vanquished men, to cherish hope no more.'

    Therewith the fury of their minds I feed, and thence away,
    As ravening wolves by night and cloud their bellies' lust obey,
    That bitter-sharp is driving on, the while their whelps at home
    Dry-jawed await them, so by steel, by crowd of foes we come
    Into the very death; we hold the city's midmost street,
    Black night-tide's wings with hollow shade about our goings meet.    360

    O ruin and death of that ill night, what tongue may set it forth!
    Or who may pay the debt of tears that agony was worth!
    The ancient city overthrown, lord for so many a year,
    The many bodies of the slain, that, moveless, everywhere
    Lie in the street, in houses lie, lie round the holy doors
    Of Gods. But not alone that night the blood of Teucrians pours,
    For whiles the valour comes again in vanquished hearts to bide,
    And conquering Danaans fall and die: grim grief on every side,
    And fear on every side there is, and many-faced is death.

    Androgeus, whom a mighty band of Danaans followeth,                  370
    First falleth on the road of us, and, deeming us to be
    His fellow-folk, in friendly words he speaketh presently:

    'Haste on, O men! what sloth is this delayeth so your ways?
    While others hand and haul away in Pergamos ablaze;
    What! fellows, from the lofty ships come ye but even now?'

    But with the word, no answer had wherein at all to trow,
    He felt him fallen amid the foe, and taken in the snare;
    Then foot and voice aback he drew, and stood amazed there,
    As one who through the thicket thrusts, and unawares doth tread
    Upon a snake, and starts aback with sudden rush of dread             380
    From gathering anger of the thing and swelling neck of blue:
    So, quaking at the sight of us, Androgeus backward drew.
    But we fall on with serried arms and round their rout we crowd,
    And fell them knowing nought the place, and with all terror cowed:
    So sweet the breath of fortune was on our first handicraft.

    But with good-hap and hardihood Coroebus' spirit laughed;
    'Come, fellows, follow up,' he cries, 'the way that fortune shows
    This first of times, and where belike a little kind she grows.
    Change we our shields, and do on us the tokens of the Greeks;
    Whether with fraud or force he play what man of foeman seeks,        390
    Yea, these themselves shall give us arms.'
                                             He spake, and forth did bear
    Androgeus' high-crested helm and shield emblazoned fair,
    And did it on, and Argive sword he girt unto his thigh:
    So Rhipeus did, and Dymas did, and all did joyously,
    And each man wholly armed himself with plunder newly won.
    Then mingled with the Greeks we fare, and no God helps us on,
    And many a battle there we join amid the eyeless night,
    And many a Danaan send adown to Orcus from the light:
    Some fled away unto the ships, some to the safe sea-shore,           399
    Or smitten with the coward's dread climbed the great horse once more
    And there they lie all close within the well-known womb of wood.

    Alas! what skills it man to trust in Gods compelled to good?
    For lo, Cassandra, Priam's maid, with hair cast all about,
    From Pallas' house and innermost of holy place dragged out,
    And straining with her burning eyes in vain to heaven aloft;
    Her eyes, for they in bonds had bound her tender palms and soft.
    Nought bore Coroebus' maddened mind to see that show go by,
    And in the middle of their host he flung himself to die,
    And all we follow and fall on with points together set.
    And first from that high temple-top great overthrow we get           410
    From weapons of our friends, and thence doth hapless death arise
    From error of the Greekish crests and armour's Greekish guise;
    Then crying out for taken maid, fulfilled thereat with wrath,
    The gathered Greeks fall in on us: comes keenest Ajax forth;
    The sons of Atreus, all the host of Dolopes are there:--
    As whiles, the knit whirl broken up, the winds together bear
    And strive, the West wind and the South, the East wind glad and free
    With Eastland steeds; sore groan the woods; and Nereus stirs the sea
    From lowest deeps, and trident shakes, and foams upon the wave:--
    They even to whom by night and cloud great overthrow we gave,        420
    Through craft of ours, and drave about through all the town that while,
    Now show themselves, and know our shields and weapons worn for guile
    The first of all; our mouths unmeet for Greekish speech they tell
    Then o'er us sweeps the multitude; and first Coroebus fell
    By Peneleus before the Maid who ever in the fight
    Prevaileth most; fell Rhipeus there, the heedfullest of right
    Of all among the Teucrian folk, the justest man of men;
    The Gods deemed otherwise. Dymas and Hypanis died then,
    Shot through by friends, and not a whit availed to cover thee,
    O Panthus, thine Apollo's bands or plenteous piety.                  430
    Ashes of Ilium, ye last flames where my beloved ones burned,
    Bear witness mid your overthrow my face was never turned
    From Danaan steel and Danaan deed! if fate had willed it so
    That I should fall, I earned my wage.
                                         Borne thence away, we go
    Pelias and Iphitus and I; but Iphitus was spent
    By eld, and by Ulysses' hurt half halting Pelias went.
    So unto Priam's house we come, called by the clamour there,
    Where such a mighty battle was as though none otherwhere
    Yet burned: as though none others fell in all the town beside.
    There all unbridled Mars we saw, the Danaans driving wide            440
    Against the house; with shield-roofs' rush the doors thereof beset.
    The ladders cling unto the walls, men by the door-posts get
    Some foothold up; with shielded left they meet the weapons' rain,
    While on the battlements above grip with the right they gain.
    The Dardans on the other side pluck roof and pinnacle
    From off the house; with such-like shot they now, beholding well
    The end anigh, all death at hand, make ready for the play:
    And gilded beams, the pomp and joy of fathers passed away.
    They roll adown, and other some with naked point and edge
    The nether doorways of the place in close arrayment hedge.           450
    Blazed up our hearts again to aid this palace of a king,
    To stead their toil, to vanquished men a little help to bring.

    A door there was, a secret pass into the common way
    Of all King Priam's houses there, that at the backward lay
    As one goes by: in other days, while yet the lordship was,
    Hapless Andromache thereby unto the twain would pass
    Alone, or leading to the king Astyanax her boy.
    And thereby now I gain the tower, whence wretched men of Troy
    In helpless wise from out their hands were casting darts aloof.
    There was a tower, a sheer height down, builded from highest roof     460
    Up toward the stars; whence we were wont on Troy to look adown,
    And thence away the Danaan ships, the Achaean tented town.
    Against the highest stage hereof the steel about we bear,
    Just where the joints do somewhat give: this from its roots we tear,
    And heave it up and over wall, whose toppling at the last
    Bears crash and ruin, and wide away the Danaans are down cast
    Beneath its fall: but more come on: nor drift of stones doth lack,
    Nor doth all kind of weapon-shot at any while grow slack.
    Lo, Pyrrhus in the very porch forth to the door doth pass
    Exulting; bright with glittering points and flashing of the brass;   470
    --E'en as a snake to daylight come, on evil herbage fed,
    Who, swollen, 'neath the chilly soil hath had his winter bed,
    And now, his ancient armour doffed, and sleek with youth new found,
    With front upreared his slippery back he coileth o'er the ground
    Up 'neath the sun; his three-cleft tongue within his mouth gleams clear:--
    And with him Periphas the huge, Achilles' charioteer,
    Now shield-bearer Automedon and all the Scyrian host
    Closed on the walls and on the roof the blazing firebrands tost.
    Pyrrhus in forefront of them all catches a mighty bill,
    Beats in the hardened door, and tears perforce from hinge and sill   480
    The brazen leaves; a beam hewn through, wide gaped the oak hard knit
    Into a great-mouthed window there, and through the midst of it
    May men behold the inner house; the long halls open lie;
    Bared is the heart of Priam's home, the place of kings gone by;
    And close against the very door all armed men they see.

    That inner house indeed was mazed with wail and misery,
    The inmost chambers of the place an echoing hubbub hold
    Of women's cries, whose clamour smites the far-off stars of gold,
    And through the house so mighty great the fearful mothers stray,
    And wind their arms about the doors, and kisses on them lay.         490

    But Pyrrhus with his father's might comes on; no bolt avails,
    No man against the might of him; the door all battered fails,
    The door-leaves torn from off of hinge tumble and lie along:
    Might maketh road; through passage forced the entering Danaans throng,
    And slay the first and fill the place with armour of their ranks.
    Nay nought so great is foaming flood that through its bursten banks
    Breaks forth, and beateth down the moles that 'gainst its going stand.
    And falls a fierce heap on the plain, and over all the land
    Drags off the herds and herd-houses.
                                        There saw I Pyrrhus wild
    With death of men amidst the door, and either Atreus' child;         500
    And Hecuba and hundred wives her sons wed saw I there,
    And Priam fouling with his blood the very altars fair
    Whose fires he hallowed: fifty beds the hope of house to be,
    The doorways proud with outland gold and war-got bravery
    Sunk into ash; where fire hath failed the Danaans are enow.

    Belike what fate on Priam fell thou askest me to show:
    For when he saw the city lost, and his own house-door stormed,
    And how in bowels of his house the host of foemen swarmed,
    The ancient man in vain does on the arms long useless laid
    About his quaking back of eld, and girds himself with blade          510
    Of no avail, and fareth forth amid the press to die.
    A very midmost of the courts beneath the naked sky
    A mighty altar stood: anear a bay exceeding old,
    The altar and the Gods thereof did all in shadow hold;
    And round about that altar-stead sat Hecuba the queen,
    And many daughters: e'en as doves all huddled up are seen
    'Neath the black storm they cling about the dear God's images.

    But when in arms of early days King Priam now she sees,
    She crieth: 'O unhappy spouse! what evil heart hast thou,
    With weapons thus to gird thyself, or whither wilt thou now?         520
    Today availeth no such help, and no such warder's stay
    May better aught; not even were my Hector here today.
    But come thou hither unto me; this altar all shall save,
    Or we shall die together here!'
                                    Her arms about she gave
    And took him, and the elder set adown in holy stead.

    But lo! now one of Priam's sons, Polites, having fled
    From Pyrrhus' murder through the swords and through the foeman's throng,
    Runs wounded through the empty hall from out the cloister long,
    And burning Pyrrhus, hard at heel, the deadly hurt doth bear,
    And grip of hand is on him now, and now the point of spear.          530
    But as he rushed before their eyes, his parents' face beneath
    He fell, and with most plenteous blood shed forth his latest breath;
    Then Priam, howsoever nigh the very death might grip,
    Refrained him nothing at the sight, but voice and wrath let slip:
    'Ah, for such wickedness,' he cried, 'for daring such a deed,
    If aught abide in heaven as yet such things as this to heed,
    May the Gods give thee worthy thanks, and pay thee well-earned prize,
    That thou hast set the death of sons before my father's eyes,
    That thou thy murder's fouling thus in father's face hast flung.
    Not he, Achilles, whence indeed thou liar hast never sprung,         540
    Was such a foe to Priam erst; for shamfast meed he gave
    To law and troth of suppliant men, and rendered to the grave
    The bloodless Hector dead, and me sent to mine own again.'

    So spake the elder, and cast forth a toothless spear and vain,
    That forthwith from the griding brass was put aback all spent,
    And from the shield-boss' outer skin hung down, for nothing sent.
    Then Pyrrhus cried: 'Yea tell him this, go take the tidings down
    To Peleus' son my father then, of Pyrrhus worser grown
    And all these evil deeds of mine! take heed to tell the tale!
    Now die!'
             And to the altar-stone him quivering did he hale,           550
    And sliding in his own son's blood so plenteous: in his hair
    Pyrrhus his left hand wound, his right the gleaming sword made bare,
    That even to the hilts thereof within his flank he hid.
    Such was the end of Priam's day, such faring forth fate bid,
    Troy all aflame upon the road, all Pergamus adown.
    He, of so many peoples once the mighty lord and crown,
    So many lands of Asia once, a trunk beside the sea
    Huge with its headless shoulders laid, a nameless corpse is he.

    Then first within the compassing of bitter fear I was;
    The image of my father dear by me all mazed did pass,                560
    When I beheld the like-aged king gasping his life away
    Through cruel wound: upon mine eyes forlorn Creusa lay,
    The wasted house, my little one, Iulus', evil end.
    I look aback to see what folk about me yet do wend,
    But all, foredone, had fallen away, their weary bodies spent,
    Some all amid the fire had cast, some unto earth had sent.

    Alone was I of all men now, when lo, in Vesta's house
    Abiding, and in inmost nook silent and lurking close,
    Helen the seed of Tyndarus! the clear fires give her light
    As there she strayeth, turning eyes on every shifting sight;         570
    She, fearful of the Teucrian wrath for Pergamus undone,
    And fearful of the Danaan wrath and husband left alone,
    The wasting fury both of Troy and land where she was born,
    She hid her by the altar-stead, a thing of Gods forlorn.

    Forth blazed the wildfire in my soul, wrath stirred me up to slake
    My vengeance for my dying home, and ill's atonement take.
    What! should she come to Sparta safe, and her Mycenae then,
    And in the hard-won triumphing go forth a Queen of men,
    And see her husband and her home, her parents and her sons,
    Served by the throng of Ilian wives and Phrygian vanquished ones?    580
    Shall Priam so be slain with sword; shall Troy so blaze aloft;
    Shall the sea-beach the Dardan blood have sweat so oft and oft
    For this? Nay, nay: and though forsooth no deed to blaze abroad
    The slaying of a woman be, nor gaineth fame's reward,
    Yet still to quench an evil thing and pay the well-earned meed
    Is worthy praise, and joy it were unto the full to feed
    My heart's fell flame, and satisfy these ashes well beloved.

    Such things my soul gave forth; such things in furious heart I moved.
    When lo, my holy mother now, ne'er seen by eyes of mine
    So clear before, athwart the dark in simple light did shine;         590
    All God she was; of countenance and measure was she nought,
    But her the heaven-abiders see; so my right hand she caught,
    And held me, and from rosy mouth moreover added word:

    'O son, what anger measureless thy mighty grief hath stirred?
    Why ragest thou? or whither then is gone thy heed of me?
    Wilt thou not first behold the place where worn by eld is he,
    Anchises, left? Wilt thou not see if yet thy wife abide
    Creusa, or Ascanius yet? The Greekish bands fare wide
    About them now on every hand, and but my care withstood
    The fire had wafted them away or sword had drunk their blood.        600
    Laconian Helen's beauty cursed this overthrow ne'er wrought.
    Nor guilty Paris; nay, the Gods, the Gods who pity nought,
    Have overturned your lordship fair, and laid your Troy alow.
    Behold! I draw aside the cloud that all abroad doth flow,
    Dulling the eyes of mortal men, and darkening dewily
    The world about. And look to it no more afeard to be
    Of what I bid, nor evermore thy mother's word disown.
    There where thou seest the great walls cleft, and stone torn off from stone,
    And seest the waves of smoke go by with mingled dust-cloud rolled,--
    There Neptune shakes the walls and stirs the foundings from their hold
    With mighty trident, tumbling down the city from its base.           611
    There by the Scaean gates again hath bitter Juno place
    The first of all, and wild and mad, herself begirt with steel,
    Calls up her fellows from the ships.
    Look back! Tritonian Pallas broods o'er topmost burg on high,
    All flashing bright with Gorgon grim from out her stormy sky;
    The very Father hearteneth on, and stays with happy might
    The Danaans, crying on the Gods against the Dardan fight.
    Snatch flight, O son, whiles yet thou may'st, and let thy toil be o'er,
    I by thy side will bring thee safe unto thy father's door.'          620

    She spake, and hid herself away where thickest darkness poured.
    Then dreadful images show forth, great Godheads are abroad,
    The very haters of our Troy.
    And then indeed before mine eyes all Ilium sank in flame,
    And overturned was Neptune's Troy from its foundations deep.
    E'en as betideth with an ash upon the mountain steep,
    Round which sore smitten by the steel the acre-biders throng,
    And strive in speeding of the axe: and there it threateneth long,
    And, shaken, trembleth nodding still with heavy head of leaf;
    Till overcome by many hurts it groans its latest grief,              630
    And torn from out the ridgy hill, drags all its ruin alow.

    I get me down, and, Goddess-led, speed on 'twixt fire and foe,
    And point and edge give place to me, before me sinks the flame;
    But when unto my father's door and ancient house I came,
    And I was fain of all things first my father forth to bear
    Unto the mountain-tops, and first I sought to find him there,
    Still he gainsayed to spin out life now Troy was lost and dead,
    Or suffer exile: 'Ye whose blood is hale with youth,' he said,
    'Ye other ones, whose might and main endureth and is stout,
    See ye to flight while yet ye may!                                   640
    Full surely if the heavenly ones my longer life had willed,
    They would have kept me this abode: the measure is fulfilled
    In that the murder I have seen, and lived when Troy-town fell.
    O ye, depart, when ye have bid my body streaked farewell.
    My hand itself shall find out death, or pity of my foes,
    Who seek my spoils: the tomb methinks a little thing to lose.
    Forsooth I tarry overlong, God-cursed, a useless thing,
    Since when the Father of the Gods, the earth-abiders' King,
    Blew on me blast of thunder-wind and touched me with his flame.'

    His deed was stubborn as his word, no change upon him came.          650
    But all we weeping many tears, my wife Creusa there,
    Ascanius, yea and all the house, besought him not to bear
    All things to wrack with him, nor speed the hastening evil tide.
    He gainsaith all, and in his will and home will yet abide.
    So wretchedly I rush to arms with all intent to die;
    For what availeth wisdom now, what hope in fate may lie?

    'And didst thou hope, O father, then, that thou being left behind,
    My foot would fare? Woe worth the word that in thy mouth I find!
    But if the Gods are loth one whit of such a town to save,
    And thou with constant mind wilt cast on dying Troy-town's grave     660
    Both thee and thine, wide is the door to wend adown such ways;
    For Pyrrhus, red with Priam's blood, is hard at hand, who slays
    The son before the father's face, the father slays upon
    The altar. Holy Mother, then, for this thou ledst me on
    Through fire and sword!--that I might see our house filled with the foe,
    My father old, Ascanius, Creusa lying low,
    All weltering in each other's blood, and murdered wretchedly.
    Arms, fellows, arms! the last day's light on vanquished men doth cry.
    Ah! give me to the Greeks again, that I may play the play
    Another while: not unavenged shall all we die today.'                670

    So was I girt with sword again, and in my shield would set
    My left hand now, and was in point from out of doors to get,
    When lo, my wife about my feet e'en in the threshold clung,
    Still to his father reaching out Iulus tender-young:
    'If thou art on thy way to die, then bear us through it all;
    But if to thee the wise in arms some hope of arms befall,
    Then keep this house first! Unto whom giv'st thou Iulus' life,
    Thy father's, yea and mine withal, that once was called thy wife?'

    So crying out, the house she filled with her exceeding moan,
    When sudden, wondrous to be told, a portent was there shown;         680
    For as his woeful parents' hands and lips he hangs between,
    On topmost of Iulus' head a thin peaked flame is seen,
    That with the harmless touch of fire, whence clearest light is shed,
    Licks his soft locks and pastures round the temples of his head.
    Quaking with awe from out his hair we fall the fire to shake,
    And bring the water of the well the holy flame to slake.
    But joyous to the stars aloft Anchises raiseth eyes,
    And with his hands spread out abroad to very heaven he cries:
    'Almighty Jove, if thou hast will toward any prayers to turn,
    Look down on us this while alone; if aught our goodness earn,        690
    Father, give help and strengthen us these omens from the sky!'

    Scarce had the elder said the word ere crashing suddenly
    It thundered on the left, and down across the shades of night
    Ran forth a great brand-bearing star with most abundant light;
    And clear above the topmost house we saw it how it slid
    Lightening the ways, and at the last in Ida's forest hid.
    Then through the sky a furrow ran drawn out a mighty space,
    Giving forth light, and sulphur-fumes rose all about the place.

    My father vanquished therewithal his visage doth upraise,
    And saith a word unto the Gods that holy star to praise:             700
    'Now, now, no tarrying is at all, I follow where ye lead;
    O Father-Gods heed ye our house and this my son's son heed!
    This is your doom; and Troy is held beneath your majesty.
    I yield, O son, nor more gainsay to go my ways with thee.'

    He spake; and mid the walls meanwhile we hear the fire alive
    Still clearer, and the burning place more nigh the heat doth drive.

    'O hasten, father well-beloved, to hang about my neck!
    Lo, here my shoulders will I stoop, nor of the labour reck.
    And whatsoever may befall, the two of us shall bide
    One peril and one heal and end: Iulus by my side                     710
    Shall wend, and after us my wife shall follow on my feet
    Ye serving-folk, turn ye your minds these words of mine to meet:
    Scant from the city is a mound and temple of old tide,
    Of Ceres' lone, a cypress-tree exceeding old beside.
    Kept by our fathers' worshipping through many years agone:
    Thither by divers roads go we to meet at last in one.
    Now, father, take thy fathers' Gods and holy things to hold,
    For me to touch them fresh from fight and murder were o'erbold,
    A misdeed done against the Gods, till in the living flood
    I make a shift to wash me clean.'                                    720

    I stooped my neck and shoulders broad e'en as the word I said,
    A forest lion's yellow fell for cloth upon them laid,
    And took my burden up: my young Iulus by my side,
    Holding my hand, goes tripping short unto his father's stride;
    My wife comes after: on we fare amidst a mirky world.
    And I, erewhile as nothing moved by storm of weapons hurled,
    I, who the gathering of the Greeks against me nothing feared,
    Now tremble at each breath of wind, by every sound am stirred,
    Sore troubled for my fellows both, and burden that I bore.

    And now we draw anigh the gates, and all the way seemed o'er,        730
    When sudden sound of falling feet was borne upon our ears,
    And therewithal my father cries, as through the dusk he peers,
    'Haste, son, and get thee swift away, for they are on us now;
    I see the glittering of the brass and all their shields aglow.'

    What Godhead nought a friend to me amidst my terror there
    Snatched wit away I nothing know: for while I swiftly fare
    By wayless places, wandering wide from out the road I knew,
    Creusa, whether her the Fates from me unhappy drew,
    Whether she wandered from the way, or weary lagged aback,
    Nought know I, but that her henceforth mine eyes must ever lack.     740
    Nor turned I round to find her lost, nor had it in my thought,
    Till to that mound and ancient house of Ceres we were brought;
    Where, all being come together now, there lacked but her alone,
    And there her fellows' hopes, her son's, her husband's were undone.

    On whom of men, on whom of Gods, then laid I not the guilt?
    What saw I bitterer to be borne in all the city spilt?
    Ascanius and Anchises set the Teucrian Gods beside,
    I give unto my fellows there in hollow dale to hide,
    But I unto the city turn with glittering weapons girt;
    Needs must I search all Troy again, and open every hurt,             750
    And into every peril past must thrust my head once more.
    And first I reach the walls again and mirk ways of the door
    Whereby I wended out erewhile; and my old footsteps' track
    I find, and mid the dusk of night with close eyes follow back;
    While on the heart lies weight of fear, and e'en the hush brings dread,
    Thence to the house, if there perchance, if there again she tread,
    I go: infall of Greeks had been, and all the house they hold,
    And 'neath the wind the ravening fire to highest ridge is rolled.
    The flames hang o'er, with raging heat the heavens are hot withal;
    Still on: I look on Priam's house and topmost castle-wall;           760
    And in the desert cloisters there and Juno's very home
    Lo, Phoenix and Ulysses cursed, the chosen wards, are come
    To keep the spoil; fair things of Troy, from everywhither brought,
    Rapt from the burning of the shrines, Gods' tables rudely caught,
    And beakers utterly of gold and raiment snatched away
    Are there heaped up; and boys and wives drawn out in long array
    Stand trembling round about the heap.
    And now withal I dared to cast my cries upon the dark,
    I fill the streets with clamour great, and, groaning woefully,
    'Creusa,' o'er and o'er again without avail I cry.                   770

    But as I sought and endlessly raved all the houses through
    A hapless shape, Creusa's shade, anigh mine eyen drew,
    And greater than the body known her image fashioned was;
    I stood amazed, my hair rose up, nor from my jaws would pass
    My frozen voice, then thus she spake my care to take away:
    'Sweet husband, wherefore needest thou with such mad sorrow play?
    Without the dealing of the Gods doth none of this betide;
    And they, they will not have thee bear Creusa by thy side,
    Nor will Olympus' highest king such fellowship allow.
    Long exile is in store for thee, huge plain of sea to plough,        780
    Then to Hesperia shalt thou come, where Lydian Tiber's wave
    The wealthiest meads of mighty men with gentle stream doth lave:
    There happy days and lordship great, and kingly wife, are born
    For thee. Ah! do away thy tears for loved Creusa lorn.
    I shall not see the Myrmidons' nor Dolopes' proud place,
    Nor wend my ways to wait upon the Greekish women's grace;
    I, daughter of the Dardan race, I, wife of Venus' son;
    Me the great Mother of the Gods on Trojan shore hath won.
    Farewell, and love the son we loved together once, we twain.'

    She left me when these words were given, me weeping sore, and fain   790
    To tell her much, and forth away amid thin air she passed:
    And there three times about her neck I strove mine arms to cast,
    And thrice away from out my hands the gathered image streams,
    E'en as the breathing of the wind or winged thing of dreams.

    And so at last, the night all spent, I meet my folk anew;
    And there I found great multitude that fresh unto us drew,
    And wondered thereat: wives were there, and men, and plenteous youth;
    All gathered for the faring forth, a hapless crowd forsooth:
    From everywhere they draw to us, with goods and courage set,
    To follow o'er the sea where'er my will may lead them yet.           800

    And now o'er Ida's topmost ridge at last the day-star rose
    With dawn in hand: all gates and doors by host of Danaan foes
    Were close beset, and no more hope of helping may I bide.
    I turned and took my father up and sought the mountain-side.




BOOK III.

ARGUMENT.

AENEAS TELLS OF HIS WANDERINGS AND MISHAPS BY LAND AND BY SEA.


    Now after it had pleased the Gods on high to overthrow
    The Asian weal and sackless folk of Priam, and alow
    Proud Ilium lay, and Neptune's Troy was smouldering on the ground,
    For diverse outlands of the earth and waste lands are we bound,
    Driven by omens of the Gods. Our fleet we built beneath
    Antandros, and the broken steeps of Phrygian Ida's heath,
    Unwitting whither Fate may drive, or where the Gods shall stay
    And there we draw together men.
                                        Now scarce upon the way
    Was summer when my father bade spread sails to Fate at last.
    Weeping I leave my fatherland, and out of haven passed                10
    Away from fields where Troy-town was, an outcast o'er the deep,
    With folk and son and Household Gods and Greater Gods to keep.

    Far off a peopled land of Mars lies midst its mighty plain,
    Tilled of the Thracians; there whilom did fierce Lycurgus reign.
    'Twas ancient guesting-place of Troy: our Gods went hand in hand
    While bloomed our weal: there are we borne, and on the hollow strand
    I set my first-born city down, 'neath evil fates begun,
    And call the folk AEneadae from name myself had won.

    Unto Dione's daughter there, my mother, and the rest,
    I sacrificed upon a day to gain beginning blest,                      20
    And to the King of Heavenly folk was slaying on the shore
    A glorious bull: at hand by chance a mound at topmost bore
    A cornel-bush and myrtle stiff with shafts close set around:
    Thereto I wend and strive to pluck a green shoot from the ground,
    That I with leafy boughs thereof may clothe the altars well;
    When lo, a portent terrible and marvellous to tell!
    For the first stem that from the soil uprooted I tear out
    Oozes black drops of very blood, that all the earth about
    Is stained with gore: but as for me, with sudden horror chill
    My limbs fall quaking, and my blood with freezing fear stands still.  30
    Yet I go on and strive from earth a new tough shoot to win,
    That I may search out suddenly what causes lurk within;
    And once again from out the bark blood followeth as before.

    I turn the matter in my mind: the Field-Nymphs I adore,
    And him, Gradivus, father dread, who rules the Thracian plain,
    And pray them turn the thing to good and make its threatenings vain.
    But when upon a third of them once more I set my hand,
    And striving hard thrust both my knees upon the opposing sand--
    --Shall I speak now or hold my peace?--a piteous groan is heard
    From out the mound, and to mine ears is borne a dreadful word:        40
    'Why manglest thou a wretched man? O spare me in my tomb!
    Spare to beguilt thy righteous hand, AEneas! Troy's own womb
    Bore me, thy kinsman; from this stem floweth no alien gore:
    Woe's me! flee forth the cruel land, flee forth the greedy shore;
    For I am Polydore: pierced through, by harvest of the spear
    O'ergrown, that such a crop of shafts above my head doth bear.'

    I stood amazed: the wildering fear the heart in me down-weighed.
    My hair rose up, my frozen breath within my jaws was stayed.
    Unhappy Priam privily had sent this Polydore,
    For fostering to the Thracian king with plenteous golden store.       50
    In those first days when he began to doubt the Dardan might,
    Having the leaguered walls of Troy for ever in his sight.
    This king, as failed the weal of Troy and fortune fell away,
    Turned him about to conquering arms and Agamemnon's day.
    He brake all right, slew Polydore, and all the gold he got
    Perforce: O thou gold-hunger cursed, and whither driv'st thou not
    The hearts of men?
                      But when at length the fear from me did fall,
    Unto the chosen of the folk, my father first of all,
    I show those portents of the Gods and ask them of their will,
    All deem it good that we depart that wicked land of ill,              60
    And leave that blighted guesting-place and give our ships the breeze.
    Therefore to Polydore we do the funeral services,
    The earth is heaped up high in mound; the Death-Gods' altars stand
    Woeful with bough of cypress black and coal-blue holy band;
    The wives of Ilium range about with due dishevelled hair;
    Cups of the warm and foaming milk unto the dead we bear,
    And bowls of holy blood we bring, and lay the soul in grave,
    And cry a great farewell to him, the last that he shall have.
    But now, when we may trust the sea and winds the ocean keep
    Unangered, and the South bids on light whispering to the deep,        70
    Our fellows crowd the sea-beach o'er and run the ships adown,
    And from the haven are we borne, and fadeth field and town.

    Amid the sea a land there lies, sweet over everything,
    Loved of the Nereids' mother, loved by that AEgean king
    Great Neptune: this, a-wandering once all coasts and shores around,
    The Bow-Lord good to Gyaros and high Myconos bound,
    And bade it fixed to cherish folk nor fear the wind again:
    There come we; and that gentlest isle receives us weary men;
    In haven safe we land, and thence Apollo's town adore;
    King Anius, who, a king of men, Apollo's priesthood bore,             80
    His temples with the fillets done and crowned with holy bays,
    Meets us, and straight Anchises knows, his friend of early days.
    So therewith hand to hand we join and houseward get us gone.

    There the God's fane I pray unto, the place of ancient stone:
    'Thymbraean, give us house and home, walls to the weary give,
    In folk and city to endure: let Pergamus twice live,
    In Troy twice built, left of the Greeks, left of Achilles' wrath!
    Ah, whom to follow? where to go? wherein our home set forth?
    O Father, give us augury and sink into our heart!

    Scarce had I said the word, when lo all doors with sudden start       90
    Fell trembling, and the bay of God, and all the mountain side,
    Was stirred, and in the opened shrine the holy tripod cried:
    There as a voice fell on our ears we bowed ourselves to earth:
    'O hardy folk of Dardanus, the land that gave you birth
    From root and stem of fathers old, its very bosom kind,
    Shall take you back: go fare ye forth, your ancient mother find:
    There shall AEneas' house be lords o'er every earth and sea,
    The children of his children's sons, and those that thence shall be.'

    So Phoebus spake, and mighty joy arose with tumult mixed,
    As all fell wondering where might be that seat of city fixed,        100
    Where Phoebus called us wandering folk, bidding us turn again.
    Thereat my father, musing o'er the tales of ancient men,
    Saith: 'Hearken, lords, and this your hope a little learn of me!
    There is an isle of mightiest Jove called Crete amid the sea;
    An hundred cities great it hath, that most abundant place;
    And there the hill of Ida is, and cradle of our race.
    Thence Teucer our first father came, if right the tale they tell,
    When borne to those Rhoetean shores he chose a place to dwell
    A very king: no Ilium was, no Pergamus rose high;
    He and his folk abode as then in dales that lowly lie:               110
    Thence came Earth-mother Cybele and Corybantian brass,
    And Ida's thicket; thence the hush all hallowed came to pass,
    And thence the lions yoked and tame, the Lady's chariot drag.
    On then! and led by God's command for nothing let us lag!
    Please we the winds, and let our course for Gnosian land be laid;
    Nor long the way shall be for us: with Jupiter to aid,
    The third-born sun shall stay our ships upon the Cretan shore.'

    So saying, all the offerings due he to the altar bore,
    A bull to Neptune, and a bull to thee, Apollo bright,
    A black ewe to the Storm of sea, to Zephyr kind a white.             120
    Fame went that Duke Idomeneus, thrust from his fathers' land,
    Had gone his ways, and desert now was all the Cretan strand,
    That left all void of foes to us those habitations lie.
    Ortygia's haven then we leave, and o'er the sea we fly
    By Naxos of the Bacchus ridge, Donusa's green-hued steep,
    And Olearon, and Paros white, and scattered o'er the deep
    All Cyclades; we skim the straits besprent with many a folk;
    And diverse clamour mid the ships seafarers striving woke;
    Each eggs his fellow; On for Crete, and sires of time agone!
    And rising up upon our wake a fair wind followed on.                 130

    And so at last we glide along the old Curetes' strand,
    And straightway eager do I take the city wall in hand,
    And call it Pergamea, and urge my folk that name who love,
    For love of hearth and home to raise a burg their walls above.

    And now the more part of the ships are hauled up high and dry,
    To wedding and to work afield the folk fall presently,
    And I give laws and portion steads; when suddenly there fell
    From poisoned heaven a wasting plague, a wretched thing to tell,
    On limbs of men, on trees and fields; and deadly was the year,
    And men must leave dear life and die, or weary sick must bear        140
    Their bodies on: then Sirius fell to burn the acres dry;
    The grass was parched, the harvest sick all victual did deny.
    Then bids my father back once more o'er the twice-measured main,
    To Phoebus and Ortygia's strand, some grace of prayer to gain:
    What end to our outworn estate he giveth? whence will he
    That we should seek us aid of toil; where turn to o'er the sea?
    Night falleth, and all lives of earth doth sleep on bosom bear,
    When lo, the holy images, the Phrygian House-gods there,
    E'en them I bore away from Troy and heart of burning town,
    Were present to the eyes of me in slumber laid adown,                150
    Clear shining in the plenteous light that over all was shed
    By the great moon anigh her full through windows fashioned.
    Then thus they fall to speech with me, end of my care to make:

    'The thing that in Ortygia erst the seer Apollo spake
    Here telleth he, and to thy doors come we of his good will:
    Thee and thine arms from Troy aflame fast have we followed still.
    We 'neath thy care and in thy keel have climbed the swelling sea,
    And we shall bear unto the stars thy sons that are to be,
    And give thy city majesty: make ready mighty wall
    For mighty men, nor toil of way leave thou, though long it fall.     160
    Shift hence abode; the Delian-born Apollo ne'er made sweet
    These shores for thee, nor bade thee set thy city down in Crete:
    There is a place, the Westland called of Greeks in days that are,
    An ancient land, a fruitful soil, a mighty land of war;
    Oenotrian folk first tilled the land, whose sons, as rumours run,
    Now call it nought but Italy, from him who led them on.
    This is our very due abode: thence Dardanus outbroke,
    Iasius our father thence, beginner of our folk.
    Come rise, and glad these tidings tell unto thy father old,
    No doubtful tale: now Corythus, Ausonian field and fold              170
    Let him go seek, for Jupiter banneth Dictaean mead.'

    All mazed was I with sight and voice of Gods; because indeed
    This was not sleep, but face to face, as one a real thing sees.
    I seemed to see their coifed hair and very visages,
    And over all my body too cold sweat of trembling flowed.
    I tore my body from the bed, and, crying out aloud,
    I stretched my upturned hands to heaven and unstained gifts I spilled
    Upon the hearth, and joyfully that worship I fulfilled.
    Anchises next I do to wit and all the thing unlock;
    And he, he saw the twi-branched stem, twin fathers of our stock,     180
    And how by fault of yesterday through steads of old he strayed.

    'O son, well learned in all the lore of Ilium's fate,' he said,
    'Cassandra only of such hap would sing; I mind me well
    Of like fate meted to our folk full oft would she foretell;
    And oft would call to Italy and that Hesperian home.
    But who believed that Teucrian folk on any day might come
    Unto Hesperia's shores? or who might trow Cassandra then?
    Yield we to Phoebus, follow we as better counselled men
    The better part.'
                     We, full of joy, obey him with one mind;
    From this seat too we fare away and leave a few behind;              190
    With sail abroad in hollow tree we skim the ocean o'er.

    But when our keels the deep sea made, nor had we any more
    The land in sight, but sea around, and sky around was spread,
    A coal-blue cloud drew up to us that, hanging overhead,
    Bore night and storm, and mirky gloom o'er all the waters cast:
    Therewith the winds heap up the waves, the seas are rising fast
    And huge; and through the mighty whirl scattered we toss about;
    The storm-clouds wrap around the day, and wet mirk blotteth out
    The heavens, and mid the riven clouds the ceaseless lightnings live.
    So are we blown from out our course, through might of seas we drive,  200
    Nor e'en might Palinurus self the day from night-tide sift,
    Nor have a deeming of the road atwixt the watery drift.
    Still on for three uncertain suns, that blind mists overlay,
    And e'en so many starless nights, across the sea we stray;
    But on the fourth day at the last afar upon us broke
    The mountains of another land, mid curling wreaths of smoke.
    Then fall the sails, we rise on oars, no sloth hath any place,
    The eager seamen toss the spray and sweep the blue sea's face;
    And me first saved from whirl of waves the Strophades on strand
    Now welcome; named by Greekish name Isles of the Sea, they stand     210
    Amid the great Ionian folk: Celaeno holds the shores,
    And others of the Harpies grim, since shut were Phineus' doors
    Against them, and they had to leave the tables they had won.
    No monster woefuller than they, and crueller is none
    Of all God's plagues and curses dread from Stygian waters sent.
    A winged thing with maiden face, whose bellies' excrement
    Is utter foul; and hooked hands, and face for ever pale
    With hunger that no feeding stints.

    Borne thither, into haven come, we see how everywhere
    The merry wholesome herds of neat feed down the meadows fair,        220
    And all untended goatish flocks amid the herbage bite.
    With point and edge we fall on them, and all the Gods invite,
    Yea very Jove, to share the spoil, and on the curved strand
    We strew the beds, and feast upon rich dainties of the land.
    When lo, with sudden dreadful rush from out the mountains hap
    The Harpy folk, and all about their clanging wings they flap,
    And foul all things with filthy touch as at the food they wrench,
    And riseth up their grisly voice amid the evilest stench.

    Once more then 'neath a hollow rock at a long valley's head,         229
    Where close around the boughs of trees their quavering shadows shed,
    We dight the boards, and once again flame on the altars raise.
    Again from diverse parts of heaven, from dusky lurking-place,
    The shrieking rout with hooked feet about the prey doth fly,
    Fouling the feast with mouth: therewith I bid my company
    To arms, that with an evil folk the war may come to pass.
    They do no less than my commands, and lay along the grass
    Their hidden swords, and therewithal their bucklers cover o'er.
    Wherefore, when swooping down again, they fill the curved shore
    With noise, Misenus blows the call from off a watch-stead high
    With hollow brass; our folk fall on and wondrous battle try,         240
    Striving that sea-fowl's filthy folk with point and edge to spill.
    But nought will bite upon their backs, and from their feathers still
    Glanceth the sword, and swift they flee up 'neath the stars of air,
    Half-eaten meat and token foul leaving behind them there.
    But on a rock exceeding high yet did Celaeeno rest,
    Unhappy seer! there breaks withal a voice from out her breast:

    'What, war to pay for slaughtered neat, war for our heifers slain?
    O children of Laomedon, the war then will ye gain?
    The sackless Harpies will ye drive from their own land away?
    Then let this sink into your souls, heed well the words I say;       250
    The Father unto Phoebus told a tale that Phoebus told
    To me, and I the first-born fiend that same to you unfold:
    Ye sail for Italy, and ye, the winds appeased by prayer,
    Shall come to Italy, and gain the grace of haven there:
    Yet shall ye gird no wall about the city granted you,
    Till famine, and this murder's wrong that ye were fain to do,
    Drive you your tables gnawed with teeth to eat up utterly.'

    She spake, and through the woody deeps borne off on wings did fly.
    But sudden fear fell on our folk, and chilled their frozen blood;    259
    Their hearts fell down; with weapon-stroke no more they deem it good
    To seek for peace: but rather now sore prayers and vows they will,
    Whether these things be goddesses or filthy fowls of ill.
    Father Anchises on the strand stretched both his hands abroad,
    And, bidding all their worship due, the Mighty Ones adored:
    'Gods, bring their threats to nought! O Gods, turn ye the curse, we pray!
    Be kind, and keep the pious folk!'
                                      Then bade he pluck away
    The hawser from the shore and slack the warping cable's strain:
    The south wind fills the sails, we fare o'er foaming waves again,
    E'en as the helmsman and the winds have will that we should fare.

    And now amidmost of the flood Zacynthus' woods appear,               270
    Dulichium, Samos, Neritos, with sides of stony steep:
    Wide course from cliffs of Ithaca, Laertes' land, we keep,
    Cursing the soil that bore and nursed Ulysses' cruelty.
    Now open up Leucata's peaks, that fare so cloudy high
    Over Apollo, mighty dread to all seafarers grown;
    But weary thither do we steer and make the little town,
    We cast the anchors from the bows and swing the sterns a-strand.
    And therewithal since we at last have gained the longed-for land,
    We purge us before Jupiter and by the altars pray,
    Then on the shores of Actium's head the Ilian plays we play.         280
    Anointed with the sleeking oil there strive our fellows stripped
    In wrestling game of fatherland: it joys us to have slipped
    By such a host of Argive towns amidmost of the foe.

    Meanwhile, the sun still pressing on, the year about doth go,
    And frosty winter with his north the sea's face rough doth wear;
    A buckler of the hollow brass of mighty Abas' gear
    I set amid the temple-doors with singing scroll thereon,
    AENEAS HANGETH ARMOUR HERE FROM CONQUERING DANAANS WON.
    And then I bid to leave the shore and man the thwarts again.
    Hard strive the folk in smiting sea, and oar-blades brush the main.  290
    The airy high Phaeacian towers sink down behind our wake,
    And coasting the Epirote shores Chaonia's bay we make,
    And so Buthrotus' city-walls high set we enter in.

    There tidings hard for us to trow unto our ears do win,
    How Helenus, e'en Priam's son, hath gotten wife and crown
    Of Pyrrhus come of AEacus, and ruleth Greekish town,
    And that Andromache hath wed one of her folk once more.
    All mazed am I; for wondrous love my heart was kindling sore
    To give some word unto the man, of such great things to learn:
    So from the haven forth I fare, from ships and shore I turn.         300

    But as it happed Andromache was keeping yearly day,
    Pouring sad gifts unto the dead, amidst a grove that lay
    Outside the town, by wave that feigned the Simois that had been,
    Blessing the dead by Hector's mound empty and grassy green,
    Which she with altars twain thereby had hallowed for her tears.
    But when she saw me drawing nigh with armour that Troy bears
    About me, senseless, throughly feared with marvels grown so great,
    She stiffens midst her gaze; her bones are reft of life-blood's heat,
    She totters, scarce, a long while o'er, this word comes forth from her:

    'Is the show true, O Goddess-born? com'st thou a messenger           310
    Alive indeed? or if from thee the holy light is fled,
    Where then is Hector?'
                           Flowed the tears e'en as the word she said,
    And with her wailing rang the place: sore moved I scarce may speak
    This word to her, grown wild with grief, in broken voice and weak:
    'I live indeed, I drag my life through outer ways of ill;
    Doubt not, thou seest the very sooth.
    Alas! what hap hath caught thee up from such a man downcast?
    Hath any fortune worthy thee come back again at last?
    Doth Hector's own Andromache yet serve in Pyrrhus' bed?'

    She cast her countenance adown, and in a low voice said:             320
    'O thou alone of Trojan maids that won a little joy,
    Bidden to die on foeman's tomb before the walls of Troy!
    Who died, and never had to bear the sifting lot's award,
    Whose slavish body never touched the bed of victor lord!
    We from our burning fatherland carried o'er many a sea,
    Of Achillaean offspring's pride the yoke-fellow must be,
    Must bear the childbed of a slave: thereafter he, being led
    To Leda's child Hermione and that Laconian bed,
    To Helenus his very thrall me very thrall gave o'er:
    But there Orestes, set on fire by all the love he bore               330
    His ravished wife, and mad with hate, comes on him unaware
    Before his fathers' altar-stead and slays him then and there.

    By death of Neoptolemus his kingdom's leavings came
    To Helenus, who called the fields Chaonian fields by name,
    And all the land Chaonia, from Chaon of Troy-town;
    And Pergamus and Ilian burg on ridgy steep set down.
    What winds, what fates gave thee the road to cross the ocean o'er?
    Or what of Gods hath borne thee on unwitting to our shore?
    What of the boy Ascanius? lives he and breathes he yet?
    Whom unto thee when Troy yet was----                                 340
    The boy then, of his mother lost, hath he a thought of her?
    Do him AEneas, Hector gone, father and uncle, stir,
    To valour of the ancient days, and great hearts' glorious gain?'

    Such tale she poured forth, weeping sore, and long she wept in vain
    Great floods of tears: when lo, from out the city draweth nigh
    Lord Helenus the Priam-born midst mighty company,
    And knows his kin, and joyfully leads onward to his door,
    Though many a tear 'twixt broken words the while doth he outpour.
    So on; a little Troy I see feigned from great Troy of fame,
    A Pergamus, a sandy brook that hath the Xanthus name,                350
    On threshold of a Scaean gate I stoop to lay a kiss.
    Soon, too, all Teucrian folk are wrapped in friendly city's bliss,
    And them the King fair welcomes in amid his cloisters broad,
    And they amidmost of the hall the bowls of Bacchus poured,
    The meat was set upon the gold, and cups they held in hand.

    So passed a day and other day, until the gales command
    The sails aloft, and canvas swells with wind from out the South:
    Therewith I speak unto the seer, such matters in my mouth:
    'O Troy-born, O Gods' messenger, who knowest Phoebus' will,
    The tripods and the Clarian's bay, and what the stars fulfil,        360
    And tongues of fowl, and omens brought by swift foreflying wing,
    Come, tell the tale! for of my way a happy heartening thing
    All shrines have said, and all the Gods have bid me follow on
    To Italy, till outland shores, far off, remote were won:
    Alone Celaeno, Harpy-fowl, new dread of fate set forth,
    Unmeet to tell, and bade us fear the grimmest day of wrath,
    And ugly hunger. How may I by early perils fare?
    Or doing what may I have might such toil to overbear?'

    So Helenus, when he hath had the heifers duly slain,
    Prays peace of Gods, from hallowed head he doffs the bands again,    370
    And then with hand he leadeth me, O Phoebus, to thy door,
    My fluttering soul with all thy might of godhead shadowed o'er.
    There forth at last from God-loved mouth the seer this word did send:

    'O Goddess-born, full certainly across the sea ye wend
    By mightiest bidding, such the lot the King of Gods hath found
    All fateful; so he rolls the world, so turns its order round.
    Few things from many will I tell that thou the outland sea
    May'st sail the safer, and at last make land in Italy;
    The other things the Parcae still ban Helenus to wot,
    Saturnian Juno's will it is that more he utter not.                  380
    First, from that Italy, which thou unwitting deem'st anigh,
    Thinking to make in little space the haven close hereby,
    Long is the wayless way that shears, and long the length of land;
    And first in the Trinacrian wave must bend the rower's wand.
    On plain of that Ausonian salt your ships must stray awhile,
    And thou must see the nether meres, AEaean Circe's isle,
    Ere thou on earth assured and safe thy city may'st set down.
    I show thee tokens; in thy soul store thou the tokens shown.
    When thou with careful heart shalt stray the secret stream anigh,
    And 'neath the holm-oaks of the shore shalt see a great sow lie,     390
    That e'en now farrowed thirty head of young, long on the ground
    She lieth white, with piglings white their mother's dugs around,--
    That earth shall be thy city's place, there rest from toil is stored.
    Nor shudder at the coming curse, the gnawing of the board,
    The Fates shall find a way thereto; Apollo called shall come.
    But flee these lands of Italy, this shore so near our home,
    That washing of the strand thereof our very sea-tide seeks;
    For in all cities thereabout abide the evil Greeks.
    There now have come the Locrian folk Narycian walls to build;
    And Lyctian Idomeneus Sallentine meads hath filled                   400
    With war-folk; Philoctetes there holdeth Petelia small,
    Now by that Meliboean duke fenced round with mighty wall.
    Moreover, when your ships have crossed the sea, and there do stay,
    And on the altars raised thereto your vows ashore ye pay,
    Be veiled of head, and wrap thyself in cloth of purple dye,
    Lest 'twixt you and the holy fires ye light to God on high
    Some face of foeman should thrust in the holy signs to spill.
    Now let thy folk, yea and thyself, this worship thus fulfil,
    And let thy righteous sons of sons such fashion ever mind.
    But when, gone forth, to Sicily thou comest on the wind,             410
    And when Pelorus' narrow sea is widening all away,
    Your course for leftward lying land and leftward waters lay,
    How long soe'er ye reach about: flee right-hand shore and wave.
    In time agone some mighty thing this place to wrack down drave,
    So much for changing of the world doth lapse of time avail.

    It split atwain, when heretofore the two lands, saith the tale,
    Had been but one, the sea rushed in and clave with mighty flood
    Hesperia's side from Italy, and field and city stood
    Drawn back on either shore, along a sundering sea-race strait.
    There Scylla on the right hand lurks, the left insatiate             420
    Charybdis holds, who in her maw all whirling deep adown
    Sucketh the great flood tumbling in thrice daily, which out-thrown
    Thrice daily doth she spout on high, smiting the stars with brine.
    But Scylla doth the hidden hole of mirky cave confine;
    With face thrust forth she draweth ships on to that stony bed;
    Manlike above, with maiden breast and lovely fashioned
    Down to the midst, she hath below huge body of a whale,
    And unto maw of wolfish heads is knit a dolphin's tail.
    'Tis better far to win about Pachynus, outer ness
    Of Sicily, and reach long round, despite the weariness,              430
    Than have that ugly sight of her within her awful den,
    And hear her coal-blue baying dogs and rocks that ring again.

    Now furthermore if Helenus in anything have skill,
    Or aught of trust, or if his soul with sooth Apollo fill,
    Of one thing, Goddess-born, will I forewarn thee over all,
    And spoken o'er and o'er again my word on thee shall fall:
    The mighty Juno's godhead first let many a prayer seek home;
    To Juno sing your vows in joy, with suppliant gifts o'ercome
    That Lady of all Might; and so, Trinacria overpast,
    Shalt thou be sped to Italy victorious at the last.                  440
    When there thou com'st and Cumae's town amidst thy way hast found,
    The Holy Meres, Avernus' woods fruitful of many a sound,
    There the wild seer-maid shalt thou see, who in a rock-hewn cave
    Singeth of fate, and letteth leaves her names and tokens have:
    But whatso song upon those leaves the maiden seer hath writ
    She ordereth duly, and in den of live stone leaveth it:
    There lie the written leaves unmoved, nor shift their ordered rows.
    But when the hinge works round, and thence a light air on them blows,
    Then, when the door doth disarray among the frail leaves bear,
    To catch them fluttering in the cave she never hath a care,          450
    Nor will she set them back again nor make the song-words meet;
    So folk unanswered go their ways and loathe the Sibyl's seat.
    But thou, count not the cost of time that there thou hast to spend;
    Although thy fellows blame thee sore, and length of way to wend
    Call on thy sails, and thou may'st fill their folds with happy gale,
    Draw nigh the seer, and strive with prayers to have her holy tale;
    Beseech her sing, and that her words from willing tongue go free:
    So reverenced shall she tell thee tale of folk of Italy
    And wars to come; and how to 'scape, and how to bear each ill,
    And with a happy end at last thy wandering shall fulfil.             460
    Now is this all my tongue is moved to tell thee lawfully:
    Go, let thy deeds Troy's mightiness exalt above the sky!'

    So when the seer from loving mouth such words as this had said,
    Then gifts of heavy gold and gifts of carven tooth he bade
    Be borne a-shipboard; and our keels he therewithal doth stow
    With Dodonaean kettle-ware and silver great enow,
    A coat of hooked woven mail and triple golden chain,
    A helm with noble towering crest crowned with a flowing mane,
    The arms of Pyrrhus: gifts most meet my father hath withal;
    And steeds he gives and guides he gives,                             470
    Fills up the tale of oars, and arms our fellows to their need.
    Anchises still was bidding us meanwhile to have a heed
    Of setting sail, nor with the wind all fair to make delay;
    To whom with words of worship now doth Phoebus' servant say:
    'Anchises, thou whom Venus' bed hath made so glorious,
    Care of the Gods, twice caught away from ruin of Pergamus,
    Lo, there the Ausonian land for thee, set sail upon the chase:
    Yet needs must thou upon the sea glide by its neighbouring face.
    Far off is that Ausonia yet that Phoebus open lays.
    Fare forth, made glad with pious son! why tread I longer ways        480
    Of speech, and stay the rising South with words that I would tell?'

    And therewithal Andromache, sad with the last farewell,
    Brings for Ascanius raiment wrought with picturing wool of gold,
    And Phrygian coat; nor will she have our honour wax acold,
    But loads him with the woven gifts, and such word sayeth she:
    'Take these, fair boy; keep them to be my hands' last memory,
    The tokens of enduring love thy younger days did win
    From Hector's wife Andromache, the last gifts of thy kin.
    O thou, of my Astyanax the only image now!
    Such eyes he had, such hands he had, such countenance as thou,       490
    And now with thee were growing up in equal tale of years.'

    Then I, departing, spake to them amid my rising tears:
    'Live happy! Ye with fortune's game have nothing more to play,
    While we from side to side thereof are hurried swift away.
    Your rest hath blossomed and brought forth; no sea-field shall ye till,
    Seeking the fields of Italy that fade before you still.
    Ye see another Xanthus here, ye see another Troy,
    Made by your hands for better days mehopes, and longer joy:
    And soothly less it lies across the pathway of the Greek,
    If ever I that Tiber flood and Tiber fields I seek                   500
    Shall enter, and behold the walls our folk shall win of fate.
    Twin cities some day shall we have, and folks confederate,
    Epirus and Hesperia; from Dardanus each came,
    One fate had each: them shall we make one city and the same,
    One Troy in heart: lo, let our sons of sons' sons see to it!'

    Past nigh Ceraunian mountain-sides thence o'er the sea we flit,
    Whence the sea-way to Italy the shortest may be made.
    But in the meanwhile sets the sun, the dusk hills lie in shade,
    And, choosing oar-wards, down we lie on bosom of the land
    So wished for: by the water-side and on the dry sea-strand           510
    We tend our bodies here and there; sleep floodeth every limb.
    But ere the hour-bedriven night in midmost orb did swim,
    Nought slothful Palinurus rose, and wisdom strives to win
    Of all the winds: with eager ear the breeze he drinketh in;
    He noteth how through silent heaven the stars soft gliding fare,
    Arcturus, the wet Hyades, and either Northern Bear,
    And through and through he searcheth out Orion girt with gold.
    So when he sees how everything a peaceful sky foretold,
    He bloweth clear from off the poop, and we our campment shift,
    And try the road and spread abroad our sail-wings to the lift.       520

    And now, the stars all put to flight, Aurora's blushes grow,
    When we behold dim fells afar and long lands lying low,
    --E'en Italy. Achates first cries out on Italy;
    To Italy our joyous folk glad salutation cry.
    Anchises then a mighty bowl crowned with a garland fair,
    And filled it with unwatered wine and called the Gods to hear,
    High standing on the lofty deck:
    'O Gods that rule the earth and sea, and all the tides of storm,
    Make our way easy with the wind, breathe on us kindly breath!'

    Then riseth up the longed-for breeze, the haven openeth              530
    As nigh we draw, and on the cliff a fane of Pallas shows:
    Therewith our fellow-folk furl sail and shoreward turn the prows.
    Bow-wise the bight is hollowed out by eastward-setting flood,
    But over-foamed by salt-sea spray thrust out its twin horns stood,
    While it lay hidden; tower-like rocks let down on either hand
    Twin arms of rock-wall, and the fane lies backward from the stand.

    But I beheld upon the grass four horses, snowy white,
    Grazing the meadows far and wide, first omen of my sight.
    Father Anchises seeth and saith: 'New land, and bear'st thou war?
    For war are horses dight; so these war-threatening herd-beasts are.  540
    Yet whiles indeed those four-foot things in car will well refrain,
    And tamed beneath the yoke will bear the bit and bridle's strain,
    So there is yet a hope of peace.'
                                     Then on the might we call
    Of Pallas of the weapon-din, first welcomer of all,
    And veil our brows before the Gods with cloth of Phrygian dye;
    And that chief charge of Helenus we do all rightfully,
    And Argive Juno worship there in such wise as is willed.

    We tarry not, but when all vows are duly there fulfilled,
    Unto the wind our sail-yard horns we fall to turn about,
    And leave the houses of the Greeks, and nursing fields of doubt.     550
    And next is seen Tarentum's bay, the Herculean place
    If fame tell true; Lacinia then, the house of Gods, we face;
    And Caulon's towers, and Scylaceum, of old the shipman's bane.
    Then see we AEtna rise far off above Trinacria's main;
    Afar the mighty moan of sea, and sea-cliffs beaten sore,
    We hearken, and the broken voice that cometh from the shore:
    The sea leaps high upon the shoals, the eddy churns the sand.

    Then saith Anchises: 'Lo forsooth, Charybdis is at hand,
    Those rocks and stones the dread whereof did Helenus foretell.
    Save ye, O friends! swing out the oars together now and well!'       560

    Nor worser than his word they do, and first the roaring beaks
    Doth Palinurus leftward wrest; then all the sea-host seeks
    With sail and oar the waters wild upon the left that lie:
    Upheaved upon the tossing whirl we fare unto the sky,
    Then down unto the nether Gods we sink upon the wave:
    Thrice from the hollow-carven rocks great roar the sea-cliffs gave;
    Thrice did we see the spray cast forth and stars with sea-dew done;
    But the wind left us weary folk at sinking of the sun,
    And on the Cyclops' strand we glide unwitting of the way.

    Locked from the wind the haven is, itself an ample bay;              570
    But hard at hand mid ruin and fear doth AEtna thunder loud;
    And whiles it blasteth forth on air a black and dreadful cloud,
    That rolleth on a pitchy wreath, where bright the ashes mix,
    And heaveth up great globes of flame and heaven's high star-world licks,
    And other whiles the very cliffs, and riven mountain-maw
    It belches forth; the molten stones together will it draw
    Aloft with moan, and boileth o'er from lowest inner vale.
    This world of mountain presseth down, as told it is in tale,
    Enceladus the thunder-scorched; huge AEtna on him cast,
    From all her bursten furnaces breathes out his fiery blast;          580
    And whensoe'er his weary side he shifteth, all the shore
    Trinacrian trembleth murmuring, and heaven is smoke-clad o'er.

    In thicket close we wear the night amidst these marvels dread,
    Nor may we see what thing it is that all that noise hath shed:
    For neither showed the planet fires, nor was the heaven bright
    With starry zenith; mirky cloud hung over all the night,
    In mist of dead untimely tide the moon was hidden close.

    But when from earliest Eastern dawn the following day arose,
    And fair Aurora from the heaven the watery shades had cleared,
    Lo, suddenly from out the wood new shape of man appeared.            590
    Unknown he was, most utter lean, in wretchedest of plight:
    Shoreward he stretched his suppliant hands; we turn back at the sight,
    And gaze on him: all squalor there, a mat of beard we see,
    And raiment clasped with wooden thorns; and yet a Greek is he,
    Yea, sent erewhile to leaguered Troy in Greekish weed of war.
    But when he saw our Dardan guise and arms of Troy afar,
    Feared at the sight he hung aback at first a little space,
    But presently ran headlong down into our sea-side place
    With tears and prayers:
                           'O Teucrian men, by all the stars,' he cried,
    'By all the Gods, by light of heaven ye breathe, O bear me wide      600
    Away from here! to whatso land henceforth ye lead my feet
    It is enough. That I am one from out the Danaan fleet,
    And that I warred on Ilian house erewhile, most true it is;
    For which, if I must pay so much wherein I wrought amiss,
    Then strew me on the flood and sink my body in the sea!
    To die by hands of very men shall be a joy to me.'

    He spake with arms about our knees, and wallowing still he clung
    Unto our knees: but what he was and from what blood he sprung
    We bade him say, and tell withal what fate upon him drave.
    His right hand with no tarrying then Father Anchises gave            610
    Unto the youth, and heartened him with utter pledge of peace.
    So now he spake when fear of us amid his heart did cease:

    'Luckless Ulysses' man am I, and Ithaca me bore,
    Hight Achemenides, who left that Adamastus poor
    My father (would I still were there!) by leaguered Troy to be.
    Here while my mates aquake with dread the cruel threshold flee,
    They leave me in the Cyclops' den unmindful of their friend;
    A house of blood and bloody meat, most huge from end to end,
    Mirky within: high up aloft star-smiting to behold
    Is he himself;--such bane, O God, keep thou from field and fold!     620
    Scarce may a man look on his face; no word to him is good;
    On wretches' entrails doth he feed and black abundant blood.
    Myself I saw him of our folk two hapless bodies take
    In his huge hand, whom straight he fell athwart a stone to break
    As there he lay upon his back; I saw the threshold swim
    With spouted blood, I saw him grind each bloody dripping limb,
    I saw the joints amidst his teeth all warm and quivering still.
    --He payed therefore, for never might Ulysses bear such ill,
    Nor was he worser than himself in such a pinch bestead:
    For when with victual satiate, deep sunk in wine, his head           630
    Fell on his breast, and there he lay enormous through the den,
    Snorting out gore amidst his sleep, with gobbets of the men
    And mingled blood and wine; then we sought the great Gods with prayer
    And drew the lots, and one and all crowded about him there,
    And bored out with a sharpened pike the eye that used to lurk
    Enormous lonely 'neath his brow overhanging grim and mirk,
    As great a shield of Argolis, or Phoebus' lamp on high;
    And so our murdered fellows' ghosts avenged we joyously.
    --But ye, O miserable men, flee forth! make haste to pluck
    The warping hawser from the shore!                                   640
    For even such, and e'en so great as Polypheme in cave
    Shuts in the wealth of woolly things and draws the udders' wave,
    An hundred others commonly dwell o'er these curving bights,
    Unutterable Cyclop folk, or stray about the heights.
    Thrice have the twin horns of the moon fulfilled the circle clear
    While I have dragged out life in woods and houses of the deer,
    And gardens of the beasts; and oft from rocky place on high
    Trembling I note the Cyclops huge, hear foot and voice go by.
    And evil meat of wood-berries, and cornel's flinty fruit             649
    The bush-boughs give; on grass at whiles I browse, and plucked-up root
    So wandering all about, at last I see unto the shore
    Your ships a-coming: thitherward my steps in haste I bore:
    Whate'er might hap enough it was to flee this folk of ill;
    Rather do ye in any wise the life within me spill.'

    And scarcely had he said the word ere on the hill above
    The very shepherd Polypheme his mountain mass did move,
    A marvel dread, a shapeless trunk, an eyeless monstrous thing,
    Who down unto the shore well known his sheep was shepherding;
    A pine-tree in the hand of him leads on and stays his feet;
    The woolly sheep his fellows are, his only pleasure sweet,           660
    The only solace of his ill.
    But when he touched the waters deep, and mid the waves was come,
    He falls to wash the flowing blood from off his eye dug out;
    Gnashing his teeth and groaning sore he walks the sea about,
    But none the less no wave there was up to his flank might win.
    Afeard from far we haste to flee, and, having taken in
    Our suppliant, who had earned it well, cut cable silently,
    And bending to the eager oars sweep out along the sea.
    He heard it, and his feet he set to follow on the sound;
    But when his right hand failed to reach, and therewithal he found    670
    He might not speed as fast as fares the Ionian billow lithe,
    Then clamour measureless he raised, and ocean quaked therewith
    Through every wave, and inwardly the land was terrified
    Of Italy, and AEtna boomed from many-hollowed side.
    But all the race of Cyclops stirred from woods and lofty hills,
    Down rushes to the haven-side and all the haven fills;
    And AEtna's gathered brethren there we see; in vain they stand
    Glowering grim-eyed with heads high up in heaven, a dreadful band
    Of councillors: they were as when on ridge aloft one sees
    The oaks stand thick against the sky, and cone-hung cypresses,       680
    Jove's lofty woods, or thicket where Diana's footsteps stray.

    Then headlong fear fell on our folk in whatsoever way
    To shake the reefs out spreading sail to any wind that blew;
    But Helenus had bid us steer a midmost course and true
    'Twixt Scylla and Charybdis, lest to death we sail o'er-close:
    So safest seemed for backward course to let the sails go loose.
    But lo, from out Pelorus' strait comes down the northern flaw,
    And past Pantagia's haven-mouth of living stone we draw,
    And through the gulf of Megara by Thapsus lying low.
    Such names did Achemenides, Ulysses' fellow, show,                   690
    As now he coasted back again the shore erst wandered by.

    In jaws of the Sicanian bay there doth an island lie
    Against Plemyrium's wavy face; folk called it in old days
    Ortygia: there, as tells the tale, Alpheus burrowed ways
    From his own Elis 'neath the sea, and now by mouth of thine,
    O Arethusa, blendeth him with that Sicilian brine.
    We pray the isle's great deities, e'en as we bidden were:
    And thence we pass the earth o'erfat about Helorus' mere;
    Then by Pachynus' lofty crags and thrust-forth rocks we skim,
    And Camarina showeth next a long way off and dim;                    700
    Her whom the Fates would ne'er be moved: then comes the plain in sight
    Of Gela, yea, and Gela huge from her own river hight:
    Then Acragas the very steep shows great walls far away,
    Begetter of the herds of horse high-couraged on a day.
    Then thee, Selinus of the palms, I leave with happy wind,
    And coast the Lilybean shoals and tangled skerries blind.

    But next the firth of Drepanum, the strand without a joy,
    Will have me. There I tossed so sore, the tempests' very toy,
    O woe is me! my father lose, lightener of every care,
    Of every ill: me all alone, me weary, father dear,                   710
    There wouldst thou leave; thou borne away from perils all for nought!
    Ah, neither Helenus the seer, despite the fears he taught,
    Nor grim Celaeno in her wrath, this grief of soul forebode.
    This was the latest of my toils, the goal of all my road,
    For me departed thence some God to this your land did bear."

    So did the Father AEneas, with all at stretch to hear,
    Tell o'er the fateful ways of God, and of his wanderings teach:
    But here he hushed him at the last and made an end of speech.




BOOK IV.

ARGUMENT.

HEREIN IS TOLD OF THE GREAT LOVE OF DIDO, QUEEN OF CARTHAGE, AND THE
WOEFUL ENDING OF HER.


    Meanwhile the Queen, long smitten sore with sting of all desire,
    With very heart's blood feeds the wound and wastes with hidden fire.
    And still there runneth in her mind the hero's valiancy,
    And glorious stock; his words, his face, fast in her heart they lie:
    Nor may she give her body peace amid that restless pain.

    But when the next day Phoebus' lamp lit up the lands again,
    And now Aurora from the heavens had rent the mist apart,
    Sick-souled her sister she bespeaks, the sharer of her heart:
    "Sister, O me, this sleepless pain that fears me with unrest!
    O me, within our house and home this new-come wondrous guest!         10
    Ah, what a countenance and mien! in arms and heart how strong!
    Surely to trow him of the Gods it doth no wisdom wrong;
    For fear it is shows base-born souls. Woe's me! how tossed about
    By fortune was he! how he showed war's utter wearing out!
    And, but my heart for ever now were set immovably
    Never to let me long again the wedding bond to tie,
    Since love betrayed me first of all with him my darling dead,
    And were I not all weary-sick of torch and bridal bed,
    This sin alone of all belike my falling heart might trap;
    For, Anna, I confess it thee, since poor Sychaeus' hap,                20
    My husband dead, my hearth acold through murderous brother's deed,
    This one alone hath touched the quick; this one my heart may lead
    Unto its fall: I feel the signs of fire of long agone.
    And yet I pray the deeps of earth beneath my feet may yawn,
    I pray the Father send me down bolt-smitten to the shades,
    The pallid shades of Erebus, the night that never fades,
    Before, O Shame, I shame thy face, or loose what thou hast tied!
    He took away the love from me, who bound me to his side
    That first of times. Ah, in the tomb let love be with him still!"

    The tears arisen as she spake did all her bosom fill.                 30
    But Anna saith: "Dearer to me than very light of day,
    Must thou alone and sorrowing wear all thy youth away,
    Nor see sweet sons, nor know the joys that gentle Venus brings?
    Deem'st thou dead ash or buried ghosts have heed of such-like things?
    So be it that thy sickened soul no man to yield hath brought
    In Libya as in Tyre; let be Iarbas set at nought,
    And other lords, whom Africa, the rich in battle's bliss,
    Hath nursed: but now, with love beloved,--must thou be foe to this?
    Yea, hast thou not within thy mind amidst whose bounds we are?
    Here the Gaetulian cities fierce, a folk unmatched in war,             40
    And hard Numidia's bitless folk, and Syrtes' guestless sand
    Lie round thee: there Barcaeans wild, the rovers of the land,
    Desert for thirst: what need to tell of wars new-born in Tyre,
    And of thy murderous brother's threats?
    Meseems by very will of Gods, by Juno's loving mind,
    The Ilian keels run down their course before the following wind.
    Ah, what a city shalt thou see! how shall the lordship wax
    With such a spouse! with Teucrian arms our brothers at our backs
    Unto what glory of great deeds the Punic realm may reach!
    But thou, go seek the grace of Gods, with sacrifice beseech;          50
    Then take thy fill of guest-serving; weave web of all delays:
    The wintry raging of the sea, Orion's watery ways,
    The way-worn ships, the heavens unmeet for playing seaman's part."

    So saying, she blew the flame of love within her kindled heart,
    And gave her doubtful soul a hope and loosed the girth of shame.

    Then straight they fare unto the shrines, by every altar's flame
    Praying for peace; and hosts they slay, chosen as custom would,
    To Phoebus, Ceres wise of law, Father Lyaeus good,
    But chiefest unto Juno's might, that wedlock hath in care.
    There bowl in hand stands Dido forth, most excellently fair,          60
    And pours between the sleek cow's horns; or to and fro doth pace
    Before the altars fat with prayer, 'neath very godhead's face,
    And halloweth in the day with gifts, and, gazing eagerly
    Amid the host's yet beating heart, for answering rede must try.
    --Woe's me! the idle mind of priests! what prayer, what shrine avails
    The wild with love!--and all the while the smooth flame never fails
    To eat her heart: the silent wound lives on within her breast:
    Unhappy Dido burneth up, and, wild with all unrest,
    For ever strays the city through: as arrow-smitten doe,
    Unwary, whom some herd from far hath drawn upon with bow              70
    Amid the Cretan woods, and left the swift steel in the sore,
    Unknowing: far in flight she strays the woods and thickets o'er,
    'Neath Dictae's heights; but in her flank still bears the deadly reed.

    Now midmost of the city-walls AEneas doth she lead,
    And shows him the Sidonian wealth, the city's guarded ways;
    And now she falls to speech, and now amidst a word she stays.
    Then at the dying of the day the feast she dights again,
    And, witless, once again will hear the tale of Ilium's pain;
    And once more hangeth on the lips that tell the tale aloud.
    But after they were gone their ways, and the dusk moon did shroud     80
    Her light in turn, and setting stars bade all to sleep away,
    Lone in the empty house she mourns, broods over where he lay,
    Hears him and sees him, she apart from him that is apart
    Or, by his father's image smit, Ascanius to her heart
    She taketh, if her utter love she may thereby beguile.
    No longer rise the walls begun, nor play the youth this while
    In arms, or fashion havens forth, or ramparts of the war:
    Broken is all that handicraft and mastery; idle are
    The mighty threatenings of the walls and engines wrought heaven high.

    Now when the holy wife of Jove beheld her utterly                     90
    Held by that plague, whose madness now not e'en her fame might stay,
    Then unto Venus, Saturn's seed began such words to say:
    "Most glorious praise ye carry off, meseems, most wealthy spoil,
    Thou and thy Boy; wondrous the might, and long to tell the toil,
    Whereas two Gods by dint of craft one woman have o'erthrown.
    But well I wot, that through your fear of walls I call mine own,
    In welcome of proud Carthage doors your hearts may never trow.
    But what shall be the end hereof? where wends our contest now?
    What if a peace that shall endure, and wedlock surely bound,          99
    We fashion? That which all thine heart was set on thou hast found.
    For Dido burns: bone of her bone thy madness is today:
    So let us rule these folks as one beneath an equal sway:
    Let the doom be that she shall take a Phrygian man for lord,
    And to thine hand for dowry due her Tyrian folk award."

    But Venus felt that Juno's guile within the word did live,
    Who lordship due to Italy to Libya fain would give,
    So thus she answered her again: "Who were so overbold
    To gainsay this? or who would wish war against thee to hold,
    If only this may come to pass, and fate the deed may seal?
    But doubtful drifts my mind of fate, if one same town and weal       110
    Jove giveth to the Tyrian folk and those from Troy outcast,
    If he will have those folks to blend and bind the treaty fast
    Thou art his wife: by prayer mayst thou prove all his purpose weighed.
    Set forth, I follow."
                         Juno then took up the word and said:
    "Yea, that shall be my very work: how that which presseth now
    May be encompassed, hearken ye, in few words will I show:
    AEneas and the hapless queen are minded forth to fare
    For hunting to the thicket-side, when Titan first shall bear
    Tomorrow's light aloft, and all the glittering world unveil:
    On them a darkening cloud of rain, blended with drift of hail,       120
    Will I pour down, while for the hunt the feathered snare-lines shake,
    And toils about the thicket go: all heaven will I awake
    With thunder, and their scattered folk the mid-mirk shall enwrap:
    Then Dido and the Trojan lord on one same cave shall hap;
    I will be there, and if to me thy heart be stable grown,
    In wedlock will I join the two and deem her all his own:
    And there shall be their bridal God."
                                         Then Venus nought gainsaid,
    But, nodding yea, she smiled upon the snare before her laid.

    Meanwhile Aurora risen up had left the ocean stream,
    And gateward throng the chosen youth in first of morning's beam,     130
    And wide-meshed nets, and cordage-toils and broad-steeled spears abound,
    Massylian riders go their ways with many a scenting hound.
    The lords of Carthage by the door bide till the tarrying queen
    Shall leave her chamber: there, with gold and purple well beseen,
    The mettled courser stands, and champs the bit that bids him bide.
    At last she cometh forth to them with many a man beside:
    A cloak of Sidon wrapped her round with pictured border wrought,
    Her quiver was of fashioned gold, and gold her tresses caught;
    The gathering of her purple gown a golden buckle had.

    Then come the Phrygian fellows forth; comes forth Iulus glad;        140
    Yea and AEneas' very self is of their fellowship,
    And joins their band: in goodliness all those did he outstrip:
    E'en such as when Apollo leaves the wintry Lycian shore,
    And Xanthus' stream, and Delos sees, his mother's isle once more;
    And halloweth in the dance anew, while round the altars shout
    The Cretans and the Dryopes, and painted Scythian rout:
    He steps it o'er the Cynthus' ridge, and leafy crown to hold
    His flowing tresses doth he weave, and intertwines the gold,
    And on his shoulders clang the shafts. Nor duller now passed on
    AEneas, from his noble face such wondrous glory shone.                150
    So come they to the mountain-side and pathless deer-fed ground,
    And lo, from hill-tops driven adown, how swift the wild goats bound
    Along the ridges: otherwhere across the open lea
    Run hart and hind, and gathering up their horned host to flee,
    Amid a whirling cloud of dust they leave the mountain-sides.
    But here the boy Ascanius the midmost valley rides,
    And glad, swift-horsed, now these he leaves, now those he flees before,
    And fain were he mid deedless herds to meet a foaming boar,
    Or see some yellow lion come the mountain-slopes adown.              159

    Meanwhile with mighty murmuring sound confused the heavens are grown,
    And thereupon the drift of rain and hail upon them broke;
    Therewith the scattered Trojan youth, the Tyrian fellow-folk,
    The son of Venus' Dardan son, scared through the meadows fly
    To diverse shelter, while the streams rush from the mountains high.

    Then Dido and the Trojan lord meet in the self-same cave;
    Then Earth, first-born of everything, and wedding Juno gave
    The token; then the wildfires flashed, and air beheld them wed,
    And o'er their bridal wailed the nymphs in hill-tops overhead.

    That day began the tide of death; that day the evil came;
    No more she heedeth eyes of men; no more she heedeth fame;           170
    No more hath Dido any thought a stolen love to win,
    But calls it wedlock: yea, e'en so she weaveth up the sin.

    Straight through the mighty Libyan folks is Rumour on the wing--
    Rumour, of whom nought swifter is of any evil thing:
    She gathereth strength by going on, and bloometh shifting oft!
    A little thing, afraid at first, she springeth soon aloft;
    Her feet are on the worldly soil, her head the clouds o'erlay.
    Earth, spurred by anger 'gainst the Gods, begot her as they say,
    Of Coeus and Enceladus the latest sister-birth.
    Swift are her wings to cleave the air, swift-foot she treads the earth:  180
    A monster dread and huge, on whom so many as there lie
    The feathers, under each there lurks, O strange! a watchful eye;
    And there wag tongues, and babble mouths, and hearkening ears upstand
    As many: all a-dusk by night she flies 'twixt sky and land
    Loud clattering, never shutting eye in rest of slumber sweet.
    By day she keepeth watch high-set on houses of the street,
    Or on the towers aloft she sits for mighty cities' fear!
    And lies and ill she loves no less than sooth which she must bear.

    She now, rejoicing, filled the folk with babble many-voiced,
    And matters true and false alike sang forth as she rejoiced:         190
    How here was come AEneas now, from Trojan blood sprung forth,
    Whom beauteous Dido deemed indeed a man to mate her worth:
    How winter-long betwixt them there the sweets of sloth they nursed,
    Unmindful of their kingdoms' weal, by ill desire accursed.
    This in the mouth of every man the loathly Goddess lays,
    And thence to King Iarbas straight she wendeth on her ways,
    To set his mind on fire with words, and high his wrath to lead.

    He, sprung from Garamantian nymph and very Ammon's seed,
    An hundred mighty fanes to Jove, an hundred altars fair,
    Had builded in his wide domain, and set the watch-fire there,        200
    The everlasting guard of God: there fat the soil was grown
    With blood of beasts; the threshold bloomed with garlands diverse blown.
    He, saith the tale, all mad at heart, and fired with bitter fame,
    Amidmost of the might of God before the altars came,
    And prayed a many things to Jove with suppliant hands outspread:

    "O Jupiter, almighty lord, to whom from painted bed
    The banqueting Maurusian folk Lenaean joy pours forth,
    Dost thou behold? O Father, is our dread of nothing worth
    When thou art thundering? Yea, forsooth, a blind fire of the clouds,
    An idle hubbub of the sky, our souls with terror loads!              210
    A woman wandering on our shore, who set her up e'en now
    A little money-cheapened town, to whom a field to plough
    And lordship of the place we gave, hath thrust away my word
    Of wedlock, and hath taken in AEneas for her lord:
    And now this Paris, hedged around with all his gelding rout,
    Maeonian mitre tied to chin, and wet hair done about,
    Sits on the prey while to thine house a many gifts we bear,
    Still cherishing an idle tale who our begetters were."

    The Almighty heard him as he prayed holding the altar-horns,
    And to the war-walls of the Queen his eyes therewith he turns,       220
    And sees the lovers heeding nought the glory of their lives;
    Then Mercury he calls to him, and such a bidding gives:
    "Go forth, O Son, the Zephyrs call, and glide upon the wing
    Unto the duke of Dardan men in Carthage tarrying,
    Who hath no eyes to see the walls that fate to him hath given:
    Speak to him, Son, and bear my words down the swift air of heaven:
    His fairest mother promised us no such a man at need,
    Nor claimed him twice from Greekish sword to live for such a deed.
    But Italy, the fierce in war, the big with empire's brood,
    Was he to rule; to get for us from glorious Teucer's blood           230
    That folk of folks, and all the world beneath his laws to lay.
    But if such glory of great deeds nought stirreth him today,
    Nor for his own fame hath he heart the toil to overcome,
    Yet shall the father grudge the son the towered heights of Rome?
    What doth he? tarrying for what hope among the enemy?
    And hath no eyes Ausonian sons, Lavinian land to see?
    Let him to ship! this is the doom; this word I bid thee bear."

    He spake: his mighty father's will straight did the God prepare
    To compass, and his golden shoes first bindeth on his feet,
    E'en those which o'er the ocean plain aloft on feathers fleet,       240
    Or over earth swift bear him on before the following gale:
    And then his rod he takes, wherewith he calleth spirits pale
    From Orcus, or those others sends sad Tartarus beneath,
    And giveth sleep and takes away, and openeth eyes to death;
    The rod that sways the ocean-winds and rules the cloudy rack.
    Now winging way he comes in sight of peak and steepy back
    Of flinty Atlas, on whose head all heaven is set adown--
    Of Atlas with the piny head, and never-failing crown
    Of mirky cloud, beat on with rain and all the winds that blow:       249
    A snow-cloak o'er his shoulders falls, and headlong streams overflow
    His ancient chin; his bristling beard with plenteous ice is done.
    There hovering on his poised wings stayed that Cyllenian one,
    And all his gathered body thence sent headlong toward the waves;
    Then like a bird the shores about, about the fishy caves,
    Skims low adown upon the wing the sea-plain's face anigh,
    Not otherwise 'twixt heaven and earth Cyllene's God did fly;
    And now, his mother's father great a long way left behind,
    Unto the sandy Libya's shore he clave the driving wind.
    But when the cot-built place of earth he felt beneath his feet,
    He saw AEneas founding towers and raising houses meet:                260
    Starred was the sword about him girt with yellow jasper stone,
    The cloak that from his shoulders streamed with Tyrian purple shone:
    Fair things that wealthy Dido's hand had given him for a gift,
    Who with the gleam of thready gold the purple web did shift.

    Then brake the God on him: "Forsooth, tall Carthage wilt thou found,
    O lover, and a city fair raise up from out the ground?
    Woe's me! thy lordship and thy deeds hast thou forgotten quite?
    The very ruler of the Gods down from Olympus bright
    Hath sent me, he whose majesty the earth and heavens obey;
    This was the word he bade me bear adown the windy way.               270
    What dost thou? hoping for what hope in Libya dost thou wear
    Thy days? if glorious fated things thine own soul may not stir,
    And heart thou lackest for thy fame the coming toil to wed,
    Think on Ascanius' dawn of days and hope inherited,
    To whom is due the Italian realm and all the world of Rome!"

    But when from out Cyllenius' mouth such word as this had come,
    Amidst his speech he left the sight of men that die from day,
    And mid thin air from eyes of folk he faded far away.
    But sore the sight AEneas feared, and wit from out him drave;
    His hair stood up, amidst his jaws the voice within him clave.       280
    Bewildered by that warning word, and by that God's command,
    He yearneth to depart and flee, and leave the lovely land.
    Ah, what to do? and with what word may he be bold to win
    Peace of the Queen all mad with love? what wise shall he begin?
    Hither and thither now he sends his mind all eager-swift,
    And bears it diversely away and runs o'er every shift:
    At last, as many things he weighed, this seemed the better rede.
    Mnestheus, Sergestus, straight he calls, Sergestus stout at need,
    And bids them dight ship silently and bring their folk to shore,
    And dight their gear, and cause thereof with lying cover o'er;       290
    While he himself, since of all this kind Dido knoweth nought,
    Nor of the ending of such love may ever have a thought,
    Will seek to draw anigh the Queen, seek time wherein the word
    May softliest be said to her, the matter lightliest stirred.
    So all they glad his bidding do, and get them to the work.

    But who may hoodwink loving eyes? She felt the treason lurk
    About her life, and from the first saw all that was to be;
    Fearing indeed where no fear was. That Rumour wickedly
    Told her wild soul of ship-host armed and ready to set out;
    The heart died in her; all aflame she raves the town about,          300
    E'en as a Thyad, who, soul-smit by holy turmoil, hears
    The voice of Bacchus on the day that crowns the triple years,
    And mirk Cithaeron through the night hath called her clamorous.

    Unto AEneas at the last herself she speaketh thus:
    "O thou forsworn! and hast thou hoped with lies to cover o'er
    Such wickedness, and silently to get thee from my shore?
    Our love, it hath not held thee back? nor right hand given in faith
    Awhile agone? nor Dido doomed to die a bitter death?
    Yea, e'en beneath the winter heavens thy fleet thou gatherest
    In haste to fare across the main amid the north's unrest             310
    O cruel! What if land unknown and stranger field and fold
    Thou sought'st not; if the ancient Troy stood as in days of old;
    Wouldst thou not still be seeking Troy across the wavy brine?
    --Yea, me thou fleest. O by these tears, by that right hand of thine,
    Since I myself have left myself unhappy nought but this,
    And by our bridal of that day and early wedding bliss,
    If ever I were worthy thanks, if sweet in aught I were,
    Pity a falling house! If yet be left a space for prayer,
    O then I pray thee put away this mind of evil things!
    Because of thee the Libyan folks, and those Numidian kings,          320
    Hate me, and Tyrians are my foes: yea, and because of thee
    My shame is gone, and that which was my heavenward road to be.
    My early glory.--Guest, to whom leav'st thou thy dying friend?
    Since of my husband nought but this is left me in the end.
    Why bide I till Pygmalion comes to lay my walls alow,
    Till taken by Getulian kings, Iarbas' slave I go?
    Ah! if at least ere thou wert gone some child of thee I had!
    If yet AEneas in mine house might play a little lad,
    E'en but to bring aback the face of that beloved one,
    Then were I never vanquished quite, nor utterly undone."             330

    She spake: he, warned by Jove's command, his eyes still steadfast held,
    And, striving, thrust his sorrow back, howso his heart-strings swelled:
    At last he answered shortly thus:
                                     "O Queen, though words may fail
    To tell thy lovingkindness, ne'er my heart belies the tale:
    Still shall it be a joy to think of sweet Elissa's days
    While of myself I yet may think, while breath my body sways.
    Few words about the deed in hand: ne'er in my mind it came
    As flees a thief to flee from thee; never the bridal flame
    Did I hold forth, or plight my troth such matters to fulfil.
    If fate would let me lead a life according to my will,               340
    Might I such wise as pleaseth me my troubles lay to rest,
    By Troy-town surely would I bide among the ashes blest
    Of my beloved, and Priam's house once more aloft should stand;
    New Pergamus for vanquished men should rise beneath my hand.
    But now Grynean Phoebus bids toward Italy the great
    To reach my hand; to Italy biddeth the Lycian fate:
    There is my love, there is my land. If Carthage braveries
    And lovely look of Libyan walls hold fast thy Tyrian eyes,
    Why wilt thou grudge the Teucrian men Ausonian dwelling-place?
    If we too seek the outland realm, for us too be there grace!         350
    Father Anchises, whensoever night covereth up the earth
    With dewy dark, and whensoe'er the bright stars come to birth,
    His troubled image midst of sleep brings warning word and fear.
    Ascanius weigheth on my heart with wrong of head so dear,
    Whom I beguile of fateful fields and realm of Italy.
    Yea, even now God's messenger sent from the Jove on high,
    (Bear witness either head of us!) bore doom of God adown
    The eager wind: I saw the God enter the fair-walled town
    In simple light: I drank his voice, yea with these ears of mine.
    Cease then to burn up with thy wail my burdened heart and thine!     360
    Perforce I follow Italy."

    But now this long while, as he spake, athwart and wild she gazed,
    And here and there her eyeballs rolled, and strayed with silent look
    His body o'er; and at the last with heart of fire outbroke:
    "Traitor! no Goddess brought thee forth, nor Dardanus was first
    Of thine ill race; but Caucasus on spiky crags accurst
    Begot thee; and Hyrcanian dugs of tigers suckled thee.
    Why hide it now? why hold me back lest greater evil be?
    For did he sigh the while I wept? his eyes--what were they moved?
    Hath he been vanquished unto tears, or pitied her that loved?        370
    --Ah, is aught better now than aught, when Juno utter great,
    Yea and the Father on all this with evil eyen wait?
    All faith is gone! I took him in a stranded outcast, bare:
    Yea in my very throne and land, ah fool! I gave him share.
    His missing fleet I brought aback; from death I brought his friends.
    --Woe! how the furies burn me up!--Now seer Apollo sends,
    Now bidding send the Lycian lots; now sendeth Jove on high
    His messenger to bear a curse adown the windy sky!
    Such is the toil of Gods aloft; such are the cares that rack
    Their souls serene.--I hold thee not, nor cast thy words aback.      380
    Go down the wind to Italy! seek lordship o'er the sea!
    Only I hope amid the rocks, if any God there be,
    Thou shalt drink in thy punishment and call on Dido's name
    Full oft: and I, though gone away, will follow with black flame;
    And when cold death from out my limbs my soul hath won away,
    I will be with thee everywhere; O wretch, and thou shalt pay.
    Ah, I shall hear; the tale of all shall reach me midst the dead."

    Therewith she brake her speech athwart, and sick at heart she fled
    The outer air, and turned away, and gat her from his eyes;
    Leaving him dallying with his fear, and turning many wise            390
    The words to say. Her serving-maids the fainting body weak,
    Bear back unto the marble room and on the pillows streak.

    But god-fearing AEneas now, however fain he were
    To soothe her grief and with soft speech assuage her weary care,
    Much groaning, and the heart of him shaken with loving pain.
    Yet went about the God's command and reached his ships again.
    Then fall the Teucrians on indeed, and over all the shore
    Roll the tall ships; the pitchy keel swims in the sea once more:
    They bear the oars still leaf-bearing: they bring the might of wood,
    Unwrought, so fain of flight they are,                               400
    Lo now their flitting! how they run from all the town in haste!
    E'en as the ants, the winter-wise, are gathered whiles to waste
    A heap of corn, and toil that same beneath their roof to lay,
    Forth goes the black troop mid the mead, and carries forth the prey
    Over the grass in narrow line: some strive with shoulder-might
    And push along a grain o'ergreat, some drive the line aright,
    Or scourge the loiterers: hot the work fares all along the road.

    Ah Dido, when thou sawest all what heart in thee abode!
    What groans thou gavest when thou saw'st from tower-top the long strand
    A-boil with men all up and down; the sea on every hand               410
    Before thine eyes by stir of men torn into all unrest!
    O evil Love, where wilt thou not drive on a mortal breast?
    Lo, she is driven to weep again and pray him to be kind,
    And suppliant, in the bonds of love her lofty heart to bind,
    Lest she should leave some way untried and die at last for nought.

    "Anna, thou seest the strand astir, the men together brought
    From every side, the canvas spread calling the breezes down.
    While joyful on the quarter-deck the sea-folk lay the crown.
    Sister, since I had might to think that such a thing could be,
    I shall have might to bear it now: yet do one thing for me,          420
    Poor wretch, O Anna: for to thee alone would he be kind,
    That traitor, and would trust to thee the inmost of his mind;
    And thou alone his softening ways and melting times dost know.
    O sister, speak a suppliant word to that high-hearted foe:
    I never swore at Aulis there to pluck up root and branch
    The Trojan folk; for Pergamus no war-ship did I launch:
    Anchises' buried ghost from tomb I never tore away:
    Why will his ears be ever deaf to any word I say?
    Where hurrieth he? O let him give his wretched love one gift;
    Let him but wait soft sailing-tide, when fair the breezes shift.     430
    No longer for the wedding past, undone, I make my prayer,
    Nor that he cast his lordship by, and promised Latium fair.
    For empty time, for rest and stay of madness now I ask,
    Till Fortune teach the overthrown to learn her weary task.
    Sister, I pray this latest grace; O pity me today,
    And manifold when I am dead the gift will I repay."

    So prayed she: such unhappy words of weeping Anna bears,
    And bears again and o'er again: but him no weeping stirs,
    Nor any voice he hearkeneth now may turn him from his road:
    God shut the hero's steadfast ears; fate in the way abode.           440
    As when against a mighty oak, strong growth of many a year,
    On this side and on that the blasts of Alpine Boreas bear,
    Contending which shall root it up: forth goes the roar, deep lie
    The driven leaves upon the earth from shaken bole on high.
    But fast it clingeth to the crag, and high as goes its head
    To heaven aloft, so deep adown to hell its roots are spread.
    E'en so by ceaseless drift of words the hero every wise
    Is battered, and the heavy care deep in his bosom lies;
    Steadfast the will abides in him; the tears fall down for nought.
    Ah, and unhappy Dido then the very death besought,                   450
    Outworn by fate: the hollow heaven has grown a sight to grieve.
    And for the helping of her will, that she the light may leave,
    She seeth, when mid the frankincense her offering she would lay,
    The holy water blackening there, O horrible to say!
    The wine poured forth turned into blood all loathly as it fell.
    Which sight to none, not e'en unto her sister, would she tell.
    Moreover, to her first-wed lord there stood amidst the house
    A marble shrine, the which she loved with worship marvellous,
    And bound it was with snowy wool and leafage of delight;             459
    Thence heard she, when the earth was held in mirky hand of night,
    Strange sounds come forth, and words as if her husband called his own.
    And o'er and o'er his funeral song the screech-owl wailed alone,
    And long his lamentable tale from high aloft was rolled.
    And many a saying furthermore of god-loved seers of old
    Fears her with dreadful memory: all wild amid her dreams
    Cruel AEneas drives her on, and evermore she seems
    Left all alone; and evermore a road that never ends,
    Mateless, and seeking through the waste her Tyrian folk, she wends.
    As raving Pentheus saw the rout of that Well-willing Folk,
    When twofold sun and twofold Thebes upon his eyes outbroke:          470
    Or like as Agamemnon's son is driven across the stage,
    Fleeing his mother's fiery hand that bears the serpent's rage,
    While there the avenging Dreadful Ones upon the threshold sit.

    But when she gave the horror birth, and, grief-worn, cherished it,
    And doomed her death, then with herself she planned its time and guise,
    And to her sister sorrowing sore spake word in such a wise,
    Covering her end with cheerful face and calm and hopeful brow:
    "Kinswoman, I have found a way, (joy with thy sister now!)
    Whereby to bring him back to me or let me loose from him.
    Adown beside the setting sun, hard on the ocean's rim,               480
    Lies the last world of AEthiops, where Atlas mightiest grown
    Upon his shoulder turns the pole with burning stars bestrown.
    A priestess thence I met erewhile, come of Massylian seed,
    The warden of the West-maid's fane, and wont the worm to feed,
    Mingling for him the honey-juice with poppies bearing sleep,
    Whereby she maketh shift on tree the hallowed bough to keep.
    She by enchantment takes in hand to loose what hearts she will,
    But other ones at need will she with heavy sorrows fill;
    And she hath craft to turn the stars and back the waters beat,
    Call up the ghosts that fare by night, make earth beneath thy feet   490
    Cry out, and ancient ash-trees draw the mountain-side adown.
    Dear heart, I swear upon the Gods, I swear on thee, mine own
    And thy dear head, that I am loath with magic craft to play.
    But privily amid the house a bale for burning lay
    'Neath the bare heaven, and pile on it the arms that evil one
    Left in the chamber: all he wore, the bridal bed whereon
    My days were lost: for so 'tis good: the priestess showeth me
    All tokens of the wicked man must perish utterly."

    No more she spake, but with the word her face grew deadly white.
    But Anna sees not how she veiled her death with new-found rite,      500
    Nor any thought of such a deed her heart encompasseth;
    Nor fears she heavier things to come than at Sychaeus' death.
    Wherefore she takes the charge in hand.

    But now the Queen, that bale being built amid the inner house
    'Neath the bare heavens, piled high with fir and cloven oak enow,
    Hangeth the garlands round the place, and crowns the bale with bough
    That dead men use: the weed he wore, his very effigy,
    His sword, she lays upon the bed, well knowing what shall be.
    There stand the altars, there the maid, wild with her scattered hair,
    Calls Chaos, Erebus, and those three hundred godheads there,         510
    And Hecate triply fashioned to maiden Dian's look;
    Water she scattered, would-be wave of dark Avernus' brook;
    And herbs she brought, by brazen shears 'neath moonlight harvested,
    All downy-young, though inky milk of venomed ill they shed.
    She brings the love-charm snatched away from brow of new-born foal
    Ere yet the mother snatcheth it.
    Dido herself the altars nigh, meal in her hallowed hands,
    With one foot of its bindings bare, and ungirt raiment stands,
    And dying calls upon the Gods, and stars that fateful fare;
    And then if any godhead is, mindful and just to care                 520
    For unloved lovers, unto that she sendeth up the prayer.

    Now night it was, and everything on earth had won the grace
    Of quiet sleep: the woods had rest, the wildered waters' face:
    It was the tide when stars roll on amid their courses due,
    And all the tilth is hushed, and beasts, and birds of many a hue;
    And all that is in waters wide, and what the waste doth keep
    In thicket rough, amid the hush of night-tide lay asleep,
    And slipping off the load of care forgat their toilsome part.
    But ne'er might that Phoenician Queen, that most unhappy heart,
    Sink into sleep, or take the night unto her eyes and breast:         530
    Her sorrows grow, and love again swells up with all unrest,
    And ever midst her troubled wrath rolls on a mighty tide;
    And thus she broods and turns it o'er and o'er on every side.

    "Ah, whither now? Shall I bemocked my early lovers try,
    And go Numidian wedlock now on bended knee to buy:
    I, who so often scorned to take their bridal-bearing hands?
    Or shall I, following Ilian ships, bear uttermost commands
    Of Teucrian men, because my help their lightened hearts makes kind;
    Because the thank for deed I did lies ever on their mind?
    But if I would, who giveth leave, or takes on scornful keel          540
    The hated thing? Thou knowest not, lost wretch, thou may'st not feel,
    What treason of Laomedon that folk for ever bears.
    What then? and shall I follow lone the joyous mariners?
    Or, hedged with all my Tyrian host, upon them shall I bear,
    Driving again across the sea those whom I scarce might tear
    From Sidon's city, forcing them to spread their sails abroad?
    Nay, stay thy grief with steel, and die, and reap thy due reward!
    Thou, sister, conquered by my tears, wert first this bane to lay
    On my mad soul, and cast my heart in that destroyer's way.
    Why was I not allowed to live without the bridal bed,                550
    Sackless and free as beasts afield, with no woes wearied?
    Why kept I not the faith of old to my Sychaeus sworn?"
    Such wailing of unhappy words from out her breast was torn.

    AEneas on the lofty deck meanwhile, assured of flight,
    Was winning sleep, since every need of his was duly dight;
    When lo! amid the dreams of sleep that shape of God come back,
    Seemed once again to warn him thus: nor yet the face did lack
    Nor anything of Mercury; both voice and hue was there,
    And loveliness of youthful limbs and length of yellow hair:          559
    "O Goddess-born, and canst thou sleep through such a tide as this?
    And seest thou not how round about the peril gathered is?
    And, witless, hear'st not Zephyr blow with gentle, happy wind?
    For treason now and dreadful deed she turneth in her mind,
    Assured of death; and diversely the tide of wrath sets in.
    Why fleest thou not in haste away, while haste is yet to win?
    Thou shalt behold the sea beat up with oar-blade, and the brand
    Gleam dire against thee, and one flame shall run adown the strand,
    If thee tomorrow's dawn shall take still lingering on this shore.
    Up! tarry not! for woman's heart is shifting evermore."

    So saying, amid the mirk of night he mingled and was lost.           570
    And therewithal AEneas, feared by sudden-flitting ghost,
    Snatching his body forth from sleep, stirs up his folk at need:
    "Wake ye, and hurry now, O men! get to the thwarts with speed,
    And bustle to unfurl the sails! here sent from heaven again
    A God hath spurred us on to flight, and biddeth hew atwain
    The hempen twine. O holy God, we follow on thy way,
    Whatso thou art; and glad once more thy bidding we obey.
    O be with us! give gracious aid; set stars the heaven about
    To bless our ways!"
                       And from the sheath his lightning sword flew out
    E'en as he spake: with naked blade he smote the hawser through,      580
    And all are kindled at his flame; they hurry and they do.
    The shore is left, with crowd of keels the sight of sea is dim;
    Eager they whirl the spray aloft, as o'er the blue they skim.

    And now Aurora left alone Tithonus' saffron bed,
    And first light of another day across the world she shed.
    But when the Queen from tower aloft beheld the dawn grow white,
    And saw the ships upon their way with fair sails trimmed aright,
    And all the haven shipless left, and reach of empty strand,
    Then thrice and o'er again she smote her fair breast with her hand,
    And rent her yellow hair, and cried, "Ah, Jove! and is he gone?      590
    And shall a very stranger mock the lordship I have won?
    Why arm they not? Why gather not from all the town in chase?
    Ho ye! why run ye not the ships down from their standing-place?
    Quick, bring the fire! shake out the sails! hard on the oars to sea!
    --What words are these, or where am I? What madness changeth me?
    Unhappy Dido! now at last thine evil deed strikes home.
    Ah, better when thou mad'st him lord--lo whereunto are come
    His faith and troth who erst, they say, his country's house-gods held
    The while he took upon his back his father spent with eld?           599
    Why! might I not have shred him up, and scattered him piecemeal
    About the sea, and slain his friends, his very son, with steel,
    Ascanius on his father's board for dainty meat to lay?
    But doubtful, say ye, were the fate of battle? Yea, O yea!
    What might I fear, who was to die?--if I had borne the fire
    Among their camp, and filled his decks with flame, and son and sire
    Quenched with their whole folk, and myself had cast upon it all!
    --O Sun, whose flames on every deed earth doeth ever fall,
    O Juno, setter-forth and seer of these our many woes,
    Hecate, whose name howled out a-nights o'er city crossway goes,
    Avenging Dread Ones, Gods that guard Elissa perishing,               610
    O hearken! turn your might most meet against the evil thing!
    O hearken these our prayers! and if the doom must surely stand,
    And he, the wicked head, must gain the port and swim aland,
    If Jove demand such fixed fate and every change doth bar,
    Yet let him faint mid weapon-strife and hardy folk of war!
    And let him, exiled from his house, torn from Iulus, wend,
    Beseeching help mid wretched death of many and many a friend.
    And when at last he yieldeth him to pact of grinding peace,
    Then short-lived let his lordship be, and loved life's increase.
    And let him fall before his day, unburied on the shore!              620
    Lo this I pray, this last of words forth with my blood I pour.
    And ye, O Tyrians, 'gainst his race that is, and is to be,
    Feed full your hate! When I am dead send down this gift to me:
    No love betwixt the peoples twain, no troth for anything!
    And thou, Avenger of my wrongs, from my dead bones outspring,
    To bear the fire and the sword o'er Dardan-peopled earth
    Now or hereafter; whensoe'er the day brings might to birth.
    I pray the shore against the shore, the sea against the sea,
    The sword 'gainst sword--fight ye that are, and ye that are to be!"

    So sayeth she, and everywise she turns about her mind                630
    How ending of the loathed light she speediest now may find.
    And few words unto Barce spake, Sychaeus' nurse of yore;
    For the black ashes held her own upon the ancient shore:
    "Dear nurse, my sister Anna now bring hither to my need,
    And bid her for my sprinkling-tide the running water speed;
    And bid her have the hosts with her, and due atoning things:
    So let her come; but thou, thine head bind with the holy strings;
    For I am minded now to end what I have set afoot,
    And worship duly Stygian Jove and all my cares uproot;
    Setting the flame beneath the bale of that Dardanian head."          640

    She spake; with hurrying of eld the nurse her footsteps sped.
    But Dido, trembling, wild at heart with her most dread intent,
    Rolling her blood-shot eyes about, her quivering cheeks besprent
    With burning flecks, and otherwhere dead white with death drawn nigh
    Burst through the inner doorways there and clomb the bale on high,
    Fulfilled with utter madness now, and bared the Dardan blade,
    Gift given not for such a work, for no such ending made.
    There, when upon the Ilian gear her eyen had been set,
    And bed well known, 'twixt tears and thoughts awhile she lingered yet;
    Then brooding low upon the bed her latest word she spake:            650

    "O raiment dear to me while Gods and fate allowed, now take
    This soul of mine and let me loose from all my woes at last!
    I, I have lived, and down the way fate showed to me have passed;
    And now a mighty shade of me shall go beneath the earth!
    A glorious city have I raised, and brought my walls to birth,
    Avenged my husband, made my foe, my brother, pay the pain:
    Happy, ah, happy overmuch were all my life-days' gain,
    If never those Dardanian keels had drawn our shores anigh."

    She spake: her lips lay on the bed: "Ah, unavenged to die!
    But let me die! Thus, thus 'tis good to go into the night!           660
    Now let the cruel Dardan eyes drink in the bale-fire's light,
    And bear for sign across the sea this token of my death."

    Her speech had end: but on the steel, amid the last word's breath,
    They see her fallen; along the blade they see her blood foam out,
    And all her hands besprent therewith: wild fly the shrieks about
    The lofty halls, and Rumour runs mad through the smitten town.
    The houses sound with women's wails and lamentable groan;
    The mighty clamour of their grief rings through the upper skies.
    'Twas e'en as if all Carthage fell mid flood of enemies,
    Or mighty Tyre of ancient days,--as if the wildfire ran              670
    Rolling about the roof of God and dwelling-place of man.

    Half dead her sister heard, and rushed distraught and trembling there,
    With nail and fist befouling all her face and bosom fair:
    She thrust amidst them, and by name called on the dying Queen:
    "O was it this my sister, then! guile in thy word hath been!
    And this was what the bale, the fire, the altars wrought for me!
    Where shall I turn so left alone? Ah, scorned was I to be
    For death-fellow! thou shouldst have called me too thy way to wend.
    One sword-pang should have been for both, one hour to make an end.
    Built I with hands, on Father-Gods with crying did I cry             680
    To be away, a cruel heart, from thee laid down to die?
    O sister, me and thee, thy folk, the fathers of the land,
    Thy city hast thou slain----O give, give water to my hand,
    And let me wash the wound, and if some last breath linger there,
    Let my mouth catch it!"
                           Saying so she reached the topmost stair,
    And to her breast the dying one she fondled, groaning sore,
    And with her raiment strove to staunch the black and flowing gore.
    Then Dido strove her heavy lids to lift, but back again
    They sank, and deep within her breast whispered the deadly bane:
    Three times on elbow struggling up a little did she rise,            690
    And thrice fell back upon the bed, and sought with wandering eyes
    The light of heaven aloft, and moaned when it was found at last.

    Then on her long-drawn agony did Juno pity cast,
    Her hard departing; Iris then she sent from heaven on high,
    And bade her from the knitted limbs the struggling soul untie.
    For since by fate she perished not, nor waited death-doom given,
    But hapless died before her day by sudden fury driven,
    Not yet the tress of yellow hair had Proserpine off-shred,
    Nor unto Stygian Orcus yet had doomed her wandering head.
    So Iris ran adown the sky on wings of saffron dew,                   700
    And colours shifting thousandfold against the sun she drew,
    And overhead she hung: "So bid, from off thee this I bear,
    Hallowed to Dis, and charge thee now from out thy body fare."

    She spake and sheared the tress away; then failed the life-heat spent
    And forth away upon the wind the spirit of her went.




BOOK V.

ARGUMENT.

AENEAS MAKING FOR ITALY IS STAYED BY CONTRARY WINDS, WHEREFORE HE SAILETH
TO SICILY, AND, COMING TO THE TOMB OF HIS FATHER ANCHISES, HOLDETH
SOLEMN GAMES THEREAT, AND IN THE END GOETH HIS WAY TO ITALY AGAIN.


    Meanwhile AEneas with his ships the mid-sea way did hold
    Steadfast, and cut the dusky waves before the north wind rolled,
    Still looking back upon the walls now litten by the flame
    Of hapless Dido: though indeed whence so great burning came
    They knew not; but the thought of grief that comes of love defiled
    How great it is, what deed may come of woman waxen wild,
    Through woeful boding of the sooth the Teucrians' bosoms bore.

    But when the ships the main sea held, nor had they any more
    The land in sight, but sea around and sky around was spread,
    A coal-blue cloud drew up to them, that hanging overhead              10
    Bore night and storm: feared 'neath the dark the waters trembling lie.
    Then called the helmsman Palinure from lofty deck on high:
    "Ah, wherefore doth such cloud of storm gird all the heavens about?
    What will ye, Father Neptune, now?"
                                        Therewith he crieth out
    To gather all the tackling in, and hard on oars to lay,
    And slopeth sail across the wind; and so such word doth say:
    "Great-souled AEneas, e'en if Jove my borrow now should be,
    'Neath such a sky I might not hope to make our Italy:
    The changed winds roar athwart our course, and from the west grown black
    They rise; while o'er the face of heaven gathers the cloudy rack.     20
    Nor have we might to draw a-head, nor e'en to hold our own.
    Wherefore since Fortune hath prevailed, by way that she hath shown,
    Whither she calleth, let us turn: methinks the way but short
    To brother-land of Eryx leal and safe Sicanian port,
    If I may read the stars aright that erst I bare in mind."

    Quoth good AEneas: "Now for long that suchwise would the wind
    I saw, and how thou heldest head against it all in vain:
    Shift sail and go about; what land may sweeter be to gain,
    Or whither would I liefer turn my keels from beat of sea,
    Than that which yet the Dardan lord Acestes holds for me,             30
    That holds my very father's bones, Anchises, in its breast?"

    They seek the haven therewithal, and fair and happy west
    Swelleth the sails: o'er whirl of waves full speedily they wend,
    And glad to that familiar sand they turn them in the end:
    But there Acestes meeteth them, who from a mountain high
    All wondering had seen afar the friendly ships draw nigh.
    With darts he bristled, and was clad in fell of Libyan bear.
    Him erst unto Crimisus' flood a Trojan mother fair
    Brought forth: and now, forgetting nought his mother's folk of old,
    He welcomes them come back again with wealth of field and fold,       40
    And solaces the weary men with plenteous friendly cheer.

    But when the stars in first of dawn fled from the morrow clear,
    AEneas called upon the shore assembly of his folk,
    And standing high aloft on mound such words to tell he spoke:
    "O mighty Dardan men, O folk from blood of Godhead born,
    The yearly round is all fulfilled, with lapse of months outworn,
    Since when my godlike father's husk and bones of him we laid
    Amid the mould, and heavy sad the hallowed altars made:
    And now meseems the day is here, for evermore to me
    A bitter day, a worshipped day.--So God would have it be!             50
    Yea should it find me outcast man on great Getulia's sand,
    Or take me in the Argive sea, or mid Mycenae's land,
    Yet yearly vows, and pomps that come in due recurring while,
    Still should I pay, and gifts most meet upon the altar pile.
    Now to my father's bones, indeed, and ashes are we brought
    By chance; yet not, meseems, without the Godhead's will and thought
    Are we come here, to lie in peace within a friendly bay.
    So come, and let all worship here the glory of the day;
    Pray we the winds, that year by year this worship may be done
    In temples dedicate to him within my city won.                        60
    Troy-born Acestes giveth you two head of horned beasts
    For every ship; so see ye bid the House-gods to your feasts,
    Both them of Troy and them our host Acestes loveth here.
    Moreover, if the ninth dawn hence Aurora shall uprear
    For health of men, and with her rays earth's coverlit shall lift,
    For Teucrians will I fast set forth the race for galleys swift:
    Then whosoe'er is fleet of foot, or bold of might and main,
    Or with the dart or eager shaft a better prize may gain,
    Or whoso hath the heart to play in fight-glove of raw hide,
    Let all be there, and victory's palm and guerdon due abide.           70
    Clean be all mouths! and gird with leaves the temple of the head."

    His mother's bush he did on brow e'en as the word he said;
    The like did Helymus, the like Acestes ripe of eld,
    The like the boy Ascanius, yea, and all that manner held.
    Then from that council to the tomb that duke of men did pass;
    Mid many thousands, he the heart of all that concourse was.
    There, worshipping, on earth he pours in such wise as was good
    Two cups of mere wine, two of milk, and two of holy blood,
    And scatters purple flowers around; and then such words he said:
    "Hail, holy father! hail once more! hail, ashes visited               80
    Once more for nought! hail, father-shade and spirit sweet in vain!
    Forbid with me that Italy to seek, that fated plain,
    With me Ausonian Tiber-flood, whereso it be, to seek."

    He spake: but from the lowest mound a mighty serpent sleek
    Drew seven great circles o'er the earth, and glided sevenfold,
    Passing in peace the tomb around, and o'er the altars rolled:
    Blue striped was the back of him, and all his scales did glow
    With glitter of fine flecks of gold; e'en as the cloud-hung bow
    A thousand shifting colours fair back from the sun he cast.
    AEneas wondered at the sight; but on the serpent passed,               90
    And 'twixt the bowls and smoothed cups his long array he wound,
    Tasting the hallowed things; and so he gat him underground
    Beneath the tomb again, and left the altars pastured o'er.

    Heartened hereby, his father's soul AEneas worshipped more,
    And, doubtful, deemeth it to be Anchises' guardian ghost
    Or godhead of the place: so there he slayeth double host,
    As custom would; two black-backed steers, and e'en as many swine,
    And calleth on his father's soul with pouring of the wine,
    On great Anchises' glorious ghost from Acheron set free.
    From out their plenty therewithal his fellows joyfully               100
    Give gifts, and load the altar-stead, and smite the steers adown.
    While others serve the seething brass, and o'er the herbage strown
    Set coaly morsels 'neath the spit, and roast the inner meat.

    And now the looked-for day was come with simple light and sweet,
    And Phaeton's horses shining bright the ninth dawn in did bear.
    Fame and the name Acestes had the neighbouring people stir
    To fill the shore with joyful throng, AEneas' folk to see:
    But some were dight amid the games their strife-fellows to be.
    There first before the eyes of men the gifts to come they lay
    Amid the course; as hallowed bowls, and garlands of green bay,       110
    And palms, the prize of victory, weapons, and raiment rolled
    In purple, and a talent's weight of silver and of gold;
    Then blast of horn from midst the mound the great games halloweth in:
    Four ships from all the fleet picked out will first the race begin
    With heavy oars; well matched are they for speed and rowers' tale:
    Hereof did Mnestheus' eager oars drive on the speedy Whale,
    Mnestheus to be of Italy, whence cometh Memmius' name.
    The huge Chimaera's mountain mass was Gyas set to tame;
    There on that city of a ship threesome its rowing plies
    The Dardan youth; the banks of oars in threefold order rise.         120
    Sergestus next, the name whereof the Sergian house yet bears,
    Is ferried by the Centaur great: last in blue Scylla steers
    Cloanthus, whence the name of thee, Cluentius, man of Rome.

    Far mid the sea a rock there is, facing the shore-line's foam,
    Which, beat by overtoppling waves, is drowned and hidden oft,
    What time the stormy North-west hides the stars in heaven aloft:
    But otherwhiles it lies in peace when nought the sea doth move,
    And riseth up a meadow fair that sunning sea-gulls love.
    There a green goal AEneas raised, dight of a leafy oak,
    To be a sign of turning back to that sea-faring folk,                130
    That fetching compass round the same their long course they might turn.

    So then by lot they take their place: there on the deck they burn.
    The captains, goodly from afar in gold and purple show:
    The other lads with poplar-leaf have garlanded the brow,
    And with the oil poured over them their naked shoulders shine.
    They man the thwarts; with hearts a-stretch they hearken for the sign,
    With arms a-stretch upon the oars; hard tugs the pulse of fear
    About their bounding hearts, hard strains the lust of glory dear.
    But when the clear horn gives the sound, forthwith from where they lie
    They leap away; the seamen's shouts smite up against the sky,        140
    The upturned waters froth about as home the arms are borne:
    So timely they the furrows cut, and all the sea uptorn
    Is cloven by the sweep of oars and bows' three-headed push.
    --Nay, nought so swift in twi-yoke race forth from the barriers rush
    The scattered headlong chariots on to wear the space of plain,
    Nor eager so the charioteers shake waves along the rein
    Above the hurrying yoke, as hung over the lash they go.
    --Then with the shouts and praise of men, and hope cast to and fro,
    Rings all the grove; the cliff-walled shore rolleth great voice around,
    And beating 'gainst the mountain-side the shattering shouts rebound.  150

    Before the others Gyas flies, and first the waves doth skim
    Betwixt the throng and roar, but hard Cloanthus presseth him;
    Who, better manned, is held aback by sluggish weight of pine.
    'Twixt Whale and Centaur after these the edge of strife is fine,
    And hard they struggle each with each to win the foremost place.
    Now the Whale hath it; beaten now is foregone in the race
    By the huge Centaur; head and head now follow on the two,
    As the long keel of either one the salt sea furrows through.

    But now they drew anigh the holm, the goal close on them gave,
    When Gyas first and conquering there amid the whirl of wave          160
    Unto the helmsman of his ship, Menoetes, cries command:
    "And why so far unto the right? turn hither to this hand!
    Hug thou the shore; let the blades graze the very rocks a-lee.
    Let others hold the deep!"
                              No less unto the wavy sea
    Menoetes, fearing hidden rocks, still turns away the bow:
    Gyas would shout him back again: "Menoetes, whither now?
    Steer for the rocks!"
                         And therewithal, as back his eyes he cast.
    He sees Cloanthus hard at heel and gaining on him fast;
    Who, grazing on this hand and that the rocks and Gyas' ship,
    Now suddenly by leeward course a-head of all doth slip,              170
    And leaving clear the goal behind hath open water's gain.
    Then unto Gyas' very bones deep burns the wrathful pain;
    Nor did his cheeks lack tears indeed: forgetting honour's trust,
    Forgetting all his fellows' weal, Menoetes doth he thrust
    Headlong from off the lofty deck into the sea adown,
    And takes the tiller, helmsman now and steering-master grown;
    He cheers his men, and toward the shore the rudder wresteth round.
    Menoetes, heavy, hardly won up from the ocean's ground,
    (For he was old, and floods enow fulfilled his dripping gear,)
    Made for the holm and sat him down upon the dry rock there:          180
    The Teucrians laughed to see him fall, and laughed to see him swim,
    And laugh to see him spue the brine back from the heart of him.

    Now Mnestheus' and Sergestus' hope began anew to spring,
    That they might outgo Gyas yet amid his tarrying:
    Of whom Sergestus draws ahead and nears the rocky holm;
    But not by all his keel indeed the other did o'ercome,
    But by the half; the eager Whale amidships held her place,
    Where Mnestheus midst the men themselves now to and fro did pace,
    Egging them on: "Now, now!" he cries; "up, up, on oar-heft high!
    Fellows of Hector, whom I chose when Troy last threw the die!        190
    Now put ye forth your ancient heart, put forth the might of yore,
    Wherewith amid Getulian sand, Ionian sea ye bore;
    The heart and might ye had amidst Malea's following wave!
    I, Mnestheus, seek not victory now, nor foremost place to save.
    --Yet, O my heart! but let them win to whom thou giv'st the crown,
    O Neptune!--but the shameful last! O townsmen, beat it down.
    And ban such horror!"
                          Hard on oars they lie mid utter throes,
    And quivereth all the brazen ship beneath their mighty blows;
    The sea's floor slippeth under them; the ceaseless pantings shake    199
    Their limbs and parched mouths, and still the sweat-streams never slake.
    But very chance those strivers gave the prize they struggled for,
    Since now Sergestus, hot at heart, while to the stony shore
    He clingeth innerward, is come into the treacherous strait,
    And hapless driveth on the rocks thrust forth for such a fate:
    The cliffs are shaken and the oars against the flinty spikes
    Snap crashing, and the prow thrust up yet hangeth where it strikes:
    Up start the seafarers, and raise great hubbub tarrying;
    Then sprits all iron-shod and poles sharp-ended forth they bring
    To bear her off, and gather oars a-floating in the wash.

    But Mnestheus, whetted by his luck, joyful, with hurrying dash       210
    Of timely-beating oars, speeds forth, and praying breezes on,
    O'er waters' slope adown the sea's all open way doth run:
    --E'en as a pigeon in a cave stirred suddenly from rest,
    Who in the shady pumice-rock hath house and happy nest;
    Scared 'neath the roof she beateth forth with mighty flap of wings,
    And flieth, borne adown the fields, till in soft air she swings,
    And floateth on the flowing way, nor scarce a wing doth move;
    --So Mnestheus, so the Whale herself, the latter waters clove,
    So with the way erst made on her she flew on swift and soft;
    And first Sergestus doth she leave stayed on the rock aloft,         220
    Striving in shallows' tanglement, calling for help in vain,
    And learning with his broken oars a little way to gain.
    Then Gyas and Chimaera's bulk he holdeth hard in chase,
    Who, from her lack of helmsman lost, must presently give place.
    And now at very end of all Cloanthus is the last
    With whom to deal: his most he strives, and presseth on him fast.
    Then verily shout thrusts on shout, and all with all goodwill
    Cry on the chase; their echoing noise the very lift doth fill.
    These, thinking shame of letting fall their hardly-gotten gain
    Of glory's meed, to buy the praise with very life are fain;          230
    Those, fed on good-hap, all things may, because they deem they may:
    The twain, perchance, head laid to head, had won the prize that day,
    But if Cloanthus both his palms had stretched to seaward there,
    And called upon the Gods to aid and poured forth eager prayer:

    "O Gods, whose lordship is the sea, whose waters I run o'er,
    Now glad will I, your debtor bound, by altars on the shore
    Bring forth for you a snow-white bull, and cast amid the brine
    His inner meat, and pour abroad a flowing of fair wine."

    He spake, and all the Nereids' choir hearkened the words he said
    Down 'neath the waves, and Phorcus' folk, and Panopea the maid;      240
    Yea, and the sire Portunus thrust the keel with mighty hand
    Upon its way, and arrow-swift it flew on toward the land,
    Swift as the South, and there at rest in haven deep it lies.

    But now Anchises' seed, all men being summoned in due wise,
    Proclaims Cloanthus victor there by loud-voiced herald's shout,
    And with green garland of the bay he does his brows about;
    Then biddeth them to choose the gifts, for every ship three steers,
    And wine, and every crew therewith great weight of silver bears.
    And glorious gifts he adds withal to every duke of man:
    A gold-wrought cloak the victor hath, about whose rim there ran      250
    A plenteous double wavy stream of Meliboean shell,
    And leafy Ida's kingly boy thereon was pictured well.
    A-following up the fleeing hart with spear and running fleet;
    Eager he seemed as one who pants; then him with hooked feet
    Jove's shield-bearer hath caught, and up with him from Ida flies,
    And there the ancient masters stretch vain palms unto the skies,
    While bark of staring hunting-hound beats fierce at upper air.

    Then next for him who second place of might and valour bare
    A mail-coat wove of polished rings with threefold wire of gold,
    Which from Demoleos the King had stripped in days of old,            260
    A conqueror then by Simois swift beneath high-builded Troy,
    He giveth now that lord to have a safeguard and a joy;
    Its many folds his serving-men, Phegeus and Sagaris,
    Scarce bore on toiling shoulders joined, yet clad in nought but this
    Swift ran Demoleos following on the Trojans disarrayed.

    A third gift then he setteth forth, twin cauldrons brazen made,
    And silver bowls with picturing fret and wrought with utter pain.

    And now when all had gotten gifts, and glorying in their gain,
    Were wending with the filleting of purple round the brow,
    Lo, gotten from the cruel rock with craft and toil enow,             270
    With missing oars, and all one board unhandy and foredone,
    His ship inglorious and bemocked, Sergestus driveth on.
    --As with an adder oft it haps caught on the highway's crown,
    Aslant by brazen tire of wheel, or heavy pebble thrown
    By wayfarer, hath left him torn and nigh unto his end:
    Who writhings wrought for helpless flight through all his length doth send,
    And one half fierce with burning eyes uprears a hissing crest,
    The other half, with wounds all halt, still holding back the rest;
    He knitteth him in many a knot and on himself doth slip.
    --E'en such the crawling of the oars that drave the tarrying ship.   280
    But they hoist sail on her, and so the harbour-mouth make shift
    To win: and there AEneas gives Sergestus promised gift,
    Blithe at his saving of the ship, and fellows brought aback:
    A maid he hath, who not a whit of Pallas' art doth lack.
    Of Crete she is, and Pholoe called, and twins at breast she bears.

    Now all that strife being overpast, the good AEneas fares
    To grassy meads girt all about by hollow wooded hills,
    Where theatre-wise the racing-course the midmost valley fills.
    Thereto the hero, very heart of many a thousand men,
    Now wendeth, and on seat high-piled he sits him down again.          290
    There whosoever may have will to strive in speedy race
    He hearteneth on with hope of gift, and shows the prize and grace.
    So from all sides Sicilians throng, and Trojan fellowship.
    Euryalus and Nisus first.
    Euryalus for goodliness and youth's first blossom famed,
    Nisus for fair love of the youth; then after these are named
    Diores, of the blood of kings from Priam's glorious race;
    Salius and Patron next; the one of Acarnanian place,
    The other from Arcadian blood of Tegeaea outsprung:
    Then two Trinacrians, Helymus and Panopes the young,                 300
    In woodcraft skilled, who ever went by old Acestes' side;
    And many others else there were whom rumour dimmed doth hide.

    And now amidmost of all these suchwise AEneas spake:
    "Now hearken; let your merry hearts heed of my saying take:
    No man of all the tale of you shall henceforth giftless go;
    Two Gnosian spears to each I give with polished steel aglow,
    An axe to carry in the war with silver wrought therein.
    This honour is for one and all: the three first prize shall win,
    And round about their heads shall do the olive dusky-grey.
    A noble horse with trappings dight the first shall bear away;        310
    A quiver of the Amazons with Thracian arrows stored
    The second hath; about it goes a gold belt broidered broad,
    With gem-wrought buckle delicate to clasp it at the end.
    But gladdened with this Argive helm content the third shall wend."

    All said, they take their places due, and when the sign they hear,
    Forthwith they leave the bar behind and o'er the course they bear,
    Like drift of storm-cloud; on the goal all set their eager eyes:
    But far before all shapes of man shows Nisus, and outflies
    The very whistling of the winds or lightning on the wing.
    Then, though the space be long betwixt, comes Salius following;      320
    And after Salius again another space is left,
    And then Euryalus is third;
    And after him is Helymus: but lo, how hard on heel
    Diores scuds! foot on his foot doth Helymus nigh feel,
    Shoulder on shoulder: yea, and if the course held longer out,
    He would slip by him and be first, or leave the thing in doubt.

    Now, spent, unto the utmost reach and very end of all
    They came, when in the slippery blood doth luckless Nisus fall,
    E'en where the ground was all a-slop with bullocks slain that day,
    And all the topmost of the grass be-puddled with it lay:             330
    There, as he went the victor now, exulting, failed his feet
    From off the earth, and forth he fell face foremost down to meet
    The midst of all the filthy slime blent with the holy gore:
    Yet for Euryalus his love forgat he none the more,
    For rising from the slippery place in Salius' way he thrust,
    Who, rolling over, lay along amid the thickened dust.
    Forth flies Euryalus, and flies to fame and foremost place,
    His own friend's gift, mid beat of hands and shouts that bear him grace.
    Next came in Helymus, and next the palm Diores bore.
    But over all the concourse set in hollow dale, and o'er              340
    The heads of those first father-lords goes Salius' clamouring speech,
    Who for his glory reft away by guile doth still beseech.
    But safe goodwill and goodly tears Euryalus do bear,
    And lovelier seemeth valour set in body wrought so fair.
    Him too Diores backeth now, and crieth out on high,
    Whose palm of praise and third-won place shall fail and pass him by,
    If the first glory once again at Salius' bidding shift.

    Then sayeth Father AEneas: "O fellows, every gift
    Shall bide unmoved: the palm of praise shall no man now displace.
    Yet for my sackless friend's mishap give me some pity's grace."      350

    He spake, and unto Salius gave a mighty lion's hide,
    Getulian born, with weight of hair and golden claws beside:
    Then Nisus spake: "If such great gifts are toward for beaten men,
    And thou must pity those that fall, what gift is worthy then
    Of Nisus? I, who should have gained the very victory's crown,
    If me, as Salius, Fate my foe had never overthrown."

    And even as he speaks the word he showeth face and limb
    Foul with the mud. The kindest lord, the Father, laughed on him,
    And bade them bring a buckler forth, wrought of Didymaon,
    Spoil of the Greeks, from Neptune's house and holy doors undone;     360
    And there unto the noble youth he gives that noble thing.
    But now, the race all overpassed and all the gift-giving,
    Quoth he: "If any valour hath, or heart that may withstand,
    Let him come forth to raise his arm with hide-begirded hand."

    So saying, for the fight to come he sets forth glories twain;
    A steer gilt-horned and garlanded the conquering man should gain,
    A sword and noble helm should stay the vanquished in his woe.
    No tarrying was there: Dares straight his face to all doth show,
    And riseth in his mighty strength amidst the murmur great:
    He who alone of all men erst with Paris held debate,                 370
    And he who at the mound wherein that mightiest Hector lay,
    Had smitten Butes' body huge, the winner of the day,
    Who called him come of Amycus and that Bebrycian land:
    But Dares stretched him dying there upon the yellow sand.
    Such was the Dares that upreared his head against the fight,
    And showed his shoulders' breadth and drave his fists to left and right,
    With arms cast forth, as heavy strokes he laid upon the air.
    But when they sought a man for him, midst all the concourse there
    Was none durst meet him: not a hand the fighting-glove would don:
    Wherefore, high-hearted, deeming now the prize from all was won,     380
    He stood before AEneas' feet nor longer tarried,
    But with his left hand took the steer about the horn and said:
    "O Goddess-born, if no man dares to trust him in the play,
    What end shall be of standing here; must I abide all day?
    Bid them bring forth the gifts."
                                    Therewith they cried out one and all,
    The Dardan folk, to give the gifts that due to him did fall.
    But with hard words Acestes now Entellus falls to chide,
    As on the bank of grassy green they sat there side by side,
    "Entellus, bravest hero once of all men, and for nought,
    If thou wilt let them bear away without a battle fought              390
    Such gifts as these. And where is he, thy master then, that God,
    That Eryx, told of oft in vain? where is thy fame sown broad
    Through all Trinacria, where the spoils hung up beneath thy roof?"

    "Nay," said he, "neither love of fame nor glory holds aloof
    Beaten by fear, but cold I grow with eld that holdeth back.
    My blood is dull, my might gone dry with all my body's lack.
    Ah, had I that which once I had, that which the rascal there
    Trusts in with idle triumphing, the days of youth the dear,
    Then had I come into the fight by no gift-giving led,
    No goodly steer: nought heed I gifts."                               400
                                           And with the last word said,
    His fighting gloves of fearful weight amidst of them he cast,
    Wherewith the eager Eryx' hands amid the play had passed
    Full oft; with hardened hide of them his arms he used to bind.
    Men's hearts were mazed; such seven bull-hides each other in them lined,
    So stiff they were with lead sewn in and iron laid thereby;
    And chief of all was Dares mazed, and drew back utterly.
    But the great-souled Anchises' seed that weight of gauntlets weighed,
    And here and there he turned about their mighty folds o'erlaid.
    Then drew the elder from his breast words that were like to these:

    "Ah, had ye seen the gloves that armed the very Hercules,            410
    And that sad battle foughten out upon this country shore!
    For these are arms indeed that erst thy kinsmen Eryx bore:
    Lo, ye may see them even now flecked with the blood and brain.
    With these Alcides he withstood; with these I too was fain
    Of war, while mightier blood gave might, nor envious eld as yet
    On either temple of my head the hoary hairs had set.
    But if this Dares out of Troy refuse our weapons still,
    And good AEneas doom it so, and so Acestes will,
    My fight-lord; make the weapons like: these gloves of Eryx here
    I take aback: be not afraid, but doff thy Trojan gear."              420

    He spake, and from his back he cast his twifold cloak adown,
    And naked his most mighty limbs and shoulders huge were shown,
    And on the midmost of the sand a giant there he stood.
    Wherewith Anchises' seed brought forth gloves even-matched and good,
    And so at last with gear alike the arms of each he bound,
    Then straightway each one stretched aloft on tip-toe from the ground:
    They cast their mighty arms abroad, nor any fear they know,
    The while their lofty heads they draw abackward from the blow:
    And so they mingle hands with hands and fall to wake the fight.
    The one a-trusting in his youth and nimbler feet and light;          430
    The other's bulk of all avail, but, trembling, ever shrank
    His heavy knees, and breathing short for ever shook his flank.
    Full many a stroke those mighty men cast each at each in vain;
    Thick fall they on the hollow sides; the breasts ring out again
    With mighty sound; and eager-swift the hands full often stray
    Round ears and temples; crack the jaws beneath that heavy play:
    In one set strain, not moving aught, heavy Entellus stands,
    By body's sway and watchful eye shunning the dart of hands:
    But Dares is as one who brings the gin 'gainst high-built town,
    Or round about some mountain-hold the leaguer setteth down:          440
    Now here now there he falleth on, and putteth art to pain
    At every place, and holds them strait with onset all in vain.
    Entellus, rising to the work, his right hand now doth show
    Upreared; but he, the nimble one, foresaw the falling blow
    Above him, and his body swift writhed skew-wise from the fall.
    Entellus spends his stroke on air, and, overborne withal,
    A heavy thing, falls heavily to earth, a mighty weight:
    As whiles a hollow-eaten pine on Erymanthus great,
    Or mighty Ida, rooted up, to earthward toppling goes.
    Then Teucrian and Trinacrian folk with wondrous longing rose,        450
    And shouts went skyward: thither first the King Acestes ran,
    And pitying his like-aged friend raised up the fallen man;
    Who neither slackened by his fall, nor smit by any fear,
    Gets back the eagerer to the fight, for anger strength doth stir,
    And shame and conscious valour lights his ancient power again.
    In headlong flight his fiery wrath drives Dares o'er the plain,
    And whiles his right hand showereth strokes, his left hand raineth whiles.
    No tarrying and no rest there is; as hail-storm on the tiles
    Rattleth, so swift with either hand the eager hero now
    Beats on and batters Dares down, and blow is laid on blow.           460

    But now the Father AEneas no longer might abide
    Entellus' bitter rage of soul or lengthening anger's tide,
    But laid an end upon the fight therewith, and caught away
    Dares foredone, and soothing words in such wise did he say:
    "Unhappy man, what madness then hath hold upon thine heart?
    Feel'st not another might than man's, and Heaven upon his part?
    Yield to the Gods!"
                        So 'neath his word the battle sank to peace.
    But Dares his true fellows took, trailing his feeble knees,
    Lolling his head from side to side, the while his sick mouth sent
    The clotted blood from out of it wherewith the teeth were blent.     470
    They lead him to the ships; then, called, they take the helm and sword,
    But leave Entellus' bull and palm, the victory's due reward;
    Who, high of heart, proud in the beast his conquering hand did earn,
    "O Goddess-born," he said, "and ye, O Teucrians, look, and learn
    What might was in my body once, ere youth it had to lack,
    And what the death whence Dares saved e'en now ye draw aback."

    He spake, and at the great bull's head straightway he took his stand,
    As there it bode the prize of fight, and drawing back his hand
    Rose to the blow, and 'twixt the horns sent forth the hardened glove,
    And back upon his very brain the shattered skull he drove.           480
    Down fell the beast and on the earth lay quivering, outstretched, dead,
    While over him from his inmost breast such words Entellus said:
    "Eryx, this soul, a better thing, for Dares doomed to die,
    I give thee, and victorious here my gloves and craft lay by."

    Forth now AEneas biddeth all who have a mind to strive
    At speeding of the arrow swift, and gifts thereto doth give,
    And with his mighty hand the mast from out Serestus' keel
    Uprears; and there a fluttering dove, mark for the flying steel,
    Tied to a string he hangeth up athwart the lofty mast.
    Then meet the men; a brazen helm catches the lots down cast:         490
    And, as from out their favouring folk ariseth up the shout,
    Hippocoon, son of Hyrtacus, before the rest leaps out;
    Then Mnestheus, who was victor erst in ship upon the sea,
    Comes after: Mnestheus garlanded with olive greenery.
    The third-come was Eurytion, thy brother, O renowned,
    O Pandarus, who, bidden erst the peace-troth to confound,
    Wert first amid Achaean host to send a winged thing.
    But last, at bottom of the helm, Acestes' name did cling,
    Who had the heart to try the toil amid the youthful rout.

    Then with their strength of all avail they bend the bows about       500
    Each for himself: from quiver then the arrows forth they take:
    And first from off the twanging string through heaven there went the wake
    Of shaft of young Hyrtacides, and clave the flowing air,
    And, flying home, amid the mast that stood before it there
    It stuck: the mast shook therewithal; the frighted, timorous bird,
    Fluttered her wings; and mighty praise all round about was heard.
    Then stood forth Mnestheus keen, and drew his bow unto the head,
    Aiming aloft; and shaft and eyes alike therewith he sped;
    But, worthy of all pitying, the very bird he missed,
    But had the hap to shear the knots and lines of hempen twist         510
    Whereby, all knitted to her foot, she to the mast was tied:
    But flying toward the winds of heaven and mirky mist she hied.
    Then swift Eurytion, who for long had held his arrow laid
    On ready bow-string, vowed, and called his brother unto aid,
    And sighted her all joyful now amidst the void of sky,
    And smote her as she clapped her wings 'neath the black cloud on high:
    Then dead she fell, and mid the stars of heaven her life she left,
    And, falling, brought the shaft aback whereby her heart was cleft.

    Acestes now was left alone, foiled of the victory's prize.
    No less the father sent his shot aloft unto the skies,               520
    Fain to set forth his archer-craft and loud-resounding bow.
    Then to men's eyes all suddenly a portent there did show,
    A mighty sign of things to come, the ending showed how great
    When seers, the shakers of men's hearts, sang over it too late.
    For, flying through the flowing clouds, the swift reed burned about,
    And marked its road with flaming wake, and, eaten up, died out
    Mid the thin air: as oft the stars fly loose from heaven's roof,
    And run adown the space of sky with hair that flies aloof.
    Trinacrian men and Teucrian men, staring aghast they stood,
    Praying the Gods: but mightiest AEneas held for good                  530
    That tokening, and Acestes takes as one all glad at heart,
    And loadeth him with many gifts, and suchwise speaks his part:

    "Take them, O father, for indeed by such a sign I wot
    Olympus' King will have thee win all honour without lot.
    This gift thou hast, Anchises' self, the ancient, had before,
    A bowl all stamped with images, which Cisseus once of yore,
    The Thracian, to my father gave, that he might bear the same
    A very tokening of his love and memory of his name."

    So saying, a garland of green bay he doth his brows about,
    And victor over all the men Acestes giveth out:                      540
    Nor did the good Eurytion grudge his honour so preferred,
    Though he alone from height of heaven had brought adown the bird:
    But he came next in gift-giving who sheared the string, and last
    Was he who set his winged reed amidmost of the mast.

    Now had AEneas called to him, ere yet the match was done,
    The child of Epytus, the guard, and fellow of his son,
    Beardless Iulus, and so spake into his faithful ear:
    "Go thou and bid Ascenius straight, if ready dight with gear
    He hath that army of the lads, and fair array of steeds,
    To bring unto his grandsire now, himself in warlike weeds,           550
    That host of his."
                       The lord meanwhile biddeth all folk begone
    Who into the long course had poured, and leave the meadow lone.
    Then come the lads: in equal ranks before their fathers' eyes
    They shine upon their bitted steeds, and wondering murmurs rise
    From men of Troy and Sicily as on their ways they fare.
    Due crown of well-ordained leaves bindeth their flowing hair,
    And each a pair of cornel shafts with iron head doth hold;
    And some the polished quiver bear at shoulder: limber gold,
    Ringing the neck with twisted stem, high on the breast is shown.
    Three companies of horse they are by tale, and up and down           560
    Three captains ride, and twice six lads each leadeth to the war:
    In bands of even tale they shine, and like their leaders are.
    Their first array all glad at heart doth little Priam lead,
    Who from his grandsire had his name, thy well-renowned seed,
    Polites, fated to beget Italian folk: him bore
    A Thracian piebald flecked with white, whose feet were white before,
    And white withal the crest of him that high aloft he flung.
    Next Atys came, from whence the stem of Latin Atii sprung;
    Young Atys, whom Iulus young most well-beloved did call:
    Iulus last, in goodliness so far excelling all,                      570
    Upon a horse of Sidon came, whom that bright Dido gave
    To be a token of her love, her memory to save.
    On horses of Acestes old, Trinacrian-nurtured beasts,
    The others of the youth are borne.

    With praise they greet their fluttering hearts and look on them with joy,
    Those Dardan folk, who see in them the ancient eyes of Troy.
    But after they had fared on steed the concourse all about
    Before the faces of their folk, Epytides did shout
    The looked-for sign afar to them, and cracked withal his whip:
    Then evenly they fall apart, in threesome order slip                 580
    Their cloven ranks; but, called again, aback upon their way
    They turn, and threatening levelled spears against each other lay.
    Then they to other onset now and other wheeling take,
    In bands opposed, and tanglements of ring on ring they make;
    So with their weapons every show of very fight they stir,
    And now they bare their backs in flight, and now they turn the spear
    In hostile wise; now side by side in plighted peace they meet.
    --E'en as they tell of Labyrinth that lies in lofty Crete,
    A road with blind walls crossed and crossed, an ever-shifting trap
    Of thousand ways, where he who seeks upon no sign may hap,           590
    But midst of error, blind to seize or follow back, 'tis gone.
    Not otherwise Troy's little ones the tangle follow on
    At top of speed, and interweave the flight and battle's play;
    E'en as the dolphins, swimming swift amid the watery way,
    Cleave Libyan or Carpathian sea and sport upon the wave.

    This guise of riding, such-like play, his folk Ascanius gave
    Once more, when round the Long White Stead the walls of war he drew:
    Withal the Ancient Latin Folk he taught the games to do,
    Suchwise as he a lad had learned with lads from Troy that came:      599
    That same the Albans taught their sons; most mighty Rome that same
    Took to her thence, and honoured so her sires of yore agone:
    Now name of Troy and Trojan host the play and boys have won.

    Thus far unto the Holy Sire the games were carried through,
    When Fortune turned her faith at last and changed her mind anew:
    For while the diverse hallowed games about the tomb they spent,
    Saturnian Juno Iris fair from heights of heaven hath sent
    Unto the Ilian ships, and breathed fair wind behind her ways,
    For sore she brooded, nor had spent her wrath of ancient days.
    So now the maid sped swift along her thousand-coloured bow,
    And swiftly ran adown the path where none beheld her go.             610
    And there she saw that gathering great, and swept the strand with eye,
    And saw the haven void of folk, the ships unheeded lie.
    But far away on lonely beach the Trojan women weep
    The lost Anchises; and all they look ever on the deep
    Amid their weeping: "Woe are we! what waters yet abide!
    What ocean-waste for weary folk!" So one and all they cried,
    And all they yearn for city's rest: sea-toil is loathsome grown.

    So she, not lacking craft of guile, amidst them lighted down,
    When she hath put away from her God's raiment and God's mien,
    And but as wife of Doryclus, the Tmarian man, is seen,               620
    Old Beroe, who once had sons and lordly race and name;
    Amid the Dardan mother-folk such wise the Goddess came:

    "O wretched ones!" she said, "O ye whom armed Achaean hand
    Dragged not to death before the walls that stayed your fatherland!
    Unhappy folk! and why hath Fate held back your doom till now?
    The seventh year is on the turn since Troy-town's overthrow;
    And we all seas the while, all lands, all rocks and skies that hate
    The name of guest, have wandered o'er, and through the sea o'ergreat
    Still chase that fleeing Italy mid wallowing waters tossed.
    Lo, here is Eryx' brother-land; Acestes is our host;                  630
    What banneth us to found our walls and lawful cities gain?
    O Fatherland! O House-Gods snatched from midst the foe in vain!
    Shall no walls more be called of Troy? Shall I see never more
    Xanthus or Simois, like the streams where Hector dwelt of yore?
    Come on, and those unhappy ships burn up with aid of me;
    For e'en now mid the dreams of sleep Cassandra did I see,
    Who gave me burning brand, and said, 'Here seek your Troy anew:
    This is the house that ye shall have.'--And now is time to do!
    No tarrying with such tokens toward! Lo, altars four are here
    Of Neptune: very God for us heart and the fire doth bear!"           640

    So saying, first she caught upon the fiery bane, and raised
    Her hand aloft, and mightily she whirled it as it blazed
    And cast it: but the Ilian wives, their straining hearts are torn,
    Their souls bewildered: one of them, yea, and their eldest-born,
    Pyrgo, the queenly fosterer of many a Priam's son,
    Cried: "Mothers, nay no Beroe, nay no Rhoeteian one,
    The wife of Doryclus is this: lo, Godhead's beauty there!
    Behold the gleaming of her eyes, note how she breathes the air;
    Note ye her countenance and voice, the gait wherewith she goes.
    Yea, I myself left Beroe e'en now amidst her woes;                   650
    Sick, sad at heart that she alone must fail from such a deed,
    Nor bear unto Anchises' ghost his glory's righteous meed."

    Such were the words she spake to them.
    But now those mothers, at the first doubtful, with evil eyes
    Gazed on the ships awhile between unhappy craving stayed
    For land they stood on, and the thought of land that Fortune bade:
    When lo! with even spread of wings the Goddess rose to heaven,
    And in her flight the cloudy lift with mighty bow was riven.
    Then, wildered by such tokens dread, pricked on by maddened hearts,
    Shrieking they snatch the hearthstone's fire and brand from inner parts;
    While some, they strip the altars there, and flaming leaf and bough  661
    Cast forth: and Vulcan, let aloose, is swiftly raging now
    Along the thwarts, along the oars, and stems of painted fir.

    But now with news of flaming ships there goes a messenger,
    Eumelus, to Anchises' tomb, and theatre-seats, and they
    Look round themselves and see the soot black in the smoke-cloud play.
    Then first Ascanius, e'en as blithe the riding-play he led,
    So eager now he rode his ways to camp bewildered,
    And nowise might they hold him back, his masters spent of breath.

    "O what new madness then is this? What, what will ye?" he saith.
    "O wretched townswomen, no foe, no camp of Argive men                671
    Ye burn, but your own hopes ye burn. Lo, your Ascanius then!"

    Therewith before their feet he cast his empty helm afar,
    Dight wherewithal he stirred in sport that image of the war.
    And thither now AEneas sped, and crowd of Teucrian folk;
    Whereat the women diversely along the sea-shore broke,
    Fleeing afeard, and steal to woods and whatso hollow den,
    And loathe their deed, and loathe the light, as changed they know again
    Their very friends, and Juno now from every heart is cast.

    But none the less the flaming rage for ever holdeth fast             680
    With might untamed; the fire lives on within the timbers wet,
    The caulking sends forth sluggish smoke, the slow heat teeth doth set
    Upon the keel; to inmost heart down creeps the fiery bale;
    Nor all the might of mighty men nor rivers poured avail.
    Then good AEneas from his back the raiment off him tore,
    And called the Gods to aid, and high his palms to heaven upbore:

    "Great Jove, if not all utterly a hater thou art grown
    Of Trojan folk, and if thy love of old yet looketh down
    On deeds of men, give to our ships to win from out the flame,
    O Father, now, and snatch from death the feeble Teucrian name,       690
    Or else thrust down the remnant left, if so we merit aught,
    With bolt of death, and with thine hand sweep us away to nought!"

    Scarce had he given forth the word, ere midst outpouring rain,
    The black storm rageth measureless, and earthly height and plain
    Shake to the thundering; all the sky casts forth confused flood,
    Most black with gathering of the South: then all the ship-hulls stood
    Fulfilled with water of the heavens; the half-burned oak was drenched,
    Until at last to utmost spark the smouldering fire is quenched,
    And all the ships escaped the bane of fiery end save four.

    But, shaken by such bitter hap, Father AEneas bore                    700
    This way and that; and turned the cares on all sides in his breast:
    Whether amid Sicilian fields to set him down in rest,
    Forgetting Fate, or yet to strive for shores of Italy.
    Then the old Nautes, whom erewhile had Pallas set on high
    By her exceeding plenteous craft and lore that she had taught:--
    She gave him answers; telling him how wrath of God was wrought,
    And how it showed, and what the law of fate would ask and have:--
    This man unto AEneas now such words of solace gave:

    "O Goddess-born, Fate's ebb and flow still let us follow on,
    Whate'er shall be, by bearing all must Fortune's fight be won.       710
    Dardan Acestes have ye here, sprung of the Godhead's seed;
    Take his goodwill and fellowship to help thee in thy rede.
    Give him the crews of those burnt ships; to him let such-like go
    As faint before thy mighty hope and shifting weal and woe.
    The mothers weary of the sea, the elders spent with years,
    And whatsoever feeble is and whatsoever fears,
    Choose out, and in this land of his walls let the weary frame;
    And they their town by leave of thee shall e'en Acesta name."

    So was he kindled by the speech of that wise ancient friend,
    Yet still down every way of care his thought he needs must send.     720

    But now the wain of mirky night was holding middle sky,
    When lo, his father's image seemed to fall from heaven the high,
    And suddenly Anchises' lips such words to him poured forth:

    "O son, that while my life abode more than my life wert worth;
    O son, well learned in Ilium's fates, hither my ways I take
    By Jove's commands, who even now the fiery bane did slake
    Amid thy ships, and now at last in heaven hath pitied thee:
    Yield thou to elder Nautes' redes; exceeding good they be:
    The very flower of all thy folk, the hearts that hardiest are,
    Take thou to Italy; for thee in Latium bideth war                    730
    With hardy folk of nurture rude: but first must thou be gone
    To nether dwelling-place of Dis: seek thou to meet me, son,
    Across Avernus deep: for me the wicked house of hell
    The dusk unhappy holdeth not; in pleasant place I dwell,
    Elysium, fellowship of good: there shall the holy Maid,
    The Sibyl, bring thee; plenteous blood of black-wooled ewes being paid:
    There shalt thou learn of all thy race, and gift of fated walls.
    And now farewell: for dewy night from mid way-faring falls,
    The panting steeds of cruel dawn are on me with their breath."

    He spake, and midst thin air he fled as smoke-wreath vanisheth.      740
    "Where rushest thou?" AEneas cried: "where hurriest thou again?
    Whom fleest thou? who driveth thee from these embraces fain?"

    So saying, the flame asleep in ash he busied him to wake,
    And worshipped with the censer full and holy-kneaded cake
    The sacred Vesta's shrine and God of Pergamean wall.
    Then for his fellows doth he send, Acestes first of all,
    And teacheth them of Jove's command, and what his sire beloved
    Had bidden him, and whitherwise his heart thereto was moved.
    No tarrying there was therein, Acestes gainsaid nought;
    They write the mothers on the roll; thither a folk is brought,       750
    Full willing hearts, who nothing crave the great reward of fame:
    But they themselves shape thwarts anew; and timbers gnawed by flame
    Make new within their ships again, and oars and rudders fit.
    A little band it is by tale, but valour lives in it.

    Meanwhile AEneas marketh out the city with the plough,
    And, portioning the houses out, bids Troy and Ilium grow:
    Therewith Acestes, Trojan king, joys in his lordship fair;
    Sets forth the court, and giveth laws to fathers gathered there:
    Then on the head of Eryx huge a house that neareth heaven
    To Venus of Idalia is reared: a priest is given                      760
    And holy grove wide spread around, where old Anchises lay.

    Now all the folk for nine days' space have made them holyday
    And worshipped God; and quiet winds have lowly laid the main,
    And ever gentle Southern breath woos to the deep again:
    Then all along the hollow shore ariseth weeping great,
    And 'twixt farewells and many a kiss a night and day they wait:
    Yea e'en the mothers, yea e'en they to whom so hard and drear
    The sea had seemed, a dreadful name they had no heart to bear,
    Are fain to go, are fain to take all toil the way may find.
    Whom good AEneas solaceth with friendly words and kind,               770
    As to Acestes' kindred heart weeping he giveth them.
    Three calves to Eryx then he bids slay on the ocean's hem;
    To wind and weather an ewe lamb; then biddeth cast aloose:
    And he himself, begarlanded with olive clipped close,
    Stands, cup in hand, on furthest prow, and casts upon the brine
    The inner meat, and poureth forth the flowing of the wine.
    They gather way; springs up astern the fair and following breeze;
    The fellows strive in smiting brine and sweep the level seas.

    But meanwhile Venus, sorely stirred by cares and all unrest,
    Hath speech of Neptune, pouring forth complaining from her breast:
    "The cruel wrath that Juno bears, and heart insatiate,               781
    Drive me, O Neptune, prayer-fulfilled upon thy power to wait:
    She softeneth not by lapse of days nor piety's increase,
    Nor yielding unto Jove and Fate from troubling will she cease.
    'Tis not enough to tear away from heart of Phrygian folk
    Their city by her cruel hate; nor with all ills to yoke
    Troy's remnant; but its ash and bones through death she followeth on.
    What! doth her own heart know the deed that all this wrath hath won?
    Be thou my witness how of late she stirred up suddenly
    Wild tumult of the Libyan sea! all waters with the sky               790
    She mingled, trusting all in vain to storm of AEolus:
    This in thy very realm she dared.
    E'en now mad hearts to Trojan wives by wickedness she gave,
    And foully burned his ships; and him with crippled ship-host drave
    To leave his fellow-folk behind upon an outland shore.
    I pray thee let the remnant left sail safe thine ocean o'er,
    And let them come where into sea Laurentian Tiber falls,
    If right I ask, and unto these Fate giveth fateful walls."

    Then Saturn's son, the sea-tamer, gave forth such words as these:
    "'Tis utter right, O Cytherean, to trust thee to my seas,            800
    Whence thou wert born; and I myself deserve no less; e'en I,
    Who oft for thee refrain the rage of maddened sea and sky.
    Nor less upon the earth my care AEneas did embrace;
    Xanthus and Simois witness it!--When, following up the chace,
    The all-unheartened host of Troy 'gainst Troy Achilles bore,
    And many a thousand gave to death; choked did the rivers roar
    Nor any way might Xanthus find to roll his flood to sea:
    AEneas then in hollow cloud I caught away, when he
    Would meet Pelides' might with hands and Gods not strong enow.
    Yea, that was when from lowest base I wrought to overthrow           810
    The walls of that same Troy forsworn my very hands had wrought.
    And now cast all thy fear away, my mind hath shifted nought;
    Avernus' haven shall he reach, e'en as thou deemest good,
    And one alone of all his folk shall seek amidst the flood;
    One head shall pay for all the rest."

    So when these words had brought to peace the Goddess' joyful heart,
    The Father yokes his steeds with gold, and bridles the wild things
    With o'erfoamed bit, and loose in hand the rein above them flings,
    And light in coal-blue car he flies o'er topmost of the sea:
    The waves sink down, the heaped main lays his waters peacefully      820
    Before the thunder of his wheels; from heaven all cloud-flecks fail.
    Lo, diverse bodies of his folk; lo, many a mighty whale;
    And Glaucus' ancient fellowship, Palaemon Ino's son,
    And Tritons swift, and all the host that Phorcus leadeth on;
    Maid Panopea and Melite, Cymodoce the fair,
    Nesaea, Spio, and Thalia, with Thetis leftward bear.

    Now to AEneas' overstrained heart the kindly joy and soft
    Sinks deep: herewith he biddeth men raise all the masts aloft
    At swiftest, and along the yards to spread the sails to wind:
    So all sheet home together then; then leftward with one mind         830
    They tack; then tack again to right: the yard-horns up in air
    They shift and shift, while kindly winds seaward the ship-host bear.
    But first before all other keels did Palinurus lead
    The close array, and all were charged to have his course in heed.
    And now the midmost place of heaven had dewy night drawn nigh,
    And 'neath the oars on benches hard scattered the shipmen lie,
    Who all the loosened limbs of them to gentle rest had given;
    When lo, the very light-winged Sleep stooped from the stars of heaven,
    Thrusting aside the dusky air and cleaving night atwain:
    The sackless Palinure he sought with evil dreams and vain.           840
    So on the high poop sat the God as Phorbas fashioned,
    And as he sat such-like discourse from out his mouth he shed:
    "Iasian Palinure, unasked the waves our ship-host bear;
    Soft blow the breezes steadily; the hour for rest is here:
    Lay down thine head, steal weary eyes from toil a little space,
    And I will do thy deeds awhile and hold me in thy place."

    But Palinure with scarce-raised eyes e'en such an answer gave:
    "To gentle countenance of sea and quiet of the wave
    Deem'st thou me dull? would'st have me trow in such a monster's truth?
    And shall I mine AEneas trust to lying breeze forsooth,               850
    I, fool of peaceful heaven and sea so many times of old?"

    So saying to the helm he clung, nor ever left his hold,
    And all the while the stars above his eyen toward them drew.
    But lo, the God brought forth a bough wet with Lethean dew,
    And sleepy with the might of Styx, and shook it therewithal
    Over his brow, and loosed his lids delaying still to fall:
    But scarce in first of stealthy sleep his limbs all loosened lay,
    When, weighing on him, did he tear a space of stern away,
    And rolled him, helm and wrack and all, into the flowing wave
    Headlong, and crying oft in vain for fellowship to save:             860
    Then Sleep himself amid thin air flew, borne upon the wing.

    No less the ship-host sails the sea, its safe way following
    Untroubled 'neath the plighted word of Father Neptune's mouth.
    So to the Sirens' rocks they draw, a dangerous pass forsooth
    In yore agone, now white with bones of many a perished man.
    Thence ever roared the salt sea now as on the rocks it ran;
    And there the Father felt the ship fare wild and fitfully,
    Her helmsman lost; so he himself steered o'er the night-tide sea,
    Sore weeping; for his fellow's end his inmost heart did touch:
    "O Palinure, that trowed the sky and soft seas overmuch,             870
    Now naked on an unknown shore thy resting-place shall be!"




BOOK VI.

ARGUMENT.

AENEAS COMETH TO THE SIBYL OF CUMAE, AND BY HER IS LED INTO THE
UNDER-WORLD, AND THERE BEHOLDETH MANY STRANGE THINGS, AND IN THE END
MEETETH HIS FATHER, ANCHISES, WHO TELLETH HIM OF THE DAYS TO COME.


    So spake he weeping, and his host let loose from every band,
    Until at last they draw anigh Cumae's Euboean strand.
    They turn the bows from off the main; the toothed anchors' grip
    Makes fast the keels; the shore is hid by many a curved ship.
    Hot-heart the youthful company leaps on the Westland's shore;
    Part falleth on to seek them out the seed of fiery store
    That flint-veins hide; part runneth through the dwellings of the deer,
    The thicket steads, and each to each the hidden streams they bare.

    But good AEneas seeks the house where King Apollo bides,
    The mighty den, the secret place set far apart, that hides            10
    The awful Sibyl, whose great soul and heart he seeketh home,
    The Seer of Delos, showing her the hidden things to come:
    And so the groves of Trivia and golden house they gain.

    Now Daedalus, as tells the tale, fleeing from Minos' reign,
    Durst trust himself to heaven on wings swift hastening, and swim forth
    Along the road ne'er tried before unto the chilly north;
    So light at last o'er Chalcis' towers he hung amid the air,
    Then, come adown to earth once more, to thee he hallowed here,
    O Phoebus, all his winged oars, and built thee mighty fane:
    Androgeus' death was on the doors; then paying of the pain            20
    By those Cecropians; bid, alas, each year to give in turn
    Seven bodies of their sons;--lo there, the lots drawn from the urn.
    But facing this the Gnosian land draws up amid the sea:
    There is the cruel bull-lust wrought, and there Pasiphae
    Embraced by guile: the blended babe is there, the twiformed thing,
    The Minotaur, that evil sign of Venus' cherishing;
    And there the tangled house and toil that ne'er should be undone:
    But ruth of Daedalus himself a queen's love-sorrow won,
    And he himself undid the snare and winding wilderment.
    Guiding the blind feet with the thread. Thou, Icarus, wert blent      30
    Full oft with such a work be sure, if grief forbade it not;
    But twice he tried to shape in gold the picture of thy lot,
    And twice the father's hands fell down.

    Long had their eyes read o'er
    Such matters, but Achates, now, sent on a while before,
    Was come with that Deiphobe, the Glaucus' child, the maid
    Of Phoebus and of Trivia, and such a word she said:
    "The hour will have no tarrying o'er fair shows for idle eyes;
    'Twere better from an unyoked herd seven steers to sacrifice,
    And e'en so many hosts of ewes in manner due culled out."

    She spake; her holy bidding then the warriors go about,               40
    Nor tarry: into temple high she calls the Teucrian men,
    Where the huge side of Cumae's rock is carven in a den,
    Where are an hundred doors to come, an hundred mouths to go,
    Whence e'en so many awful sounds, the Sibyl's answers flow.
    But at the threshold cried the maid: "Now is the hour awake
    For asking--Ah, the God, the God!"
                                        And as the word she spake
    Within the door, all suddenly her visage and her hue
    Were changed, and all her sleeked hair, and gasping breath she drew,
    And with the rage her wild heart swelled, and greater was she grown,
    Nor mortal-voiced; for breath of God upon her heart was blown         50
    As He drew nigher:
                        "Art thou dumb of vows and prayers, forsooth,
    Trojan AEneas, art thou dumb? unprayed, the mighty mouth
    Of awe-mazed house shall open not."
                                        Even such a word she said,
    Then hushed: through hardened Teucrian bones swift ran the chilly dread,
    And straight the king from inmost heart the flood of prayers doth pour:
    "Phoebus, who all the woe of Troy hast pitied evermore,
    Who Dardan shaft and Paris' hands in time agone didst speed
    Against Achilles' body there, who me withal didst lead
    Over the seas that go about so many a mighty land,
    Through those Massylian folks remote, and length of Syrtes' sand,     60
    Till now I hold that Italy that ever drew aback;
    And now perchance a Trojan fate we, even we may lack.
    Ye now, O Gods and Goddesses, to whom a stumbling-stone
    Was Ilium in the days of old, and Dardan folk's renown,
    May spare the folk of Pergamus. But thou, O holiest,
    O Maid that knowest things to come, grant thou the Latin rest
    To Teucrian men, and Gods of Troy, the straying way-worn powers!
    For surely now no realm I ask but such as Fate makes ours.
    To Phoebus and to Trivia then a temple will I raise,
    A marble world; in Phoebus' name will hallow festal days:           70
    Thee also in our realm to be full mighty shrines await,
    There will I set thine holy lots and hidden words of fate
    Said to my folk, and hallow there well-chosen men for thee,
    O Holy One: But give thou not thy songs to leaf of tree,
    Lest made a sport to hurrying gales confusedly they wend;
    But sing them thou thyself, I pray!"
                                          Therewith his words had end.
    Meanwhile the Seer-maid, not yet tamed to Phoebus, raves about
    The cave, still striving from her breast to cast the godhead out;
    But yet the more the mighty God her mouth bewildered wears,
    Taming her wild heart, fashioning her soul with weight of fears.      80
    At last the hundred mighty doors fly open, touched of none,
    And on the air the answer floats of that foreseeing one:

    "O Thou, who dangers of the sea hast throughly worn away,
    Abides thee heavier toil of earth: the Dardans on a day
    Shall come to that Lavinian land,--leave fear thereof afar:
    Yet of their coming shall they rue. Lo, war, war, dreadful war!
    And Tiber bearing plenteous blood upon his foaming back.
    Nor Simois there, nor Xanthus' stream, nor Dorian camp shall lack:
    Yea, once again in Latin land Achilles is brought forth,
    God-born no less: nor evermore shall mighty Juno's wrath              90
    Fail Teucrian men. Ah, how shalt thou, fallen on evil days,
    To all Italian lands and folks thine hands beseeching raise!
    Lo, once again a stranger bride brings woeful days on Troy,
    Once more the wedding of a foe.
    But thou, yield not to any ill, but set thy face, and wend
    The bolder where thy fortune leads; the dawn of perils' end,
    Whence least thou mightest look for it, from Greekish folk shall come."

    Suchwise the Seer of Cumae sang from out her inner home
    The dreadful double words, wherewith the cavern moans again,
    As sooth amid the mirk she winds: Apollo shakes the rein             100
    Over the maddened one, and stirs the strings about her breast;
    But when her fury lulled awhile and maddened mouth had rest,
    Hero AEneas thus began:
                            "No face of any care,
    O maiden, can arise on me in any wise unware:
    Yea, all have I forecast; my mind hath worn through everything.
    One prayer I pray, since this they call the gateway of the King
    Of Nether-earth, and Acheron's o'erflow this mirky mere:
    O let me meet the eyes and mouth of my dead father dear;
    O open me the holy gate, and teach me where to go!
    I bore him on these shoulders once from midmost of the foe,          110
    From flame and weapons thousandfold against our goings bent;
    My yoke-fellow upon the road o'er every sea he went,
    'Gainst every threat of sea and sky a hardy heart he held,
    Though worn and feeble past decay and feebleness of eld.
    Yea, he it was who bade me wend, a suppliant, to thy door,
    And seek thee out: O holy one, cast thou thy pity o'er
    Father and son! All things thou canst, nor yet hath Hecate
    Set thee to rule Avernus' woods an empty Queen to be.
    Yea, Orpheus wrought with Thracian harp and strings of tuneful might
    To draw away his perished love from midmost of the night.            120
    Yea, Pollux, dying turn for turn, his brother borrowed well,
    And went and came the road full oft--Of Theseus shall I tell?
    Or great Alcides? Ah, I too from highest Jove am sprung."

    Such were the words he prayed withal and round the altars clung:
    Then she fell speaking:
                            "Man of Troy, from blood of Godhead grown,
    Anchises' child, Avernus' road is easy faring down;
    All day and night is open wide the door of Dis the black;
    But thence to gain the upper air, and win the footsteps back,
    This is the deed, this is the toil: Some few have had the might,
    Beloved by Jove the just, upborne to heaven by valour's light,       130
    The Sons of God. 'Twixt it and us great thicket fills the place
    That slow Cocytus' mirky folds all round about embrace;
    But if such love be in thine heart, such yearning in thee lie,
    To swim twice o'er the Stygian mere and twice to see with eye
    Black Tartarus, and thou must needs this idle labour win,
    Hearken what first there is to do: the dusky tree within
    Lurks the gold bough with golden leaves and limber twigs of gold,
    To nether Juno consecrate; this all these woods enfold,
    Dim shadowy places cover it amid the hollow dale;
    To come unto the under-world none living may avail                    140
    Till he that growth of golden locks from off the tree hath shorn;
    For this fair Proserpine ordained should evermore be borne
    Her very gift: but, plucked away, still faileth not the thing,
    Another golden stem instead hath leafy tide of spring.
    So throughly search with eyes: thine hand aright upon it lay
    When thou hast found: for easily 'twill yield and come away
    If the Fates call thee: otherwise no might may overbear
    Its will, nor with the hardened steel the marvel mayst thou shear.

    --Ah! further,--of thy perished friend as yet thou nothing know'st,
    Whose body lying dead and cold defileth all thine host,              150
    While thou beseechest answering words, and hangest on our door:
    Go, bring him to his own abode and heap the grave mound o'er;
    Bring forth the black-wooled ewes to be first bringing back of grace:
    So shalt thou see the Stygian groves, so shalt thou see the place
    That hath no road for living men."
                                        So hushed her mouth shut close:
    But sad-faced and with downcast eyes therefrom AEneas goes,
    And leaves the cave, still turning o'er those coming things, so dim,
    So dark to see. Achates fares nigh fellow unto him,
    And ever 'neath like load of cares he lets his footsteps fall:
    And many diverse words they cast each unto each withal,              160
    What was the dead friend and the grave whereof the seer did teach.
    But when they gat them down at last upon the barren beach,
    They saw Misenus lying dead by death but lightly earned;
    Misenus, son of AEolus; no man more nobly learned
    In waking up the war with brass and singing Mars alight.
    Great Hector's fellow was he erst, with Hector through the fight
    He thrust, by horn made glorious, made glorious by the spear.
    But when from Hector life and all Achilles' hand did tear,
    Dardan AEneas' man became that mightiest under shield,
    Nor unto any worser lord his fellowship would yield.                 170
    Now while by chance through hollow shell he blew across the sea,
    And witless called the very Gods his singing-foes to be,
    The envious Triton caught him up, if ye the tale may trow,
    And sank the hero 'twixt the rocks in foaming waters' flow.
    Wherefore about him weeping sore were gathered all the men,
    And good AEneas chief of all: the Sibyl's bidding then
    Weeping they speed, and loiter not, but heap the tree-boughs high
    Upon the altar of the dead to raise it to the sky:
    Then to the ancient wood they fare, high dwelling of wild things;
    They fell the pine, and 'neath the axe the smitten holm-oak rings;   180
    With wedge they cleave the ashen logs, and knitted oaken bole,
    Full fain to split; and mighty elms down from the mountains roll.

    Amid the work AEneas is, who hearteneth on his folk,
    As with such very tools as they he girds him for the stroke;
    But through the sorrow of his heart such thought as this there strays,
    And looking toward the waste of wood such word as this he prays:
    "O if that very golden bough would show upon the tree,
    In such a thicket and so great; since all she told of thee,
    The seer-maid, O Misenus lost, was true and overtrue!"

    But scarcely had he spoken thus, when lo, from heaven there flew     190
    Two doves before his very eyes, who settled fluttering
    On the green grass: and therewithal that mightiest battle-king
    Knoweth his mother's birds new-come, and joyful poureth prayer:
    "O, if a way there be at all, lead ye amid the air,
    Lead on unto the thicket place where o'er the wealthy soil
    The rich bough casteth shadow down! Fail not my eyeless toil,
    O Goddess-mother!"
                        So he saith, and stays his feet to heed
    What token they may bring to him, and whitherward they speed.
    So on they flutter pasturing, with such a space between,
    As they by eyes of following folk may scantly well be seen;          200
    But when Avernus' jaws at last, the noisome place, they reach,
    They rise aloft and skim the air, and settle each by each
    Upon the very wished-for place, yea high amid the tree,
    Where the changed light through twigs of gold shines forth diversedly;
    As in the woods mid winter's chill puts forth the mistletoe,
    And bloometh with a leafage strange his own tree ne'er did sow,
    And with his yellow children hath the rounded trunk in hold,
    So in the dusky holm-oak seemed that bough of leafy gold,
    As through the tinkling shaken foil the gentle wind went by:
    Then straight AEneas caught and culled the tough stem greedily,       210
    And to the Sibyl's dwelling-place the gift in hand he bore.

    Nor less meanwhile the Teucrians weep Misenus on the shore,
    And do last service to the dead that hath no thanks to pay.
    And first fat fagots of the fir and oaken logs they lay,
    And pile a mighty bale and rich, and weave the dusk-leaved trees
    Between its sides, and set before the funeral cypresses,
    And over all in seemly wise the gleaming weapons pile:
    But some speed fire bewaved brass and water's warmth meanwhile,
    And wash all o'er and sleek with oil the cold corpse of the dead:
    Goes up the wail; the limbs bewept they streak upon the bed,         220
    And cast thereon the purple cloths, the well-known noble gear.
    Then some of them, they shoulder up the mighty-fashioned bier,
    Sad service! and put forth the torch with faces from him turned,
    In fashion of the fathers old: there the heaped offerings burned,
    The frankincense, the dainty meats, the bowls o'erflowed with oil.
    But when the ashes were sunk down and fire had rest from toil,
    The relics and the thirsty ash with unmixed wine they wet.
    Then the gleaned bones in brazen urn doth Corynaeus set,
    Who thrice about the gathered folk the stainless water bore.
    As from the fruitful olive-bough light dew he sprinkled o'er,        230
    And cleansed the men, and spake withal last farewell to the dead.
    But good AEneas raised a tomb, a mound huge fashioned,
    And laid thereon the hero's arms and oar and battle-horn,
    Beneath an airy hill that thence Misenus' name hath borne,
    And still shall bear it, not to die till time hath faded out.

    This done, those deeds the Sibyl bade he setteth swift about:
    A deep den is there, pebble-piled, with mouth that gapeth wide;
    Black mere and thicket shadowy-mirk the secret of it hide.
    And over it no fowl there is may wend upon the wing
    And 'scape the bane; its blackened jaws bring forth such venoming.   240
    Such is the breath it bears aloft unto the hollow heaven;
    So to the place the Greekish folk have name of Fowl-less given.

    Here, first of all, four black-skinned steers the priestess sets in line,
    And on the foreheads of all these out-pours the bowl of wine.
    Then 'twixt the horns she culleth out the topmost of the hair,
    And lays it on the holy fire, the first-fruits offered there,
    And cries aloud on Hecate, of might in heaven and hell;
    While others lay the knife to throat and catch the blood that fell
    Warm in the bowls: AEneas then an ewe-lamb black of fleece
    Smites down with sword to her that bore the dread Eumenides,         250
    And her great sister; and a cow yet barren slays aright
    To thee, O Proserpine, and rears the altars of the night
    Unto the Stygian King, and lays whole bulls upon the flame,
    Pouring rich oil upon the flesh that rush of fire o'ercame.

    But now, when sunrise is at hand, and dawning of the day,
    The earth falls moaning 'neath their feet, the wooded ridges sway,
    And dogs seem howling through the dusk as now she drew anear
    The Goddess. "O be far away, ye unclean!" cries the seer.
    "Be far away! ah, get ye gone from all the holy wood!
    But thou, AEneas, draw thy steel and take thee to the road;           260
    Now needeth all thine hardihood and steadfast heart and brave."

    She spake, and wildly cast herself amidst the hollow cave,
    But close upon her fearless feet AEneas followeth.

    O Gods, who rule the ghosts of men, O silent shades of death,
    Chaos and Phlegethon, hushed lands that lie beneath the night!
    Let me speak now, for I have heard: O aid me with your might
    To open things deep sunk in earth, and mid the darkness blent.

    All dim amid the lonely night on through the dusk they went,
    On through the empty house of Dis, the land of nought at all.
    E'en as beneath the doubtful moon, when niggard light doth fall      270
    Upon some way amid the woods, when God hath hidden heaven,
    And black night from the things of earth the colours dear hath driven.

    Lo, in the first of Orcus' jaws, close to the doorway side,
    The Sorrows and Avenging Griefs have set their beds to bide;
    There the pale kin of Sickness dwells, and Eld, the woeful thing,
    And Fear, and squalid-fashioned Lack, and witless Hungering,
    Shapes terrible to see with eye; and Toil of Men, and Death,
    And Sleep, Death's brother, and the Lust of Soul that sickeneth:
    And War, the death-bearer, was set full in the threshold's way,
    And those Well-willers' iron beds: there heartless Discord lay,      280
    Whose viper-breeding hair about was bloody-filleted.

    But in the midst a mighty elm, dusk as the night, outspread
    Its immemorial boughs and limbs, where lying dreams there lurk,
    As tells the tale, still clinging close 'neath every leaf-side mirk.
    Withal most wondrous, many-shaped are all the wood-beasts there;
    The Centaurs stable by the porch, and twi-shaped Scyllas fare,
    And hundred-folded Briareus, and Lerna's Worm of dread
    Fell hissing; and Chimaera's length and fire-behelmed head,
    Gorgons and Harpies, and the shape of that three-bodied Shade.
    Then smitten by a sudden fear AEneas caught his blade,                290
    And turned the naked point and edge against their drawing nigh;
    And but for her wise word that these were thin lives flitting by
    All bodiless, and wrapped about in hollow shape and vain,
    With idle sword had he set on to cleave the ghosts atwain.

    To Acheron of Tartarus from hence the road doth go,
    That mire-bemingled, whirling wild, rolls on his desert flow,
    And all amid Cocytus' flood casteth his world of sand.
    This flood and river's ferrying doth Charon take in hand,
    Dread in his squalor: on his chin untrimmed the hoar hair lies
    Most plenteous; and unchanging flame bides in his staring eyes:      300
    Down from his shoulders hangs his gear in filthy knot upknit;
    And he himself poles on his ship, and tends the sails of it,
    And crawls with load of bodies lost in bark all iron-grey,
    Grown old by now: but fresh and green is godhead's latter day.

    Down thither rushed a mighty crowd, unto the flood-side borne;
    Mothers and men, and bodies there with all the life outworn
    Of great-souled heroes; many a boy and never-wedded maid,
    And youths before their fathers' eyes upon the death-bale laid:
    As many as the leaves fall down in first of autumn cold;
    As many as the gathered fowl press on to field and fold,             310
    From off the weltering ocean-flood, when the late year and chill
    Hath driven them across the sea the sunny lands to fill.

    There stood the first and prayed him hard to waft their bodies o'er,
    With hands stretched out for utter love of that far-lying shore.
    But that grim sailor now takes these, now those from out the band,
    While all the others far away he thrusteth from the sand.

    AEneas wondered at the press, and moved thereby he spoke:
    "Say, Maid, what means this river-side, and gathering of the folk?
    What seek the souls, and why must some depart the river's rim,
    While others with the sweep of oars the leaden waters skim?"         320

    Thereon the ancient Maid of Days in few words answered thus:
    "Anchises' seed, thou very child of Godhead glorious,
    Thou seest the deep Cocytus' pools, thou seest the Stygian mere,
    By whose might Gods will take the oath, and all forswearing fear:
    But all the wretched crowd thou seest are they that lack a grave,
    And Charon is the ferryman: those borne across the wave
    Are buried: none may ever cross the awful roaring road
    Until their bones are laid at rest within their last abode.
    An hundred years they stray about and wander round the shore,
    Then they at last have grace to gain the pools desired so sore."     330

    There tarried then Anchises' child and stayed awhile his feet,
    Mid many thoughts, and sore at heart, for such a doom unmeet:
    And there he saw all sorrowful, without the death-dues dead,
    Leucaspis, and Orontes, he that Lycian ship-host led;
    Whom, borne from Troy o'er windy plain, the South wind utterly
    O'erwhelming, sank him, ships and men, in swallow of the sea.
    And lo ye now, where Palinure the helmsman draweth nigh,
    Who lately on the Libyan sea, noting the starry sky,
    Fell from the high poop headlong down mid wavy waters cast.
    His sad face through the plenteous dusk AEneas knew at last,          340
    And spake:
                "What God, O Palinure, did snatch thee so away
    From us thy friends and drown thee dead amidst the watery way?
    Speak out! for Seer Apollo, found no guileful prophet erst,
    By this one answer in my soul a lying hope hath nursed;
    Who sang of thee safe from the deep and gaining field and fold
    Of fair Ausonia: suchwise he his plighted word doth hold!"

    The other spake: "Apollo's shrine in nowise lied to thee,
    King of Anchises, and no God hath drowned me in the sea:
    But while I clung unto the helm, its guard ordained of right,
    And steered thee on, I chanced to fall, and so by very might         350
    Seaward I dragged it down with me. By the rough seas I swear
    My heart, for any hap of mine, had no so great a fear
    As for thy ship; lest, rudderless, its master from it torn,
    Amid so great o'ertoppling seas it yet might fail forlorn.
    Three nights of storm I drifted on, 'neath wind and water's might,
    Over the sea-plain measureless; but with the fourth day's light
    There saw I Italy rise up from welter of the wave.
    Then slow I swam unto the land, that me well-nigh did save,
    But fell the cruel folk on me, heavy with raiment wet,
    And striving with my hooked hands hold on the rocks to get:          360
    The fools, they took me for a prey, and steel against me bore.
    Now the waves have me, and the winds on sea-beach roll me o'er.
    But by the breath of heaven above, by daylight's joyous ways,
    By thine own father, by the hope of young Iulus' days,
    Snatch me, O dauntless, from these woes, and o'er me cast the earth!
    As well thou may'st when thou once more hast gained the Veline firth.
    Or if a way there be, if way thy Goddess-mother show,--
    For not without the will of Gods meseemeth wouldst thou go
    O'er so great floods, or have a mind to swim the Stygian mere,--
    Then give thine hand, and o'er the wave me woeful with thee bear,    370
    That I at least in quiet place may rest when I am dead."

    So spake he, but the priestess straight such word unto him said:
    "O Palinure, what godless mind hath gotten hold of thee,
    That thou the grim Well-willers' stream and Stygian flood wouldst see
    Unburied, and unbidden still the brim wilt draw anear?
    Hope not the Fates of very God to change by any prayer.
    But take this memory of my words to soothe thy wretched case:
    Through all their cities far and wide the people of the place,
    Driven by mighty signs from heaven, thy bones shall expiate
    And raise thee tomb, and year by year with worship on thee wait;     380
    And there the name of Palinure shall dwell eternally."

    So at that word his trouble lulled, his grief of heart passed by,
    A little while he joyed to think of land that bore his name.

    So forth upon their way they went and toward the river came;
    But when from Stygian wave their path the shipman's gaze did meet,
    As through the dead hush of the grove shoreward they turned their feet,
    He fell upon them first with words and unbid chided them:

    "Whoe'er ye be who come in arms unto our river's hem,
    Say what ye be! yea, speak from thence and stay your steps forthright!
    This is the very place of shades, and sleep, and sleepful night;     390
    And living bodies am I banned in Stygian keel to bear.
    Nor soothly did I gain a joy, giving Alcides fare,
    Or ferrying of Pirithoues and Theseus time agone,
    Though come of God they were and matched in valiancy of none:
    He sought the guard of Tartarus chains on his limbs to lay,
    And from the King's own seat he dragged the quaking beast away:
    Those strove to carry off the Queen from great Dis' very bed."

    The Amphrysian prophet answering, few words unto him said:
    "But here are no such guiles as this, so let thy wrath go by:
    Our weapons bear no war; for us still shall the door-ward lie        400
    And bark in den, and fright the ghosts, the bloodless, evermore:
    Nor shall chaste Proserpine for us pass through her kinsman's door:
    Trojan AEneas, great in arms and great in godly grace,
    Goes down through dark of Erebus to see his father's face.
    But if such guise of piety may move thine heart no whit,
    At least this bough "--(bared from her weed therewith she showeth it)--
    "Know ye!"
                Then in his swelling heart adown the anger sank,
    Nor spake he more; but wondering at that gift a God might thank,
    The fateful stem, now seen once more so long a time worn by,
    He turned about his coal-blue keel and drew the bank anigh           410
    The souls upon the long thwarts set therewith he thrusteth out,
    And clears the gangway, and withal takes in his hollow boat
    The huge AEneas, 'neath whose weight the seamed boat groans and creaks,
    And plenteous water of the mere lets in at many leaks.
    At last the Hero and the Maid safe o'er the watery way
    He leaveth on the ugly mire and sedge of sorry grey.

    The three-mouthed bark of Cerberus here filleth all the place,
    As huge he lieth in a den that hath them full in face:
    But when the adders she beheld upon his crest upborne,
    A sleepy morsel honey-steeped, and blent of wizards' corn,           420
    She cast him: then his threefold throat, all wild with hunger's lack,
    He opened wide, and caught at it, and sank his monstrous back,
    And there he lay upon the earth enormous through the cave.
    AEneas caught upon the pass the door-ward's slumber gave,
    And fled the bank of that sad stream no man may pass again.
    And many sounds they heard therewith, a wailing vast and vain;
    For weeping souls of speechless babes round the first threshold lay,
    Whom, without share of life's delight, snatched from the breast away,
    The black day hurried off, and all in bitter ending hid.
    And next were those condemned to die for deed they never did:        430
    For neither doom nor judge nor house may any lack in death:
    The seeker Minos shakes the urn, and ever summoneth
    The hushed-ones' court, and learns men's lives and what against them stands.

    The next place is of woeful ones, who sackless, with their hands
    Compassed their death, and weary-sick of light without avail
    Cast life away; but now how fain to bear the poor man's bale
    Beneath the heaven, the uttermost of weary toil to bear!
    But law forbiddeth: the sad wave of that unlovely mere
    Is changeless bond; and ninefold Styx compelleth to abide.
    Nor far from thence behold the meads far spread on every side,       440
    The Mourning Meads--in tale have they such very name and sign.
    There those whom hard love ate away with cruel wasting pine
    Are hidden in the lonely paths with myrtle-groves about,
    Nor in the very death itself may wear their trouble out:
    Phaedra he saw, Procris he saw, and Eriphyle sad.
    Baring that cruel offspring's wound her loving body had:
    Evadne and Pasiphae, Laodamia there
    He saw, and Caenis, once a youth and then a maiden fair,
    And shifted by the deed of fate to his old shape again.

    Midst whom Phoenician Dido now, fresh from the iron bane,            450
    Went wandering in the mighty wood: and when the Trojan man
    First dimly knew her standing by amid the glimmer wan
    --E'en as in earliest of the month one sees the moon arise,
    Or seems to see her at the least in cloudy drift of skies--
    He spake, and let the tears fall down by all love's sweetness stirred:
    "Unhappy Dido, was it true, that bitter following word,
    That thou wert dead, by sword hadst sought the utter end of all?
    Was it thy very death I wrought? Ah! on the stars I call,
    I call the Gods and whatso faith the nether earth may hold,
    To witness that against my will I left thy field and fold!           460
    But that same bidding of the Gods, whereby e'en now I wend
    Through dark, through deserts rusty-rough, through night without an end,
    Drave me with doom. Nor held my heart in anywise belief
    That my departure from thy land might work thee such a grief.
    O stay thy feet! nor tear thyself from my beholding thus.
    Whom fleest thou? this word is all that Fate shall give to us."

    Such were the words AEneas spake to soothe her as she stood
    With stern eyes flaming, while his heart swelled with the woeful flood:
    But, turned away, her sick eyes still she fixed upon the earth;
    Nor was her face moved any more by all his sad words' birth          470
    Than if Marpesian crag or flint had held her image so:
    At last she flung herself away, and fled, his utter foe,
    Unto the shady wood, where he, her husband of old days,
    Gives grief for grief, and loving heart beside her loving lays.
    Nor less AEneas, smitten sore by her unworthy woes,
    With tears and pity followeth her as far away she goes.

    But thence the meted way they wear, and reach the outer field,
    Where dwell apart renowned men, the mighty under shield:
    There Tydeus meets him; there he sees the great fight-glorious man,
    Parthenopaeus; there withal Adrastus' image wan;                      480
    And there the Dardans battle-slain, for whom the wailing went
    To very heaven: their long array he saw with sad lament:
    Glaucus and Medon there he saw, Thersilochus, the three
    Antenor-sons, and Polyphoete, by Ceres' mystery
    Made holy, and Idaeus still in car with armed hand:
    There on the right side and the left the straying spirits stand.
    Nor is one sight of him enough; it joyeth them to stay
    And pace beside, asking for why he wendeth such a way.
    But when the lords of Danaan folk, and Agamemnon's hosts,
    Behold the man and gleaming arms amid the dusky ghosts,              490
    They fall a-quaking full of fear: some turn their back to fly
    As erst they ran unto the ships; some raise a quavering cry,
    But never from their gaping vain will swell the shout begun.

    And now Deiphobus he sees, the glorious Priam's son;
    But all his body mangled sore, his face all evilly hacked,
    His face and hands; yea, and his head, laid waste, the ear-lobes lacked,
    And nostrils cropped unto the root by wicked wound and grim.
    Scarcely he knew the trembling man, who strove to hide from him
    Those torments dire, but thus at last he spake in voice well known:

    "O great in arms, Deiphobus, from Teucer's blood come down,          500
    Who had the heart to work on thee such bitter wicked bale?
    Who had the might to deal thee this? Indeed I heard the tale,
    That, tired with slaying of the Greeks on that last night of all,
    Upon a heap of mingled death thou didst to slumber fall:
    And I myself an empty tomb on that Rhoetean coast
    Set up to thee, and thrice aloud cried blessing on thy ghost:
    Thy name and arms still keep the place; but thee I found not, friend,
    To set thee in thy fathers' earth ere I too needs must wend."

    To him the child of Priam spake: "Friend, nought thou left'st undone;
    All things thou gav'st Deiphobus, and this dead shadowy one:         510
    My Fates and that Laconian Bane, the Woman wicked-fair,
    Have drowned me in this sea of ills: she set these tokens here.
    How midst a lying happiness we wore the last night by
    'Thou know'st: yea; overwell belike thou hold'st that memory
    Now when the baneful Horse of Fate high Pergamus leapt o'er,
    With womb come nigh unto the birth of weaponed men of war,
    She, feigning hallowed dance, led on a holy-shouting band
    Of Phrygian maids, and midst of them, the bale-fire in her hand,
    Called on the Danaan men to come, high on the castle's steep:
    But me, outworn with many cares and weighed adown with sleep,        520
    The hapless bride-bed held meanwhile, and on me did there press
    Deep rest and sweet, most like indeed to death's own quietness.
    Therewith my glorious wife all arms from out the house withdrew,
    And stole away from o'er my head the sword whose faith I knew,
    Called Menelaues to the house and opened him the door,
    Thinking, forsooth, great gift to give to him who loved so sore,
    To quench therewith the tale gone by of how she did amiss.
    Why linger? They break in on me, and he their fellow is,
    Ulysses, preacher of all guilt.--O Gods, will ye not pay
    The Greeks for all? belike with mouth not godless do I pray.         530
    --But tell me, thou, what tidings new have brought thee here alive?
    Is it blind strayings o'er the sea that hither doth thee drive,
    Or bidding of the Gods? Wherein hath Fortune worn thee so,
    That thou, midst sunless houses sad, confused lands, must go?"

    But as they gave and took in talk, Aurora at the last
    In rosy wain the topmost crown of upper heaven had passed,
    And all the fated time perchance in suchwise had they spent;
    But warning of few words enow the Sibyl toward him sent:
    "Night falls, AEneas, weeping here we wear the hours in vain;
    And hard upon us is the place where cleaves the road atwain;         540
    On by the walls of mighty Dis the right-hand highway goes,
    Our way to that Elysium: the left drags on to woes
    Ill-doers' souls, and bringeth them to godless Tartarus."

    Then spake Deiphobus: "Great seer, be not o'erwroth with us:
    I will depart and fill the tale, and unto dusk turn back:
    Go forth, our glory, go and gain the better fate I lack!"
    And even with that latest word his feet he tore away.
    But suddenly AEneas turned, and lo, a city lay
    Wide-spread 'neath crags upon the left, girt with a wall threefold;
    And round about in hurrying flood a flaming river rolled,            550
    E'en Phlegethon of Tartarus, with rattling, stony roar:
    In face with adamantine posts was wrought the mighty door,
    Such as no force of men nor might of heaven-abiders high
    May cleave with steel; an iron tower thence riseth to the sky:
    And there is set Tisiphone, with girded blood-stained gown,
    Who, sleepless, holdeth night and day the doorway of the town.
    Great wail and cruel sound of stripes that city sendeth out,
    And iron clanking therewithal of fetters dragged about.

    Then fearfully AEneas stayed, and drank the tumult in:
    "O tell me, Maiden, what is there? What images of sin?               560
    What torments bear they? What the wail yon city casts abroad?"

    Then so began the seer to speak: "O glorious Teucrian lord,
    On wicked threshold of the place no righteous foot may stand:
    But when great Hecate made me Queen of that Avernus land,
    She taught me of God's punishments and led me down the path.
    --There Gnosian Rhadamanthus now most heavy lordship hath,
    And heareth lies, and punisheth, and maketh men confess
    Their deeds of earth, whereof made glad by foolish wickedness,
    They thrust the late repentance off till death drew nigh to grip:
    Those guilty drives Tisiphone, armed with avenging whip,             570
    And mocks their writhings, casting forth her other dreadful hand
    Filled with the snakes, and crying on her cruel sister's band.
    And then at last on awful hinge loud-clanging opens wide
    The Door of Doom:--and lo, behold what door-ward doth abide
    Within the porch, what thing it is the city gate doth hold!
    More dreadful yet the Water-worm, with black mouth fiftyfold,
    Hath dwelling in the inner parts. Then Tartarus aright
    Gapes sheer adown; and twice so far it thrusteth under night
    As up unto the roof of heaven Olympus lifteth high:
    And there the ancient race of Earth, the Titan children, lie,        580
    Cast down by thunder, wallowing in bottomless abode.
    There of the twin Aloidae the monstrous bodies' load
    I saw; who fell on mighty heaven to cleave it with their hands,
    That they might pluck the Father Jove from out his glorious lands;
    And Salmoneus I saw withal, paying the cruel pain
    That fire of Jove and heaven's own voice on earth he needs must feign:
    He, drawn by fourfold rush of steeds, and shaking torches' glare,
    Amidmost of the Grecian folks, amidst of Elis fair,
    Went glorying, and the name of God and utter worship sought.
    O fool! the glory of the storm, and lightning like to nought,        590
    He feigned with rattling copper things and beat of horny hoof.
    Him the Almighty Father smote from cloudy rack aloof,
    But never brand nor pitchy flame of smoky pine-tree cast,
    As headlong there he drave him down amid the whirling blast.
    And Tityon, too, the child of Earth, great Mother of all things,
    There may ye see: nine acres' space his mighty frame he flings;
    His deathless liver still is cropped by that huge vulture's beak
    That evermore his daily meat doth mid his inwards seek,
    Fruitful of woe, and hath his home beneath his mighty breast:
    Whose heart-strings eaten, and new-born shall never know of rest.    600
    Of Lapithae, Pirithoues, Ixion, what a tale!
    O'er whom the black crag hangs, that slips, and slips, and ne'er shall fail
    To seem to fall. The golden feet of feast beds glitter bright,
    And there in manner of the kings is glorious banquet dight.
    But lo, the Furies' eldest-born is crouched beside it there,
    And banneth one and all of them hand on the board to bear,
    And riseth up with tossing torch, and crieth, thundering loud.
    Here they that hated brethren sore while yet their life abode,
    The father-smiters, they that drew the client-catching net,
    The brooders over treasure found in earth, who never yet             610
    Would share one penny with their friends--and crowded thick these are--
    Those slain within another's bed; the followers up of war
    Unrighteous; they no whit ashamed their masters' hand to fail,
    Here prisoned bide the penalty: seek not to know their tale
    Of punishment; what fate it is o'erwhelmeth such a folk.
    Some roll huge stones; some hang adown, fast bound to tire or spoke
    Of mighty wheels. There sitteth now, and shall sit evermore
    Theseus undone: wretch Phlegyas is crying o'er and o'er
    His warning, and in mighty voice through dim night testifies:
    'Be warned, and learn of righteousness, nor holy Gods despise.'      620
    This sold his fatherland for gold; this tyrant on it laid;
    This for a price made laws for men, for price the laws unmade:
    This broke into his daughter's bed and wedding-tide accursed:
    All dared to think of monstrous deed, and did the deed they durst.
    Nor, had I now an hundred mouths, an hundred tongues at need,
    An iron voice, might I tell o'er all guise of evil deed,
    Or run adown the names of woe those evil deeds are worth."

    So when Apollo's ancient seer such words had given forth:
    "Now to the road! fulfil the gift that we so far have brought!       629
    Haste on!" she saith, "I see the walls in Cyclops' furnace wrought;
    And now the opening of the gates is lying full in face,
    Where we are bidden lay adown the gift that brings us grace."

    She spake, and through the dusk of ways on side by side they wend,
    And wear the space betwixt, and reach the doorway in the end.
    AEneas at the entering in bedews his body o'er
    With water fresh, and sets the bough in threshold of the door.
    So, all being done, the Goddess' gift well paid in manner meet,
    They come into a joyous land, and green-sward fair and sweet
    Amid the happiness of groves, the blessed dwelling-place.
    Therein a more abundant heaven clothes all the meadows' face         640
    With purple light, and their own sun and their own stars they have.
    Here some in games upon the grass their bodies breathing gave;
    Or on the yellow face of sand they strive and play the play;
    Some beat the earth with dancing foot, and some, the song they say:
    And there withal the Thracian man in flowing raiment sings
    Unto the measure of the dance on seven-folded strings;
    And now he smites with finger-touch, and now with ivory reed.
    And here is Teucer's race of old, most lovely sons indeed;
    High-hearted heroes born on earth in better days of joy:
    Ilus was there, Assaracus, and he who builded Troy,                  650
    E'en Dardanus. Far off are seen their empty wains of war
    And war-weed: stand the spears in earth, unyoked the horses are,
    And graze the meadows all about; for even as they loved
    Chariot and weapons, yet alive, and e'en as they were moved
    To feed sleek horses, under earth doth e'en such joy abide.
    Others he saw to right and left about the meadows wide
    Feasting; or joining merry mouths to sing the battle won
    Amidst the scented laurel grove, whence earthward rolleth on
    The full flood that Eridanus athwart the wood doth pour.
    Lo, they who in their country's fight sword-wounded bodies bore;     660
    Lo, priests of holy life and chaste, while they in life had part;
    Lo, God-loved poets, men who spake things worthy Phoebus' heart:
    And they who bettered life on earth by new-found mastery;
    And they whose good deeds left a tale for men to name them by:
    And all they had their brows about with snowy fillets bound.

    Now unto them the Sibyl spake as there they flowed around,--
    Unto Musaeus first; for him midmost the crowd enfolds
    Higher than all from shoulders up, and reverently beholds:
    "Say, happy souls, and thou, O bard, the best earth ever bare,
    What land, what place Anchises hath? for whose sake came we here,    670
    And swam the floods of Erebus and every mighty wave."

    Then, lightly answering her again, few words the hero gave:
    "None hath a certain dwelling-place; in shady groves we bide,
    And meadows fresh with running streams, and beds by river-side:
    But if such longing and so sore the heart within you hath,
    O'ertop yon ridge and I will set your feet in easy path."

    He spake and footed it afore, and showeth from above
    The shining meads; and thence away from hill-top down they move.

    But Sire Anchises deep adown in green-grown valley lay,
    And on the spirits prisoned there, but soon to wend to day,          680
    Was gazing with a fond desire: of all his coming ones
    There was he reckoning up the tale, and well-loved sons of sons:
    Their fate, their haps, their ways of life, their deeds to come to pass.
    But when he saw AEneas now draw nigh athwart the grass,
    He stretched forth either palm to him all eager, and the tears
    Poured o'er his cheeks, and speech withal forth from his mouth there fares:

    "O come at last, and hath the love, thy father hoped for, won
    O'er the hard way, and may I now look on thy face, O son,
    And give and take with thee in talk, and hear the words I know?
    So verily my mind forebode, I deemed 'twas coming so,                690
    And counted all the days thereto; nor was my longing vain.
    And now I have thee, son, borne o'er what lands, how many a main!
    How tossed about on every side by every peril still!
    Ah, how I feared lest Libyan land should bring thee unto ill!"

    Then he: "O father, thou it was, thine image sad it was,
    That, coming o'er and o'er again, drave me these doors to pass:
    My ships lie in the Tyrrhene salt--ah, give the hand I lack!
    Give it, my father; neither thus from my embrace draw back!"

    His face was wet with plenteous tears e'en as the word he spake,
    And thrice the neck of him beloved he strove in arms to take;        700
    And thrice away from out his hands the gathered image streams,
    E'en as the breathing of the wind or winged thing of dreams.

    But down amid a hollow dale meanwhile AEneas sees
    A secret grove, a thicket fair, with murmuring of the trees,
    And Lethe's stream that all along that quiet place doth wend;
    O'er which there hovered countless folks and peoples without end:
    And as when bees amid the fields in summer-tide the bright
    Settle on diverse flowery things, and round the lilies white
    Go streaming; so the fields were filled with mighty murmuring.

    Unlearned AEneas fell aquake at such a wondrous thing,                710
    And asketh what it all may mean, what rivers these may be,
    And who the men that fill the banks with such a company.
    Then spake Anchises: "These are souls to whom fate oweth now
    New bodies: there they drink the draught by Lethe's quiet flow,
    The draught that is the death of care, the long forgetfulness.
    And sure to teach thee of these things, and show thee all their press,
    And of mine offspring tell the tale, for long have I been fain,
    That thou with me mightst more rejoice in thine Italia's gain."

    "O Father, may we think it then, that souls may get them hence
    To upper air and take once more their bodies' hinderance?            720
    How can such mad desire be to win the worldly day?"

    "Son, I shall tell thee all thereof, nor hold thee on the way."
    Therewith he takes the tale and all he openeth orderly:

    "In the beginning: earth and sky and flowing fields of sea,
    And stars that Titan fashioned erst, and gleaming moony ball,
    An inward spirit nourisheth, one soul is shed through all,
    That quickeneth all the mass, and with the mighty thing is blent:
    Thence are the lives of men and beasts and flying creatures sent,
    And whatsoe'er the sea-plain bears beneath its marble face;
    Quick in these seeds is might of fire and birth of heavenly place,   730
    Ere earthly bodies' baneful weight upon them comes to lie,
    Ere limbs of earth bewilder them and members made to die.
    Hence fear they have, and love, and joy, and grief, and ne'er may find
    The face of heaven amid the dusk and prison strait and blind:
    Yea, e'en when out of upper day their life at last is borne,
    Not all the ill of wretched men is utterly outworn,
    Not all the bane their bodies bred; and sure in wondrous wise
    The plenteous ill they bore so long engrained in them it lies:
    So therefore are they worn by woes and pay for ancient wrong:
    And some of them are hung aloft the empty winds among;               740
    And some, their stain of wickedness amidst the water's heart
    Is washed away; amidst the fire some leave their worser part;
    And each his proper death must bear: then through Elysium wide
    Are we sent forth; a scanty folk in joyful fields we bide,
    Till in the fulness of the time, the day that long hath been
    Hath worn away the inner stain and left the spirit clean,
    A heavenly essence, a fine flame of all unmingled air.
    All these who now have turned the wheel for many and many a year
    God calleth unto Lethe's flood in mighty company,
    That they, remembering nought indeed, the upper air may see          750
    Once more, and long to turn aback to worldly life anew."

    Anchises therewithal his son, and her the Sibyl drew
    Amid the concourse, the great crowd that such a murmuring sent,
    And took a mound whence they might see the spirits as they went
    In long array, and learn each face as 'neath their eyes it came.

    "Come now, and I of Dardan folk will tell the following fame,
    And what a folk from Italy the world may yet await,
    Most glorious souls, to bear our name adown the ways of fate.
    Yea, I will set it forth in words, and thou thy tale shalt hear:
    Lo ye, the youth that yonder leans upon the headless spear,          760
    Fate gives him nighest place today; he first of all shall rise,
    Blent blood of Troy and Italy, unto the earthly skies:
    Silvius is he, an Alban name, thy son, thy latest born;
    He whom thy wife Lavinia now, when thin thy life is worn,
    Beareth in woods to be a king and get a kingly race,
    Whence comes the lordship of our folk within the Long White Place.
    And Procas standeth next to him, the Trojan people's fame;
    Then Capys, Numitor, and he who bringeth back thy name,
    Silvius AEneas, great in war, and great in godliness,
    If ever he in that White Stead may bear the kingdom's stress.        770
    Lo ye, what youths! what glorious might unto thine eyes is shown!
    But they who shade their temples o'er with civic oaken crown,
    These build for thee Nomentum's walls, and Gabii, and the folk
    Fidenian, and the mountains load with fair Collatia's yoke:
    Pometii, Bola, Cora, there shall rise beneath their hands,
    And Inuus' camp: great names shall spring amid the nameless lands.

    "Then Mavors' child shall come on earth, his grandsire following,
    When Ilia's womb, Assaracus' own blood, to birth shall bring
    That Romulus:--lo, see ye not the twin crests on his head,
    And how the Father hallows him for day with his own dread            780
    E'en now? Lo, son! those signs of his; lo, that renowned Rome!
    Whose lordship filleth all the earth, whose heart Olympus' home,
    And with begirdling of her wall girds seven great burgs to her,
    Rejoicing in her man-born babes: e'en as the Earth-Mother
    Amidst the Phrygian cities goes with car and towered crown,
    Glad in the Gods, whom hundred-fold she kisseth for her own.
    All heaven-abiders, all as kings within the house of air.
    Ah, turn thine eyeballs hitherward, look on this people here,
    Thy Roman folk! Lo Caesar now! Lo all Iulus' race,
    Who 'neath the mighty vault of heaven shall dwell in coming days.    790
    And this is he, this is the man thou oft hast heard foretold,
    Augustus Caesar, sprung from God to bring the age of gold
    Aback unto the Latin fields, where Saturn once was king.
    Yea, and the Garamantian folk and Indians shall he bring
    Beneath his sway: beyond the stars, beyond the course of years,
    Beyond the Sun-path lies the land, where Atlas heaven upbears,
    And on his shoulders turns the pole with burning stars bestrown.
    Yea, and e'en now the Caspian realms quake at his coming, shown
    By oracles of God; and quakes the far Maeotic mere,                   799
    And sevenfold Nile through all his mouths quakes in bewildered fear.
    Not so much earth did Hercules o'erpass, though he prevailed
    To pierce the brazen-footed hind, and win back peace that failed
    The Erymanthus' wood, and shook Lerna with draught of bow;
    Nor Liber turning vine-wreathed reins when he hath will to go
    Adown from Nysa's lofty head in tiger-yoked car.--
    Forsooth then shall we doubt but deeds shall spread our valour far?
    Shall fear forsooth forbid us rest in that Ausonian land?

    "But who is this, the olive-crowned, that beareth in his hand
    The holy things? I know the hair and hoary beard of eld
    Of him, the Roman king, who first a law-bound city held,             810
    Sent out from little Cures' garth, that unrich land of his,
    Unto a mighty lordship: yea, and Tullus next is this,
    Who breaks his country's sleep and stirs the slothful men to fight;
    And calleth on the weaponed hosts unused to war's delight
    But next unto him Ancus fares, a boaster overmuch;
    Yea and e'en now the people's breath too nigh his heart will touch.
    And wilt thou see the Tarquin kings and Brutus' lofty heart,
    And fasces brought aback again by his avenging part?
    He first the lordship consular and dreadful axe shall take;          819
    The father who shall doom the sons, that war and change would wake,
    To pain of death, that he thereby may freedom's fairness save.
    Unhappy! whatso tale of thee the after-time may have,
    The love of country shall prevail, and boundless lust of praise.

    "Drusi and Decii lo afar! On hard Torquatus gaze,
    He of the axe: Camillus lo, the banner-rescuer!
    But note those two thou seest shine in arms alike and clear,
    Now souls of friends, and so to be while night upon them weighs:
    Woe's me! what war shall they awake if e'er the light of days
    They find: what host each sets 'gainst each, what death-field shall they dight!
    The father from the Alpine wall, and from Monoecus' height         830
    Comes down; the son against him turns the East's embattlement.
    O children, in such evil war let not your souls be spent,
    Nor turn the valour of your might against the heart of home.
    Thou first, refrain, O thou my blood from high Olympus come;
    Cast thou the weapons from thine hand!

    "Lo to the Capitol aloft, for Corinth triumphing,
    One glorious with Achaean deaths in victor's chariot goes;
    Mycenae, Agamemnon's house, and Argos he o'erthrows,
    Yea and AEacides himself the great Achilles' son;
    Avenging so the sires of Troy and Pallas' house undone.              840
    Great Cato, can I leave thee then untold? pass Cossus o'er?
    Or house of Gracchus? Yea, or ye, twin thunderbolts of war,
    Ye Scipios, bane of Libyan land? Fabricius, poor and strong?
    Or thee, Serranus, casting seed adown the furrows long?
    Fabii, where drive ye me outworn? Thou Greatest, thou art he,
    Who bringest back thy country's weal by tarrying manfully.

    "Others, I know, more tenderly may beat the breathing brass,
    And better from the marble block bring living looks to pass;
    Others may better plead the cause, may compass heaven's face,
    And mark it out, and tell the stars, their rising and their place:   850
    But thou, O Roman, look to it the folks of earth to sway;
    For this shall be thine handicraft, peace on the world to lay,
    To spare the weak, to wear the proud by constant weight of war."

    So mid their marvelling he spake, and added furthermore:
    "Marcellus lo! neath Spoils of Spoils how great and glad he goes,
    And overtops all heroes there, the vanquisher of foes:
    Yea, he shall prop the Roman weal when tumult troubleth all,
    And ride amid the Punic ranks, and crush the rising Gaul,
    And hang in sire Quirinus' house the third war-taken gear."

    Then spake AEneas, for he saw following Marcellus near                860
    A youth of beauty excellent, with gleaming arms bedight,
    Yet little glad of countenance with eyes that shunned the light:
    "O father, who is he that wends beside the hero's hem,
    His son belike, or some one else from out that mighty stem?
    What murmuring of friends about! How mighty is he made!
    But black Night fluttereth over him with woeful mirky shade."

    Then midst the rising of his tears father Anchises spoke:
    "O son, search not the mighty woe and sorrow of thy folk!
    The Fates shall show him to the world, nor longer blossoming
    Shall give. O Gods that dwell on high, belike o'ergreat a thing      870
    The Roman tree should seem to you, should this your gift endure!
    How great a wail of mighty men that Field of Fame shall pour
    On Mavors' mighty city walls: what death-rites seest thou there,
    O Tiber, as thou glidest by his new-wrought tomb and fair!
    No child that is of Ilian stock in Latin sires shall raise
    Such glorious hope; nor shall the land of Romulus e'er praise
    So fair and great a nursling child mid all it ever bore.
    Goodness, and faith of ancient days, and hand unmatched in war,
    Alas for all! No man unhurt had raised a weaponed hand
    Against him, whether he afoot had met the foeman's band,             880
    Or smitten spur amid the flank of eager foaming horse.
    O child of all men's ruth, if thou the bitter Fates mayst force,
    Thou art Marcellus. Reach ye hands of lily-blooms fulfilled;
    For I will scatter purple flowers, and heap such offerings spilled
    Unto the spirit of my child, and empty service do."

    Thereafter upon every side they strayed that country through,
    Amid wide-spreading airy meads, and sight of all things won.
    But after old Anchises now through all had led his son,
    And kindled love within his heart of fame that was to be,
    Then did he tell him of the wars that he himself should see,         890
    And of Laurentian peoples taught, and town of Latin folk;
    And how from every grief to flee, or how to bear its stroke.

    Now twofold are the Gates of Sleep, whereof the one, men say,
    Is wrought of horn, and ghosts of sooth thereby win easy way,
    The other clean and smooth is wrought of gleaming ivory,
    But lying dreams the nether Gods send up to heaven thereby.
    All said, Anchises on his son and Sibyl-maid doth wait
    Unto the last, and sends them up by that same ivory gate.
    He wears the way and gains his fleet and fellow-folk once more.

    So for Caieta's haven-mouth by straightest course they bore,         900
    Till fly the anchors from the bows and sterns swing round ashore.




BOOK VII.

ARGUMENT.

AENEAS AND HIS TROJANS TAKE LAND BY THE TIBER-MOUTH, AND KING LATINUS
PLIGHTETH PEACE WITH THEM; WHICH PEACE IS BROKEN BY THE WILL OF JUNO,
AND ALL MEN MAKE THEM READY FOR WAR.


    Thou also, O AEneas' nurse, Caieta, didst avail,
    E'en dying, unto these our shores to leave a deathless tale:
    And yet thy glory guards the place, thy bones have won it name
    Within the great Hesperian land, if that be prize of fame.

    But good AEneas, when at last all funeral rites were paid
    And the grave heaped, when in a while the ocean's face was laid,
    Went on his way with sails aloft, and left the port behind:
    The faint winds breathe about the night, the moon shines clear and kind;
    Beneath the quivering shining road the wide seas gleaming lie.

    But next the beach of Circe's land their swift ships glide anigh,     10
    Where the rich daughter of the Sun with constant song doth rouse
    The groves that none may enter in, or in her glorious house
    Burneth the odorous cedar-torch amidst the dead of night,
    While through the slender warp she speeds the shrilling shuttle light.
    And thence they hear the sound of groans, and wrath of lions dread
    Fretting their chains; and roaring things o'er night-tide fallen dead;
    And bristled swine and caged bears cried bitter-wild, and sore;
    And from the shapes of monstrous wolves the howling seaward bore.
    These from the likeness of mankind had cruel Circe won
    By herbs of might, and shape and hide of beasts upon them done.       20
    But lest the godly Trojan folk such wickedness should bear,
    Lest borne into the baneful bay they bring their keels o'er near,
    Their sails did Father Neptune fill with fair and happy breeze,
    And sped their flight and sent them swift across the hurrying seas.

    Now reddened all the sea with rays, and from the heavenly plain
    The golden-hued Aurora shone amidst her rosy wain,
    Then fell the winds and every air sank down in utter sleep,
    And now the shaven oars must strive amid the sluggish deep:
    Therewith AEneas sees a wood rise from the water's face,
    And there it is the Tiber's flood amidst a pleasant place,            30
    With many a whirling eddy swift and yellowing with sand
    Breaks into sea; and diversely above on either hand
    The fowl that love the river-bank and haunt the river-bed
    Sweetened the air with plenteous song and through the thicket fled.
    So there AEneas bids his folk shoreward their bows to lay,
    And joyfully he entereth in the stream's o'ershadowed way.

    To aid, Erato! while I tell what kings, what deedful tide,
    What manner life, in Latin land did anciently abide
    When first the stranger brought his ships to that Ausonian shore;
    Yea help me while I call aback beginnings of the war.                 40
    O Goddess, hearten thou thy seer! dread war my song-speech saith:
    It tells the battle in array, and kings full fain of death,
    The Tyrrhene host, all Italy, spurred on the sword to bear:
    Yea, greater matters are afoot, a mightier deed I stir.

    The king Latinus, old of days, ruled o'er the fields' increase,
    And cities of the people there at rest in long-drawn peace:
    Of Faunus and Laurentian nymph, Marica, do we learn
    That he was born: but Faunus came of Picus, who must turn
    To thee, O Saturn, for his sire: 'twas he that blood began.
    Now, as God would, this king had got no son to grow a man,            50
    For he who first had dawned on him in earliest youth had waned:
    A daughter only such a house, so great a world sustained,
    Now ripe for man, the years fulfilled that made her meet for bed:
    And her much folk of Latin land were fain enow to wed,
    And all Ausonia: first of whom, and fairest to be seen,
    Was Turnus, great from fathers great; and him indeed the queen
    Was fain of for her son-in-law with wondrous love of heart:
    But dreadful portents of the Gods the matter thrust apart.
    Amidmost of the inner house a laurel-tree upbore
    Its hallowed leaves, that fear of God had kept through years of yore:  60
    Father Latinus first, they said, had found it there, when he
    Built there his burg and hallowed it to Phoebus' deity,
    And on Laurentian people thence the name thereof had laid;
    On whose top now the gathered bees, O wondrous to be said!
    Borne on with mighty humming noise amid the flowing air,
    Had settled down, and foot to foot all interwoven there,
    In sudden swarm they hung adown from off the leafy bough.

    But straight the seer cries out: "Ah me! I see him coming now,
    The stranger man; I see a host from that same quarter come
    To this same quarter, to be lords amidst our highest home."           70

    But further, while the altar-fires she feeds with virgin brands,
    The maid Lavinia, and beside her ancient father stands,
    Out! how along her length of hair the grasp of fire there came,
    And all the tiring of her head was caught in crackling flame.
    And there her royal tresses blazed, and blazed her glorious crown
    Gem-wrought, and she one cloud of smoke and yellow fire was grown:
    And wrapped therein, the fiery God she scattered through the house:
    And sure it seemed a dreadful thing, a story marvellous:
    For they fell singing she should grow glorious of fame and fate,
    But unto all her folk should be the seed of huge debate.              80

    So troubled by this tokening dread forth fareth now the king
    To Faunus' fane, his father-seer, to ask him counselling
    'Neath Albunea the high, whose wood, the thicket most of worth,
    Resoundeth with the holy well and breathes the sulphur forth.
    From whence the folk of Italy and all Oenotrian land
    Seek rede amidst of troublous time. Here, when the priest in hand
    Hath borne the gifts, and laid him down amidst the hush of night
    On the strown fells of slaughtered ewes, and sought him sleep aright,
    He seeth wondrous images about him flit and shift,
    He hearkeneth many a changing voice, of talk with Gods hath gift,     90
    And holdeth speech with Acheron, from deep Avernus come.
    There now the sire Latinus went seeking the answers home,
    And there an hundred woolly ewes in order due did slay,
    And propped upon the fells thereof on bed of fleeces lay,
    Till from the thickets inner depths the sudden answer came:

    "Seek not thy daughter, O my son, to wed to Latin name;
    Unto the bridal set on foot let not thy troth be given:
    Thy sons are coming over sea to raise our blood to heaven,
    And sons of sons' sons from their stem shall see beneath their feet
    All things for them to shift and doom; all things the sun may meet,  100
    As to and fro he wendeth way 'twixt either ocean wave."

    Such warnings of the silent night that father Faunus gave,
    Shut up betwixt his closed lips Latinus held no whit,
    But through Ausonia flying fame had borne the noise of it,
    When that Laomedontian folk at last had moored their ships
    Unto the grassy-mounded bank whereby the river slips.

    AEneas and Iulus fair, and all their most and best,
    Beneath a tall tree's boughs had laid their bodies down to rest:
    They dight the feast; about the grass on barley-cakes they lay
    What meat they had,--for even so Jove bade them do that day,--       110
    And on the ground that Ceres gave the woodland apples pile.
    And so it happed, that all being spent, they turn them in a while
    To Ceres' little field, and eat, egged on by very want,
    And dare to waste with hands and teeth the circle thin and scant
    Where fate lay hid, nor spare upon the trenchers wide to fall.

    "Ah!" cries Iulus, "so today we eat up board and all."

    'Twas all his jest-word; but its sound their labour slew at last,
    And swift his father caught it up, as from his mouth it passed,
    And stayed him, by the might of God bewildered utterly.              119
    Then forthwith: "Hail," he cried, "O land that Fate hath owed to me!
    And ye, O House-gods of our Troy, hail ye, O true and kind!
    This is your house, this is your land: my father, as I mind,
    Such secrets of the deeds of Fate left me in days of yore:
    'O son, when hunger driveth thee stranded on outland shore
    To eat the very boards beneath thy victual scant at need,
    There hope for house, O weary one, and in that place have heed
    To set hand first unto the roof, and heap the garth around.'
    So this will be that hunger-tide: this waited us to bound
    Our wasting evils at the last.
    So come, and let us joyfully upon the first of dawn                  130
    Seek out the land, what place it is, what men-folk there abide,
    And where their city; diversely leaving the haven-side.
    But now pour out the bowls to Jove, send prayer upon the way
    To sire Anchises, and the wine again on table lay."

    He spake, and with the leafy bough his temples garlanded,
    And to the Spirit of the Soil forthwith the prayer he said,
    To Earth, the eldest-born of Gods, to Nymphs, to Streams unknown
    As yet: he called upon the Night, and night-tide's signs new shown;
    Idaean Jove, the Phrygian Queen, the Mother, due and well
    He called on; and his parents twain in Heaven and in Hell.           140
    But thrice the Almighty Father then from cloudless heaven on high
    Gave thunder, showing therewithal the glory of his sky
    All burning with the golden gleam, and shaken by his hand.
    Then sudden rumour ran abroad amid the Trojan band,
    That now the day was come about their fateful walls to raise;
    So eagerly they dight the feast, gladdened by omen's grace,
    And bring the beakers forth thereto and garland well the wine.
    But when the morrow's lamp of dawn across the earth 'gan shine,
    The shore, the fields, the towns of folk they search, wide scattering:
    And here they come across the pools of that Numician spring:         150
    This is the Tiber-flood; hereby the hardy Latins dwell.
    But therewithal Anchises' seed from out them chose him well
    An hundred sweet-mouthed men to go unto the walls renowned,
    Where dwelt the king, and every one with Pallas' olive crowned,
    To carry gifts unto the lord and peace for Teucrians pray.
    So, bidden, nought they tarry now, but swift-foot wear the way.

    But he himself marks out the walls with shallow ditch around,
    And falls to work upon the shore his first abode to found,
    In manner of a camp, begirt with bank and battlement.

    Meanwhile his men beheld at last, when all the way was spent,        160
    The Latin towers and roofs aloft, and drew the walls anigh:
    There were the lads and flower of youth afield the city by
    Backing the steed, or mid the dust a-steering of the car,
    Or bending of the bitter bow, hurling tough darts afar
    By strength of arm; for foot or fist crying the challenging.
    Then fares a well-horsed messenger, who to the ancient king
    Bears tidings of tall new-comers in outland raiment clad:
    So straight Latinus biddeth them within his house be had,
    And he upon his father's throne sat down amidmost there.

    High on an hundred pillars stood that mighty house and fair,         170
    High in the burg, the dwelling-place Laurentian Picus won,
    Awful with woods, and worshipping of sires of time agone:
    Here was it wont for kings to take the sceptre in their hand,
    Here first to raise the axe of doom: 'twas court-house of the land,
    This temple, and the banquet-hall; here when the host was slain
    The fathers at the endlong boards would sit the feast to gain.
    There too were dight in cedar old the sires of ancient line
    For there was fashioned Italus, and he who set the vine,
    Sabinus, holding yet in hand the image of the hook;
    And Saturn old, and imaging of Janus' double look,                   180
    Stood in the porch; and many a king was there from ancient tide,
    Who in their country's battle erst the wounds of Mars would bide:
    And therewithal were many arms hung on the holy door.
    There hung the axes crooked-horned, and taken wains of war,
    And crested helms, and bolts and locks that city-gates had borne;
    And spears and shields, and thrusting-beaks from ships of battle torn.
    There with Quirinus' crooked staff, girt in the shortened gown,
    With target in his left hand held, was Picus set adown,--
    The horse-tamer, whom Circe fair, caught with desire erewhile,
    Smote with that golden rod of hers, and, sprinkling venom's guile,   190
    Made him a fowl, and colours fair blent on his shifting wings.

    In such a temple of the Gods, in such a house of kings,
    Latinus sat when he had called those Teucrian fellows in,
    And from his quiet mouth and grave such converse did begin:
    "What seek ye, sons of Dardanus? for not unknown to me
    Is that your city or your blood; and how ye crossed the sea,
    That have I heard. But these your ships, what counsel or what lack
    Hath borne them to Ausonian strand o'er all the blue sea's back?
    If ye have strayed from out your course, or, driven by stormy tide
    (For such things oft upon the sea must seafarers abide),             200
    Have entered these our river-banks in haven safe to lie,
    Flee not our welcome, nor unknown the Latin folk pass by;
    The seed of Saturn, bound to right by neither law nor chain,
    But freely following in the ways whereof the God was fain.
    Yea now indeed I mind a tale, though now with years outworn,
    How elders of Aurunce said that mid these fields was born
    That Dardanus, who reached at last the Phrygian Ida's walls,
    And Thracian Samos, that the world now Samothracia calls:
    From Tuscan stead of Corythus he went upon his ways;
    Whose throne is set in golden heaven, the star-besprinkled place,    210
    Who adds one other to the tale of altared deities."

    He ended, but Ilioneus followed in words like these:
    "O king, O glorious Faunus' child, no storm upon the main
    Drave us amid the drift of waves your country coast to gain;
    And neither star nor strand made blind the region of our road;
    But we by counsel and free will have sought out thine abode,
    Outcast from such a realm as once was deemed the mightiest
    The Sun beheld, as o'er the heaven she ran from east to west.
    Jove is the well-spring of our race; the Dardan children joy
    In Jove for father; yea, our king, AEneas out of Troy,                220
    Who sends us to thy door, himself is of the Highest's seed.
    How great a tempest was let loose o'er our Idaean mead,
    From dire Mycenae Sent; what fate drave either clashing world,
    Europe and Asia, till the war each against each they hurled,
    His ears have heard, who dwells afar upon the land alone
    That ocean beats; and his no less the bondman of the zone,
    That midmost lieth of the four, by cruel sun-blaze worn.
    Lo, from that flood we come to thee, o'er waste of waters borne,
    Praying a strip of harmless shore our House-Gods' home to be,
    And grace of water and of air to all men lying free.                 230
    We shall not foul our land's renown; and thou, thy glory fair
    We know, and plenteous fruit of thanks this deed of thine shall bear:
    Nor ever may embrace of Troy Ausonia's soul despite.
    Now by AEneas' fates I swear, and by his hand of might,
    Whether in troth it hath been tried, or mid the hosts of war,
    That many folks--yea, scorn us not that willingly we bore
    These fillets in our hands today with words beseeching peace--
    That many lands have longed for us, and yearned for our increase.
    But fate of Gods and Gods' command would ever drive us home
    To this your land: this is the place whence Dardanus was come,       240
    And hither now he comes again: full sore Apollo drave
    To Tuscan Tiber, and the place of dread Numicius' wave.
    Moreover, here some little gifts of early days of joy
    Giveth our king, a handful gleaned from burning-tide of Troy:
    Anchises at the altar erst would pour from out this gold;
    This was the gear that Priam used when in the guise of old
    He gave his gathered folk the law; sceptre, and holy crown,
    And weed the work of Ilian wives."

    Now while Ilioneus so spake Latinus held his face,
    Musing and steadfast, on the ground setting his downcast gaze,       250
    Rolling his eyes all thought-fulfilled; nor did the broidered gear
    Of purple move the King so much, nor Priam's sceptre fair,
    As on his daughter's bridal bed the thoughts in him had rest,
    For ancient Faunus' fateful word he turned within his breast.
    Here was the son, the fate-foretold, the outland wanderer,
    Called on by equal doom of God the equal throne to share;
    He from whose loins those glorious sons of valour should come forth
    To take the whole world for their own by utter might of worth.

    At last he spake out joyfully: "God grace our deed begun,
    And his own bidding! man of Troy, thine asking shall be done:        260
    I take your gifts: nought shall ye lack from King Latinus' hand,
    Riches of Troy, nor health and wealth of fat and fruitful land.
    But let AEneas come himself if he so yearn for me,
    If he be eager for our house, and would our fellow be;
    Nor let him fear to look upon friends' faces close anigh,
    Part of the peace-troth shall be this, my hand in his to lie.
    And now bear back unto your king this bidding that I send:
    I have a daughter; her indeed with countryman to blend
    The answers of my father's house forbid, and many a sign
    Sent down from heaven: from over sea comes one to wed our line;      270
    They say this bideth Latin Land; a man to raise our blood
    Up to the very stars of heaven: that this is he fate would,
    I think, yea hope, if any whit my heart herein avail."

    He spake, and bade choose horses out from all his noble tale,
    Whereof three hundred sleek and fair stood in the stables high:
    These biddeth he for Teucrian men be led forth presently,
    Wing-footed purple-bearing beasts, with pictures o'er them flung
    Of woven stuff, and, on their breasts are golden collars hung:
    Gold-housed are they, and champ in teeth the yellow-golden chain
    But to AEneas, absent thence, a car and yoke-beasts twain             280
    He sends: the seed of heaven are they, and breathing very fire,
    The blood of those that Circe stole when she beguiled her sire,
    That crafty mistress, winning them, bastards, from earthy mare.
    So back again AEneas' folk high on their horses fare,
    Bearing Latinus' gifts and words, and all the tale of peace.

    But lo, where great Jove's bitter wife comes from the town of Greece,
    From Argos wrought of Inachus, and holds the airy way.
    Far off she sees AEneas' joy, and where the ship-host lay
    Of Dardans: yea from Sicily and far Pachynus head
    She seeth him on earth at last and raising roofed stead,             290
    And all the ships void: fixed she stood, smit through with bitter wrath,
    And shook her head: then from her breast the angry words came forth:

    "Ah, hated race! Ah, Phrygian fates that shear my fates atwain!
    Was there no dead man's place for you on that Sigean plain?
    Had ye no might to wend as slaves? gave Troy so poor a flame
    To burn her men, that through the fire and through the swords ye came?
    I think at last my godhead's might is wearied and gone by,
    That I have drunk enough of hate, and now at rest may lie:-- I,
    who had heart to follow up those outcasts from their land,
    And as they fled o'er all the sea still in their path would stand.   300
    Against these Teucrians sea and sky have spent their strength for nought:
    Was Syrtes aught, or Scylla aught, or huge Charybdis aught?
    Lo now the longed-for Tiber's breast that nation cherisheth
    Safe from the deep and safe from me: while Mars might do to death
    Those huge-wrought folk of Lapithae: the very Father-God
    Gave up the ancient Calydon to Dian's wrath and rod.
    What was the guilt of Lapithae? what crime wrought Calydon?
    But I, the mighty spouse of Jove, who nought have left undone
    My evil hap might compass, I who ran through all craft's tale
    Am vanquished of AEneas now. But if of no avail                       310
    My godhead be, I will not spare to pray what is of might,
    Since Heaven I move not, needs must I let loose the Nether Night.
    Ah! say it is not fated me the Latin realm to ban,
    Lavinia must be fated wife of this same Trojan man,
    Yet may I draw out time at least, and those great things delay;
    At least may I for either king an host of people slay:
    For father and for son-in-law shall plenteous price be paid,
    With Trojan and Rutulian blood shalt thou be dowered, O maid;
    Bellona's self shall bridal thee; not Cisseus' seed alone
    Was big with brand; not she alone with wedding-ring has shone:       320
    Yea, and this too is Venus' child; another Paris comes
    To kindle deadly torch again in new-born Trojan homes."

    So spake she terrible, and sank into the earth below,
    Yea to the nether night, and stirred Alecto, forge of woe,
    From the dread Goddesses' abode: sad wars she loveth well,
    And murderous wrath, and lurking guile, and evil deeds and fell:
    E'en Pluto loathes her; yea, e'en they of that Tartarean place,
    Her sisters, hate her: sure she hath as many a changing face,
    As many a cruel body's form, as her black snakes put forth.
    To whom in such wise Juno spake and whetted on her wrath:            330

    "Win me a work after thine heart, O Virgin of the night,
    Lest all my fame, unstained of old, my glory won aright,
    Give place: lest there AEneas' sons Latinus overcome
    By wedlock, and in Italy set up their house and home:
    Thou, who the brothers of one heart canst raise up each 'gainst each,
    And overturn men's homes with hate, and through the house-walls' breach
    Bear in the stroke and deadly brand--a thousand names hast thou,--
    A thousand arts of ill: Stir up thy fruitful bosom now;
    Be render of the plighted peace; of war-seed be the sower;           339
    That men may yearn for arms, and ask, and snatch in one same hour."

    Thereon Alecto, steeped at heart with Gorgon venoming.
    Sought Latium first and high-built house of that Laurentian king,
    And by the silent threshold stood whereby Amata lay,
    In whose hot heart a woman's woe and woman's wrath did play,
    About those Teucrian new-comers and Turnus' bridal bed:
    On her she cast an adder blue, a tress from off her head,
    And sent it to her breast to creep her very heart-strings through,
    That she, bewildered by the bane, may all the house undo.
    So he betwixt her bosom smooth and dainty raiment slid,
    And crawled as if he touched her not, and maddened her yet hid,      350
    And breathed the adder's soul in her: the dreadful wormy thing
    Seemed the wrought gold about her neck, or the long silken string
    That knit her hair, and slippery soft it glided o'er her limbs.
    And now while first the plague begins, and soft the venom swims,
    Touching her sense, and round her bones the fiery web is pressed,
    Nor yet her soul had caught the flame through all her poisoned breast,
    Still soft, and e'en as mothers will, she spake the word and said
    Her woes about her daughter's case, and Phrygian bridal bed.

    "To Teucrian outcasts shall our maid, Lavinia, wedded be?
    O Father, hast thou nought of ruth of her, forsooth, and thee?       360
    Nor of the mother, whom that man forsworn shall leave behind,
    Bearing the maiden o'er the sea with the first northern wind?
    Nay, not e'en so the Phrygian herd pierced Lacedaemon's fold,
    And bore Ledaean Helen off unto the Trojan hold.
    Nay, where is gone thine hallowed faith, thy kinsomeness of yore?
    Thine hand that oft to Turnus' hand, thy kinsman, promise bore?
    Lo, if we needs must seek a son strange to the Latin folk,
    And Father Faunus' words on thee are e'en so strait a yoke,
    I deem, indeed, that every land free from our kingdom's sway
    Is stranger land, and even so I deem the Gods would say:             370
    And Turnus comes, if we shall seek beginning of his race.
    From Inachus, Acrisius old, and mid Mycenae's place."

    But when she thus had said in vain, and saw Latinus still
    Withstand her: when all inwardly the maddening serpent's ill
    Hath smitten through her heart of hearts and passed through all her frame,
    Then verily the hapless one, with dreadful things aflame,
    Raves through the city's length and breadth in God-wrought agonies:
    As 'neath the stroke of twisted lash at whiles the whip-top flies,
    Which lads all eager for the game drive, ever circling wide
    Round some void hall; it, goaded on beneath the strip of hide,       380
    From circle unto circle goes; the silly childish throng
    Still hanging o'er, and wondering how the box-tree spins along,
    The while their lashes make it live: no quieter she ran
    Through the mid city, borne amid fierce hearts of many a man.
    Then in the wilderness she feigns the heart that Bacchus fills,
    And stirs a greater madness up, beginning greater ills,
    And mid the leafy mountain-side her daughter hides away,
    To snatch her from the Teucrian bed, the bridal torch to stay;
    Foaming: "Hail, Bacchus! thou alone art worthy lord to wed
    This virgin thing: for thee she takes the spear's soft-fruited head,  390
    For thee she twinkleth dancing feet, and feeds her holy hair."

    The rumour flies, and one same rage all mother-folk doth bear,
    Heart-kindled by the Fury's ill, to roofs of all unrest:
    They flee the house and let the wind play free o'er hair and breast:
    While others fill the very heavens with shrilly quivering wail,
    And skin-clad toss about the spear the wreathing vine-leaves veil:
    But she ablaze amidst of them upholds the fir-lit flame,
    And sings her daughter's bridal song, and sings of Turnus' name,
    Rolling her blood-shot eyes about; then eager suddenly
    She shouts: "Ho, mothers! Latin wives, wherever ye may be,           400
    Hearken! if in your righteous souls abideth any love
    Of lorn Amata; if your souls a mother's right may move,
    Cast off the fillets from your locks, with me the madness bear."

    So through the woodland wilderness and deserts of the deer
    Alecto drave the Queen around, with Bacchus' stings beset
    But when she deemed enough was wrought that rage of hers to whet,
    And that Latinus' rede and house was utterly undone,
    Forthwith away on dusky wings is borne that evil one
    Unto the bold Rutulian's wall: a city, saith the tale,
    Raised up by Danae for her Acrisian folks' avail                     410
    When on the hurrying South she fled: Ardea in days of yore
    Our fathers called it; nor as yet is name thereof passed o'er,
    Though wealth be gone: there Turnus lay within his house on high,
    And midmost sleep of dusky night was winning peacefully.
    When there Alecto cruel face and hellish body shed,
    And to an ancient woman's like her shape she fashioned,
    Wrinkling her forehead villanous; and hoary coifed hair
    She donned, and round about it twined the olive-garland fair,
    And seemed the ancient Calybe of Juno's holy place;
    And so with such a word she thrust before the hero's face:           420

    "Turnus, and wilt thou bear it now, such labour spent in vain,
    And give thy folk to Dardan men, the outcasts of the main?
    The King gainsays thy wedding couch, and dowry justly bought
    By very blood, and for his throne an outland heir is sought.
    Go, thou bemocked, and thrust thyself mid perils none shall thank;
    For cloaking of the Latin peace o'erthrow the Tuscan rank!
    The mighty Saturn's Seed herself hath bid me openly
    To bear thee this, while thou in peace of middle night shouldst lie.
    So up! be merry! arm the lads! bid wend from out the gate.
    Up, up, and arm! The Phrygian folk who in the fair stream wait,
    Burn thou their dukes of men with fire! burn every painted keel!
    'Tis heavenly might that biddeth this. Let King Latinus feel
    Thy strength, and learn to know at last what meaneth Turnus' sword,
    Unless he grant the wedding yet, and hold his plighted word."

    But therewithal the young man spake, and answered her in scorn:
    "Thou errest: tidings of all this failed nowise to be borne
    Unto mine ears, how stranger ships the Tiber-flood beset.
    Nay, make me not so sore afeared,--belike she minds me yet,
    Juno, the Queen of Heaven aloft.
    Nay, mother, Eld the mouldy-dull, the empty of all sooth,            440
    Tormenteth thee with cares in vain, and mid the arms of kings
    Bemocks the seer with idle shows of many fearful things.
    Nay, 'tis for thee to watch God's house, and ward the images,
    And let men deal with peace and war; for they were born for these."

    But at such word Alecto's wrath in utter fire outbrake;
    A tremor ran throughout his limbs e'en as the word he spake;
    Fixed stared his eyes, the Fury hissed with Serpent-world so dread,
    And such a mighty body woke: then rolling in her head
    Her eyes of flame, she thrust him back, stammering and seeking speech,
    As on her head she reared aloft two adders each by each,             450
    And sounded all her fearful whip, and cried from raving mouth:

    "Lo, I am she, the mouldy-dull, whom Eld, the void of sooth,
    Bemocks amid the arms of kings with empty lies of fear!
    Look, look! for from the Sisters' House, the Dread Ones, come I here;
    And war and death I have in hand."

    She spake, and on the youth she cast her torch and set its blaze,
    A mirky gleam of smoke-wreathed flame, amidmost of his heart:
    And mighty dread his slumber brake, and forth from every part,
    From bones and body, burst the sweat, and o'er his limbs 'gan fall;
    And wild he cries for arms, and seeks for arms from bed and wall:    460
    The sword-lust rageth in his soul, and wicked thirst of war.
    So was it as at whiles it is, when with a mighty roar
    The twiggen flame goes up about the hollow side of brass;
    The water leapeth up therewith, within comes rage to pass,
    The while the cloudy foaming flood spouts up a bubbling stir,
    Until the sea refrains no more; the black cloud flies in air.
    So to the dukes of men he shows how peace hath evil end,
    And on Latinus biddeth them in weed of war to wend;
    That they may save their Italy, and thrust the foemen forth.
    And he will fare unto the field more than the twain of worth,        470
    Teucrians and Latins: so he saith, and calls the Gods to aid.
    Then eagerly Rutulian men to war and battle bade:
    For some his glorious beauty stirred, and some his youth drave on,
    And some his sires; and some were moved by deeds his hand had done.

    But while he fills Rutulian souls with love for glorious things,
    Alecto to the Teucrians wends on Stygian-fashioned wings,
    With fresh guile spying out the place where goodly on the shore,
    With toils and speed 'gainst woodland beasts, Iulus waged the war.
    Here for his hounds Cocytus' Maid a sudden madness blent,
    Crossing the nostrils of the beasts with long familiar scent,        480
    As eagerly they chased a hart. This first began the toil,
    And kindled field-abiders' souls to war and deadly broil.

    There was a hart most excellent, a noble horned thing,
    That Tyrrheus' sons had stolen from its own dam's cherishing,
    And fostered: he, their father, had the kingly herd to heed,
    And well was trusted far and wide, the warden of the mead.
    But to their sister Sylvia's hand the beast was used, and oft
    She decked him lovingly, and wreathed his horns with leafage soft,
    And combed him oft, and washed him oft in water of the well.
    Tame to her hand, and used enow amid manfolk to dwell,               490
    He strayed the woods; but day by day betook him evermore,
    Of his own will at twilight-tide, to that familiar door.
    Him now Iulus' hunting hounds mad-eager chanced to stir
    Afar from home, and floating whiles adown the river fair,
    Or whiles on bank of grassy green beguiling summer's flame.
    Therewith Ascanius, all afire with lust of noble fame,
    Turned on the beast the spiky reed from out the curved horn;
    Nor lacked the God to his right hand; on was the arrow borne
    With plenteous whirr, and smote the hart through belly and through flank;
    Who, wounded, to the well-known house fled fast, and groaning shrank
    Into the stalls of his abode, and bloody, e'en as one                501
    Who cries for pity, filled the place with woefulness of moan.

    Then first the sister Sylvia there, smiting her breast, cried out,
    Calling to aid the hardy hearts of field-folk thereabout;
    And swifter than the thought they came; for still that bitter Bane
    Lurked in the silent woods: this man a half-burned brand did gain
    For weapon; that a knotted stake: whate'er came first to hand,
    The seeker's wrath a weapon made: there Tyrrheus cheers his band,
    Come from the cleaving of an oak with foursome driven wedge,
    Panting and fierce he tossed aloft the wood-bill's grinded edge.     510
    But she, that Evil, on the watch, noting the death anigh,
    Climbs up upon the stall-house loft, and from its roof on high
    Singeth the shepherd's gathering sign, and through the crooked horn
    Sends voice of hell: and e'en therewith, as forth the notes were borne,
    The forest trembled; the deep woods resounded; yea afar
    The mere of Trivia heard the sound, and that white water, Nar,
    That bears the sulphur down its stream; the Veline well-springs heard:
    Mothers caught up their little ones, and trembled sore afeard.
    Then hurrying at the voice sent forth by the dread war-horn's song,
    The hardy-hearted folk of fields from everywhither throng,           520
    With weapons caught in haste: and now the Trojan folk withal
    Pour from their opened gates, and on to aid Ascanius fall.
    And there the battle is arrayed; and now no war they wake,
    Where field-folk strive with knotty club or fire-behardened stake;
    But with the two-edged sword they strive: the meadows bristle black
    With harvest of the naked steel: the gleaming brass throws back
    Unto the clouds that swim aloft the smiting of the sun:
    As when the whitening of the wind across the flood doth run,
    And step by step the sea gets up, and higher heaps the wave,
    Until heaven-high it sweeps at last up from its lowest cave.         530

    And here, by dint of whistling shaft in forefront of the fight,
    A youth, e'en Tyrrheus' eldest son, by name of Almo hight,
    Was laid alow: there in his throat the reedy bane abode,
    And shut with blood the path of speech, the tender life-breath's road.
    And many a body fell around: there, thrusting through the press
    With peaceful word, Galaesus old died in his righteousness;
    Most just of men; most rich erewhile of all Ausonian land:
    Five flocks of bleaters once he had: five-fold came home to hand
    His herds of neat: an hundred ploughs turned up the earth for him.   539

    But while they wrought these deeds of Mars mid doubtful fate and dim,
    The Goddess, strong in pledge fulfilled, since she the war had stained
    With very blood, and death of men in that first battle gained,
    Leaveth the Westland, and upborne along the hollow sky,
    To Juno such a word of pride sets forth victoriously:

    "Lo thou, the discord fashioned fair with misery of fight!
    Come let them join in friendship now, and troth together plight!
    But now, since I have sprinkled Troy with that Ausonian blood,
    I will do more, if thereunto thy will abideth good;
    For all the cities neighbouring to war my word shall bring,
    And in their souls the love of Mars and maddening fire shall fling   550
    Till all strike in, and all the lea crops of my sowing bear."

    But Juno answered: "Full enough there is of fraud and fear;
    Fast stands the stumbling-block of war, and hand to hand they fight:
    The sword that Fate first gave to them hath man's death stained aright
    Forsooth let King Latinus now and Venus' noble son
    Join hand to hand, and hold high feast for such a wedding won.
    But thee, the Father of the Gods, lord of Olympus high,
    Will nowise have a-wandering free beneath the worldly sky:
    Give place; and whatso more of toil Fortune herein may make
    Myself shall rule."                                                  560
                        Such words as these Saturnian Juno spake,
    And on the wing the Evil rose, with snaky sweeping whirr,
    Seeking Cocytus' house, and left the light world's steep of air.
    Midst Italy a place there is 'neath mountains high set down,
    Whose noble tale in many a land hath fame and great renown,
    The valley of Amsanctus called, hemmed in by woody steep
    On either side, and through whose midst a rattling stream doth leap,
    With clattering stones and eddying whirl: a strange den gapeth there,
    The very breathing-hole of Dis; an awful place of fear,
    A mighty gulf of baneful breath that Acheron hath made
    When he brake forth: therein as now the baneful Fury laid            570
    Her hated godhead, lightening so the load of earth and heaven.

    No less meanwhile did Saturn's Queen still turn her hand to leaven
    That war begun. The shepherd folk rush from the battle-wrack
    Into the city of the king, bearing their dead aback,
    Almo the lad, Galaesus slain with changed befouled face.
    They bid Latinus witness bear, and cry the Gods for grace.
    Turnus is there, and loads the tale of bale-fire and the sword,
    And swells the fear: "The land shall have a Teucrian host for lord:
    With Phrygians shall ye foul your race and drive me from your door."
    Then they, whose mothers midst the wood God Bacchus overbore,
    To lead the dance--Amata's name being held in nowise light--         581
    Together draw from every side, and weary for the fight.
    Yea, all with froward heart and voice cry out for war and death,
    That signs of heaven forbid so sore, that high God gainsayeth,
    And King Latinus' house therewith beset they eagerly;
    But he unmoved against them stands as crag amid the sea;
    As crag amid the sea, that stands unmoved and huge to meet
    The coming crash, while plenteously the waves bark round its feet:
    Vain is the roaring on the rocks and rattling shingly crash,
    The wrack from off its smitten sides falls down amid the wash.       590

    But when no might is given him their blindness to o'ercome,
    And by the road fell Juno would the matter must win home,
    Sore called the father on the Gods and emptiness of air:
    "Ah, broken by the Fates," he cried, "amid the storm we bear!
    Ye with your godless blood yourselves shall pay the penalty,
    Unhappy men! But Turnus, thou, thine ill deed bideth thee
    With woe enough, and overlate the Gods shalt thou adore.
    For me, my rest is gained, my foot the threshold passeth o'er;
    Yet is my happy ending spilled."
                                      Nor further would he say;
    But, hedged within his house, he cast the reins of rule away.        600

    In Latium of the Westland world a fashion was whilome,
    Thence hallowed of the Alban folk, held holy thence by Rome,
    Earth's mightiest thing: and this they used what time soe'er they woke
    Mars unto battle; whether they against the Getic folk,
    Ind, Araby, Hyrcanian men, fashioned the woeful wrack,
    Or mid the dawn from Parthian men the banners bade aback.
    For twofold are the Gates of War--still bear they such a name--
    Hallowed by awe of Mars the dread, and worship of his fame,
    Shut by an hundred brazen bolts, and iron whose avail
    Shall never die: nor ever thence doth door-ward Janus fail.          610
    Now when amid the Fathers' hearts fast is the war-rede grown,
    The Consul, girt in Gabine wise, and with Quirinus gown
    Made glorious, doth himself unbar the creaking door-leaves great,
    And he himself cries on the war; whom all men follow straight,
    The while their brazen yea-saying the griding trumpets blare.

    In e'en such wise Latinus now was bidden to declare
    The battle 'gainst AEneas' folk, and ope the gates of woe.
    But from their touch the Father shrank, and fleeing lest he do
    The evil deed, in eyeless dark he hideth him away.
    Then slipped the Queen of Gods from heaven, and ended their delay;
    For back upon their hinges turned the Seed of Saturn bore            621
    The tarrying leaves, and burst apart the iron Gates of War,
    And all Ausonia yet unstirred brake suddenly ablaze:
    And some will go afoot to field, and some will wend their ways
    Aloft on horses dusty-fierce: all seek their battle-gear.
    Some polish bright the buckler's face and rub the pike-point clear
    With fat of sheep; and many an axe upon the wheel is worn.
    They joy to rear the banners up and hearken to the horn.
    And now five mighty cities forge the point and edge anew
    On new-raised anvils; Tibur proud, Atina staunch to do,              630
    Ardea and Crustumerium's folk, Antemnae castle-crowned.
    They hollow helming for the head; they bend the withe around
    For buckler-boss: or other some beat breast-plates of the brass,
    Or from the toughened silver bring the shining greaves to pass.
    Now fails all prize of share and hook, all yearning for the plough;
    The swords their fathers bore afield anew they smithy now.
    Now is the gathering-trumpet blown; the battle-token speeds;
    And this man catches helm from wall; this thrusteth foaming steeds
    To collar; this his shield does on, and mail-coat threesome laid
    Of golden link, and girdeth him with ancient trusty blade.           640

    O Muses, open Helicon, and let your song awake
    To tell what kings awoke to war, what armies for whose sake
    Filled up the meads; what men of war sweet mother Italy
    Bore unto flower and fruit as then; what flame of fight ran high:
    For ye remember, Holy Ones, and ye may tell the tale;
    But we--a slender breath of fame scarce by our ears may sail.

    Mezentius first, the foe of Gods, fierce from the Tuscan shore
    Unto the battle wends his way, and armeth host of war:
    Lausus, his son, anigh him wends;--no lovelier man than he,
    Save Turnus, the Laurentine-born, the crown of all to see.--         650
    Lausus, the tamer of the horse, the wood-deer's following bane,
    Who led from Agyllina's wall a thousand men in vain.
    Worthy was he to have more mirth than 'neath Mezentius' sway;
    Worthy that other sire than he had given him unto day.

    The goodly Aventinus next, glorious with palm of prize,
    Along the grass his chariot shows and steeds of victories,
    Sprung from the goodly Hercules, marked by his father's shield,
    Where Hydra girded hundred-fold with adders fills the field:
    Him Rhea the priestess on a day gave to the sun-lit earth,
    On wooded bent of Aventine, in secret stolen birth;                  660
    The woman mingled with a God, what time that, Geryon slain,
    The conquering man of Tiryns touched the fair Laurentian plain,
    And washed amidst the Tuscan stream the bulls Iberia bred.
    These bear in war the bitter glaive and darts with piled head:
    With slender sword and Sabine staff the battle they abide;
    But he afoot and swinging round a monstrous lion's hide,
    Whose bristly brow and terrible with sharp white teeth a-row
    Hooded his head, beneath the roof where dwelt the king did go
    All shaggy rough, his shoulders clad with Herculean cloak.

    Then next twin brethren wend away from Tibur's town and folk,        670
    Whose brother-born, Tiburtus, erst had named that citied place;
    Catillus, eager Coras they, men of the Argive race;
    In forefront of the battle-wood, mid thick of sleet they fare,
    Like as two centaurs cloud-begot, that down the mountains bear,
    Leaving the high-piled Homole, and Othrys of the snow
    With hurrying hoofs: the mighty wood yields to them as they go;
    The tangle of the thicket-place before them gives aback.

    Nor did Praeneste's raiser-up from field of battle lack,
    That Caeculus, whom king of men mid cattle of the mead,
    All ages of the world have trowed was Vulcan's very seed             680
    Found on the hearth: from wide away gathered his rustic band:
    Those housed upon Praeneste's steep; they of the Juno land
    Of Gabii: abiders near cool Anio, they that dwell
    On Hernic rocks, the stream-bedewed: they whom thou feedest well,
    Anagnia rich; the foster-sons of Amasenus' coast.
    Not all had arms, or clash of shield, or war-wain; but the most
    Cast the grey plummets forth, and some, the dart in hand they bear,
    And on the head the fallow fell of woodland wolf they wear
    For helming: now with all of them the left foot goes aground,
    Naked and bare; but with the hide untanned the left is bound.        690

    Messapus lo, the horse-tamer, a child by Neptune won,
    Ne'er by the fire to be spilled, nor by the steel undone;
    His folk this long while sunk in peace, a battle-foolish band,
    He calleth suddenly to fight, and taketh sword in hand;
    AEqui Falisci are of these, Fescennium's folk of fight,
    These lie upon Flavinium's lea, and hold Soracte's hight,
    And mere and mound of Ciminus, Capena's woodland broad.
    With measured footfalls on they go, a-singing of their lord:
    As whiles the snowy swans will fare amid the world of cloud,
    Returning from their feeding-field; far goes the song and loud,      700
    Whose notes along their necks they pour: the flood resounds, and all
    The Asian marish beat with song.
    Scarce might ye deem the brazen ranks of such a mighty host
    Were gathered there: but rather fowl a-driving toward the coast,
    An airy cloud of hoarse-voiced things drawn from the wallowing sea.

    Lo sprung from ancient Sabine blood comes Clausus presently,
    Leading a mighty host, himself a very host of war;
    From whom the Claudian tribe and race hath spread itself afar
    Through Latium, since the Sabine folk was given a share in Rome:
    With him the Amiternian host and old Quirites come;                  710
    Eretus' host and they that keep Mutusca's olive gain,
    The biders in Nomentum's wall, and Veline Rosea's plain,
    The bristling rocks of Tetricae and high Severus' flank,
    Casperia and Foruli and wet Himella's bank;
    The drinkers of the Tiber-stream and Fabaris, and folk
    Cool Nursia sends, and Horta's troop, and men of Latin yoke;
    And they whom hapless Allia parts with wash of waters wan:
    As many as on Lybian main the tumbling waves roll on
    When fierce Orion falls to sleep in wintry waters' lair;
    Or thick as stand the wheaten ears the young sun burneth there       720
    On Hermus' plain or Lycia's lea a-yellowing for the hook:
    Loud clashed the shields, and earth afeared beneath their footfalls shook.

    Halaesus, Agamemnon's blood, a foe to Troy inbred,
    Next yoked the horses to the car; a thousand men he led,
    Fierce folk for Turnus: they that hoe the vine-fair Massic soil;
    And they that from their lofty hills adown unto the broil
    Aruncan fathers sent, and they of Sidicinum's lea;
    All who leave Cales, all whose homes beside Vulturnus be,
    The shoally water: with them went Saticula's fierce band,
    And host of Oscans: slender shafts are weapons of their hand,        730
    Which same to toughened casting-thong amid the fight they tie;
    With bucklered left and scanty blade they come to blows anigh.

    Nor, Oebalus, shalt thou unsung from this our story fail,
    Whom Telon on nymph Sebethis begat as tells the tale
    When Teleboan Capreae he reigned o'er waxen old;
    Whose son might not abide to sit within his father's fold;
    But even then held neath his sway the country far and wide,
    Sarrastes' folk, and all the plain along the Sarnus side.
    Celenna's lea, and Batulum, and folk of Rufra's town,
    And those on whom Abella's walls, the apple-rich, look down.         740
    But these are wont to hurl the spear after the Teuton wise,
    Their heads are helmed with e'en such bark as on the holm-oak lies:
    All brazen-wrought their targets gleam, their brazen sword-blades flash.

    'Twas Nursae in the heart of hills sent thee to battle-clash,
    O Ufens, well renowned of fame, and rich in battle's grace;
    Whose folk are roughest lived of men, eager for woodland chase;
    AEquiculi they hight; who dwell on land of little gain,
    And ever armed they till the earth, and ever are they fain
    To drive the spoil from hour to hour, and live upon the prey.

    Then Umbro of the hardy heart went on the battle-way;                750
    Priest was he of Marruvian folk; about his helm was bent
    The happy olive, leaf and twig: him King Archippus sent:
    Wont was he with his hand and voice the bitter viper-kind
    And water-worms of evil breath in bonds of sleep to bind;
    And he would soothe the wrath of them, and dull their bite by craft,
    Yet nothing might he heal the hurt that came of Dardan shaft;
    Nay, nothing might the sleepy song avail against his bane,
    All herbs on Marsian mountains plucked were nought thereto and vain.
    Anguitia's thicket wept for thee, Fucinus wave of glass,
    The thin wan waters wept for thee.                                   760

    Most goodly Virbius went to war, Hippolytus' own son:
    His mother fair Aricia sent this battle-glorious one
    From fostering of Egeria's wood, from out the marish place
    Where standeth Dian's altar rich fulfilled of plenteous grace.
    For folk say, when Hippolytus, undone by step-dame's lie,
    Had paid unto his father's wrath that utmost penalty,
    He, piecemeal torn by maddened steeds, yet came aback to live
    Beneath the starry firmament, and air that heaven doth give,
    Brought back to life by healing herbs and Dian's cherishing:
    Then the Almighty Father, wroth that any mortal thing                770
    Should rise again to light of life from nether shadows wan,
    Beat down with bolt to Stygian wave the Phoebus-gotten man,
    The finder of such healing craft, the wise in such an art.
    But Trivia's lovingkindness hid Hippolytus apart,
    And in the nymph Egeria's wood she held him many a day:
    Alone in woods of Italy he wore his life away,
    Deedless, his very name all changed, and Virbius by-named then.
    So for this cause to Trivia's fane and hallowed grove do men
    Drive horn-foot steeds, because, o'ercome by sea-beasts dread of yore,
    Piecemeal the chariot and the man they strewed about the shore.      780
    No less his son would drive the steeds across the level plain
    For all their heat, and rush to war aloft in battle-wain.

    Now mid the forefront Turnus self of body excellent,
    Strode sword in hand: there by the head all others he outwent:
    His threefold crested helm upbore Chimaera in her wrath;
    Where very flame of AEtna's womb her jaws were pouring forth;
    And fiercer of her flames was she, and madder of her mood
    As bloomed the battle young again with more abundant blood.
    But on the smoothness of his shield was golden Io shown
    With upraised horns, with hairy skin, a very heifer grown,--         790
    A noble tale;--and Argus there was wrought, the maiden's ward;
    And father Inachus from bowl well wrought the river poured.

    A cloud of foot-folk follow him; his shielded people throng
    The meadows all about; forth goes the Argive manhood strong;
    Aruncan men and Rutuli, Sicanians of old years,
    Sacranian folk, Labicus' band the blazoned shield-bearers:
    Thy thicket-biders, Tiber; those that holy acres till
    Beside Numicus, those that plough Rutulian holt and hill,
    And ridges of Circaei: they whose meadows Anxur Jove
    Looks down on, where Feronia joys amid her fair green grove;         800
    Where Satura's black marish lies, where chilly Ufens glides,
    Seeking a way through lowest dales, till in the sea he hides.

    And after these from Volscian folk doth fair Camilla pass,
    Leading a mighty host of horse all blossoming with brass;
    A warrior maid, whose woman's hands unused to ply the rock,
    Unused to bear Minerva's crate, were wise in battle's shock.
    The very winds might she outgo with hurrying maiden feet,
    Or speed across the topmost blades of tall unsmitten wheat,
    Nor ever hurt the tender ears below her as she ran;
    Or she might walk the middle sea, and cross the welter wan,          810
    Nor dip the nimble soles of her amid the wavy ways.
    From house and field the youth pours forth to wonder and to gaze;
    The crowd of mothers stands at stare all marvelling, and beholds
    Her going forth; how kingly cloak of purple dye enfolds
    Her shining shoulders, how the clasp of gold knots up her hair,
    And how a quiver Lycian-wrought the Queen herself doth bear,
    And shepherd's staff of myrtle-wood steel-headed to a spear.




BOOK VIII.

ARGUMENT.

THE LATINS SEEK HELP OF DIOMEDE, AND AENEAS OF EVANDER, TO WHOM HE GOETH
AS A GUEST. VENUS CAUSETH VULCAN TO FORGE ARMOUR AND WEAPONS FOR HER SON
AENEAS.


    When Turnus from Laurentum's burg the battle-sign upreared,
    When with their voices hard and shrill the gathering trumpets blare,
    When he had stirred his war-steeds on and clashed his weed of war,
    All troubled were the minds of men, and midst of tumult sore
    All Latium swore the battle oath, and rage of men outbroke;
    Messapus then, and Ufens great, the dukes of warring folk,
    Mezentius, scorner of the Gods, these drive from every side
    The folk to war, and waste the fields of tillers far and wide.
    And Venulus is sent withal to Diomedes' town
    To pray for aid, and tell him how the Teucrians are come down         10
    On Latium: how AEneas comes with ship-host, carrying
    His vanquished House-Gods, calling him the Fate-ordained King;
    How many a folk of Italy hath joined the Dardan lord,
    How that his name in Latin land is grown a mighty word--
    What thing the man will build from this, what way the prize of fight,
    If Fortune aid him he shall turn--through this thou see'st more light
    Than cometh to King Turnus yet or King Latinus eyes.

    So goes the world in Latium now, and noting how all lies,
    The Trojan hero drifts adown a mighty tide of care,
    And hither now his swift thought speeds, now thither bids it fare,    20
    And sends it diversely about by every way to slip:
    As quivering light of water is in brazen vessel's lip,
    Smit by the sun, or casting back the image of the moon.
    It flitteth all about the place, and rising upward soon
    Smiteth the fashioned ceiling spread beneath the tiling steep.

    Night fell, and over all the world the earthly slumber deep
    Held weary things, the fowl of air, the cattle of the wold,
    And on the bank beneath the crown of heaven waxen cold,
    Father AEneas, all his heart with woeful war oppressed,
    Lay stretched along and gave his limbs the tardy meed of rest:        30
    When lo, between the poplar-leaves the godhead of the place,
    E'en Tiber of the lovely stream, arose before his face,
    A veil of linen grey and thin the elder's body clad,
    And garlanding of shady sedge the tresses of him had;
    And thus AEneas he bespeaks to take away his woe:

    "O Seed of Gods, who bearest us Troy-town from midst the foe,
    Who savest Pergamus new-born no more to die again,
    Long looked-for on Laurentine earth and fields of Latin men;
    This is your sure abiding-place, your House-Gods' very stead;
    Turn not, nor fear the battle-threats, for now hath fallen dead       40
    The swelling storm of godhead's wrath.
    And lest thou think I forge for thee an idle dream of sleep,
    Amid the holm-oaks of the shore a great sow shalt thou see,
    Who e'en now farrowed thirty head of young; there lieth she
    All white along, with piglings white around her uddered sides:
    That earth shall be thy dwelling-place; there rest from toil abides.
    From thence Ascanius, when the year hath thrice ten times rolled round,
    Shall raise a city, calling it by Alba's name renowned.
    No doubtful matters do I sing,--but how to speed thee well,
    And win thee victor from all this, in few words will I tell:          50
    Arcadian people while agone, a folk from Pallas come,
    Following Evander for their king, have borne his banners home,
    And chosen earth, and reared their town amid a mountain place
    E'en Pallanteum named, from him who first began their race:
    This folk against the Latin men for ever wages fight,
    Bid them as fellows to thy camp, and treaty with them plight;
    But I by bank and flow of flood will straightly lead thee there,
    While thou with beating of the oars the stream dost overbear.
    Arise, arise, O Goddess-born, when the first star-world sets,
    Make prayer to Juno in due wise; o'ercome her wrath and threats       60
    With suppliant vows: victorious grown, thou yet shalt worship me;
    For I am that abundant flood whom thou today dost see
    Sweeping the bank and cleaving way amid the plenteous earth,
    Blue Tiber, sweetest unto heaven of all the streams of worth.
    This is my mighty house; my head from lofty cities sweeps."

    The River spake, and hid himself amid the watery deeps;
    But night and slumber therewithal AEneas' eyes forsook;
    He rose and toward the dawning-place and lights of heaven 'gan look,
    And duly in his hollow hand he lifted water fair                      69
    From out the stream, and unto heaven in such wise poured his prayer:

    "O Nymphs, Laurentian Nymphs, from whence the race of rivers springs,
    And thou, O father Tiber fair, with holy wanderings,
    Cherish AEneas; thrust from me the bitter following bane,
    What pool soe'er may nurse thy spring, O pityer of my pain,
    From whatso land, O loveliest, thy stream may issue forth.
    For ever will I give thee gifts, and worship well thy worth,
    Horned river, of all Westland streams the very king and lord;
    Only be with me; faster bind thy great God-uttered word."

    Thus having said, two twi-banked keels he chooseth from the fleet,
    And mans the oars and dights his folk with gear and weapons meet.     80

    But lo meanwhile a wondrous sign is thrust before his eyes;
    For on the green-sward of the wood a snow-white sow there lies
    Down by the strand, her little ones, like-hued, about her pressed;
    Whom god-loving AEneas slays to thee, O mightiest,
    O Juno, at thine altar-fires hallowing both dam and brood.

    Now while the long night wore away, the swelling of his flood
    Had Tiber soothed, and eddying back in peace the stream was stayed,
    And in the manner of a mere the water's face was laid,
    Or as a pool, that so the oars unstrained their work may ply.
    So now they speed their journey forth amid a happy cry;               90
    The oiled fir slips along the seas, the waves fall wondering then,--
    The woods, unused, fall wondering sore to see the shields of men
    Shine far up stream; to see the keels bepainted swimming there:
    But day and night, with beat of oars, the watery way they wear,
    And conquer reaches long, o'erlaid with many a shifting tree,
    And cleave the forest fair and green along the waveless sea.

    Unto the midmost crown of heaven had climbed the fiery sun,
    By then the walls, and far-off burg, and few roofs one by one
    They see; the place raised high as heaven by mightiness of Rome,
    Where in those days Evander had an unrich, scanty home:              100
    So thither swift they turned their prows, and toward the city drew.

    That day it chanced the Arcadian King did yearly honour do
    Unto Amphitryon's mighty son, and on the God did call
    In grove before the city-walls: Pallas, his son, withal,
    The battle-lords, the senate poor of that unwealthy folk
    Cast incense there; with yet warm blood the altars were a-smoke.
    But when they saw the tall ships glide amidst the dusky shade
    Of woody banks, and might of men on oars all silent laid,
    Scared at the sudden sight they rise, and all the boards forsake:
    But Pallas, of the hardy heart, forbids the feast to break,          110
    While he, with weapon caught in haste, flies forth to meet the men,
    And crieth from a mound afar:
                                  "Fellows, what drave you then?
    And whither wend ye on your ways by road untried before?
    What folk and from what home are ye? and is it peace or war?"

    Then spake the father AEneas the lofty deck aboard,
    As with the peaceful olive-bough he reached his hand abroad;
    "Troy's folk ye see and weapons whet against the Latin side,
    Whom they have driven forth by war amid their plenteous pride.
    We seek Evander: go ye forth and tell him this, and say
    That chosen dukes of Troy are come for plighted troth to pray."      120

    The sound of such a mighty name smote Pallas with amaze:
    "Come forth," he said, "whoso ye be: before my father's face
    Say what ye would; come to our Gods and in our house be guest."

    So saying he gave his hand to him, and hard his right hand pressed;
    Therewith they leave the river-bank, and wend amidst the wood:
    But spake AEneas to the king fair friendly words and good:

    "O best of Greeks, whom fortune wills that I should now beseech,
    And unto thee the suppliant staff of olive garlands reach,
    I feared thee not for Arcas' seed or Duke of Danai,
    Nor for thy being to Atreus' twins a kinsman born anigh:             130
    Rather my heart, and holy words that Gods have given forth,
    Our fathers' kin, the world-wide tale that goeth of thy worth,
    Bind me to thee, and make me fain of what Fate bids befall.
    Now Dardanus, first setter-up and sire of Ilian wall,
    Born of Electra, Atlas' child, as Greekish stories say,
    Came to the Teucrians: Atlas huge Electra gave today,
    Atlas, who on his shoulders rears the round-wrought heavenly house:
    But Mercury thy father is, whom Maia glorious
    Conceived, and shed on earth one day on high Cyllene cold;
    But Atlas Maia too begot, if we may trow tale told,                  140
    That very Atlas who the stars of heavenly house doth raise,
    So from one root the race of us wends on its twofold ways.
    Stayed by these things none else I sent, nor guilefully have sought,
    Assaying of thee, but myself unto thyself I brought,
    And mine own head; and here I stand a suppliant at thy door.
    And that same Daunian folk of men drive us with bitter war
    As fall on thee: if us they chase, what stay but utterly,
    (So deem they) all the Westland earth beneath their yoke shall lie,
    With all the upper flood of sea, and nether waters' wash.
    Take troth and give it: hearts are we stout in the battle's clash,   150
    High-counselled souls, men well beheld in deeds that try the man."

    He ended: but Evander's look this long while overran
    His face, his speaking eyes, and all his body fair to see;
    Then in few words he answered thus:
                                        "How sweet to welcome thee,
    Best heart of Troy! and how I mind the words, and seem to hear
    Anchises' voice, and see the face that mighty man did bear:
    For I remember Priam erst, child of Laomedon,
    Came to Hesione's abode, to Salamis passed on,
    And thence would wend his ways to seek Arcadia's chilly place.
    The blossom of the spring of life then bloomed upon my face,         160
    When on the Teucrian lords I looked with joy and wonderment;
    On Priam, too: but loftier there than any other went
    Anchises; and his sight in me struck youthful love awake.
    I yearned to speak unto the man, and hand in hand to take:
    So fain I met him, led him in to Phineus' walled place;
    And he, departing, gave to me a noble arrow-case
    And Lycian shafts; a cloak thereto, all shot across with gold,
    And golden bridles twain, that now Pallas, my son, doth hold.
    Lo, then, the right hand that ye sought is joined in troth to thine;
    And when tomorrow's light once more upon the world shall shine,      170
    Glad, holpen, shall I send you forth and stay you with my store.
    Meanwhile, since here ye come our friends, with us the Gods adore
    At this our hallowed yearly feast, which ill it were to stay:
    Be kind, and with your fellows' boards make friends without delay."

    Therewith he bids bring forth once more the wine-cups and the meat,
    And he himself sets down the men upon a grassy seat;
    But chiefly to the bed bedight with shaggy lion's skin
    He draws AEneas, bidding him the throne of maple win.
    Then vie the chosen youth-at-arms, the altar-priest brings aid;
    They bear in roasted flesh of bulls, and high the baskets lade       180
    With gifts of Ceres fashioned well, and serve the Bacchus' joy;
    So therewithal AEneas eats and men-at-arms of Troy
    Of undivided oxen chines and inwards of the feast.
    But when the lust of meat was dulled and hunger's gnawing ceased,
    Saith King Evander:
                        "This high-tide that we are holding thus,
    This ordered feast, this altar raised to God all-glorious,
    No idle task of witch-work is, that knoweth not the Gods
    Of ancient days: O Trojan chief, we, saved from fearful odds,
    Here worship, and give glory new to deeds done gloriously.
    Note first the crag, whose world of stones o'ertoppleth there anigh;  190
    What stone-heaps have been cast afar, how waste and wild is grown
    The mountain-house, what mighty wrack the rocks have dragged adown.
    Therein a cave was erst, that back a long way burrowing ran,
    Held by the dreadful thing, the shape of Cacus, monster-man.
    A place the sun might never see, for ever warm and wet
    With reek of murder newly wrought; o'er whose proud doorways set
    The heads of men were hanging still wan mid the woeful gore.
    Vulcan was father of this fiend; his black flame did he pour
    Forth from his mouth, as monster-great he wended on his ways.
    But to our aid, as whiles it will, brought round the lapse of days   200
    The help and coming of a God: for that most mighty one,
    All glorious with the death and spoils of threefold Geryon,
    Alcides, our avenger came, driving the victor's meed,
    His mighty bulls, who down the dale and river-bank did feed.
    But Cacus, mad with furious heart, that nought undared might be
    Of evil deeds, or nought untried of guile and treachery,
    Drave from the fold four head of bulls of bodies excellent,
    And e'en so many lovely kine, whose fashion all outwent;
    Which same, that of their rightful road the footprints clean might lack,
    Tail-foremost dragged he to his den, turning their way-marks back;   210
    And so he hid them all away amid that stonydark,
    Nor toward the cave might he that sought find any four-foot mark.

    "Meanwhile, his beasts all satiate, from fold Amphitryon's son
    Now gets them ready for the road, and busks him to be gone;
    When lo, the herd falls bellowing, and with its sorrow fills
    The woodland as it goes away, and lowing leaves the hills.
    Therewith a cow gave back the sound, and in the cavern hid
    Lowed out, and in despite his heed all Cacus' hope undid.
    Then verily Alcides' ire and gall of heart outbroke
    In fury, and his arms he caught and weight of knotty oak,            220
    And running, sought the hill aloft that thrusteth toward the skies.
    Then first our folk saw Cacus scared and trouble in his eyes,
    And in a twinkling did he flee, no eastern wind as fleet,
    Seeking his den, and very fear gave wings unto his feet;
    But scarcely was he shut therein, and, breaking down the chains,
    Had dropped the monstrous rock that erst his crafty father's pains
    Hung there with iron; scarce had he blocked the doorway with the same,
    When lo, the man of Tiryns there, who with his heart aflame
    Eyed all the entries, here and there turning about his face,
    Gnashing his teeth: afire with wrath, thrice all that hilly place    230
    Of Aventine he eyeth o'er, thrice tries without avail
    The rocky door, thrice sits him down awearied in the dale.

    "There was a peaked rock of flint with ragged edges dight,
    Which at the cave's back rose aloft exceeding high to sight,
    A dwelling meet for evil fowl amidst their nests to bide;
    This, that hung o'er the brow above the river's leftward side,
    Hard from the right he beareth on, and shakes, and from its roots
    Wrencheth it loose, and suddenly adown the bent side shoots.
    Then ringeth all the mighty heaven with thunder of its wrack,
    The banks are rent, the frighted stream its waters casteth back;     240
    But Cacus' den and kingly house showed all uncovered there,
    The inmost of the shadowy cave was laid undoored and bare:
    As if the inner parts of earth 'neath mighty stroke should gape,
    Unlocking all the house of hell, showing that country's shape,
    The wan land all forlorn of God: there shows the unmeasured pit,
    And ghosts aquake with light of day shot through the depths of it.

    "But Cacus, caught unwares by day whereof he had no doubt,
    Imprisoned in the hollow rock, in strange voice bellowing out,
    Alcides fell on from above, calling all arms to aid,
    And plenteous cast of boughs and stones upon the monster laid;       250
    While he, since now no flight availed to 'scape that peril's hold,
    Pours from his mouth a mighty smoke, O wondrous to be told!
    Enwrapping all the house about with blinding misty shroud,
    Snatching the sight from eyes of men, and rolling on the cloud,
    A reeking night with heart of fire and utter blackness blent.
    Alcides' spirit bore it nought; his body swift he sent
    With headlong leap amid the fire where thickest rolled the wave
    Of smoke, and with its pitchy mist was flooding all the cave;
    Cacus he catcheth in the dark spueing out fire in vain,
    And knitteth him in knot about, and, strangling him, doth strain     260
    The starting eyes from out of him, and throat that blood doth lack:
    Then the mirk house is opened wide; the doors are torn aback;
    The stolen kine, that prey his oath foreswore to heaven are shown,
    And by the feet is dragged today the body hideous grown;
    Nor may men satiate their hearts by gazing on the thing;
    His fearful eyes, the face of him, the man-beast's fashioning
    Of bristled breast; those jaws of his, whence faded is the flame.

    "Hence is this honour celebrate, and they that after came
    Still kept the day all joyfully; Potitius wrought it first,
    This feast of mighty Hercules; the house Pinarian nursed,            270
    The altar of the grove he reared, which Mightiest yet we call,
    And ever more, in very sooth, shall mightiest be of all.
    So come, O youths, these glorious deeds I bid you glorify:
    Wreathe round your hair, put forth your hands and raise the cup on high!
    Call on the God whom all we love, and give the wine full fain!"

    He spake: the leaf of Hercules, the poplar coloured twain,
    Shaded his hair; the leaves entwined hung down aback his head;
    The holy beaker filled his hand: then merry all men sped,
    And on the table poured their gift, and called the Gods to hear.

    Meanwhile unto the slopes of heaven the Western Star drew near,      280
    And then the priests, and chief thereof, Potitius, thither came,
    All clad in skins, as due it was, and bearing forth the flame.
    New feast they dight, and gifts beloved of second service bring,
    And on the altar pile again the plates of offering.
    The Salii then to singing-tide heart-kindled go around
    The altars; every brow of them with poplar leafage bound:
    And here the youths, the elders there, set up the song of praise,
    And sing the deeds of Hercules: How, on his first of days,
    The monsters twain his stepdame sent, the snakes, he crushed in hand;
    And how in war he overthrew great cities of the land,                290
    Troy and Oechalia: how he won through thousand toils o'ergreat,
    That King Eurystheus laid on him by bitter Juno's fate.
    "O thou Unconquered, thou whose hand beat down the cloud-born two,
    Pholeus, Hylaeus, twin-wrought things, and Cretan monsters slew:
    O thou who slew'st the lion huge 'neath that Nemean steep,
    The Stygian mere hath quaked at thee, the ward of Orcus deep
    Quaked in his den above his bed of half-gnawed bones and blood.
    At nothing fashioned wert thou feared; not when Typhoeus stood
    Aloft in arms: nor from thine heart fell any rede away
    When round thee headed-manifold the Worm of Lerna lay.               300
    O very child of Jupiter, O Heaven's new glory, hail!
    Fail not thy feast with friendly foot, nor us, thy lovers, fail!"

    With such-like song they sing the praise, and add to all the worth
    The cave of Cacus, and the beast that breathed the wildfire forth.
    The woods sing with them as they sing; the hills are light with song.

    So, all the holy things fulfilled, they wend their ways along
    Unto the city: the old king afoot was with them there,
    And bade AEneas and his son close to his side to fare,
    And as he went made light the way with talk of many a thing.
    AEneas wonders, and his eyes go lightly wandering                     310
    O'er all; but here and there they stay, as, joyful of his ways,
    He asks and hears of tokens left by men of earlier days.

    Then spake the King Evander, he who built up Rome of old:
    "These woods the earth-born Fauns and Nymphs in time agone did hold,
    And men from out the tree-trunk born and very heart of oak;
    No fashion of the tilth they knew, nor how the bulls to yoke,
    Nor how to win them store of wealth, or spare what they had got;
    The tree-boughs only cherished them and rugged chase and hot.
    Then from Olympus of the heavens first Saturn came adown,
    Fleeing the war of Jupiter and kingdom overthrown:                   320
    He laid in peace the rugged folk amid the mountains steep
    Scattered about, and gave them laws, and willed them well to keep
    The name of Latium, since he lay safe hidden on that shore.
    They call the days the Golden Days that 'neath that king outwore,
    Amid such happiness of peace o'er men-folk did he reign.
    But worsened time as on it wore, and gathered many a stain;
    And then the battle-rage was born, and lust of gain outbroke:
    Then came the host Ausonian; then came Sicanian folk;
    And oft and o'er again the land of Saturn cast its name.             329
    Then kings there were, and Thybris fierce, of monstrous body came,
    From whom the Tiber flood is named by us of Italy,
    Its old true name of Albula being perished and gone by.
    Me, driven from my land, and strayed about the ocean's ends,
    Almighty Fortune and the Fate no struggling ever bends
    Set in these steads; my mother's word well worshipped hither drave,
    The nymph Carmentis; and a god, Apollo, wayfare gave."

    Now, as he spake, hard thereunto the altar-stead doth show,
    And gate that by Carmentis' name the Roman people know;
    An honour of the olden time to nymph Carmentis, she,
    The faithful seer, who first foretold what mighty men should be      340
    AEneas' sons; how great a name from Pallanteum should come.
    Then the great grove that Romulus hallowed the fleer's home
    He showeth, and Lupercal set beneath the cliff acold,
    Called of Lycaean Pan in wise Parrhasia used of old.
    Thereafter Argiletum's grove he shows and bids it tell,
    A very witness, where and how the guesting Argus fell.
    Next, then, to the Tarpeian stead and Capitol they went,
    All golden now, but wild of yore with thickets' tanglement:
    E'en then at its dread holiness the folk afield would quake
    And tremble sore to look upon its cliff-besetting brake.             350

    "This grove," saith he, "this hill thou seest with thicket-covered brow,
    Some godhead haunts, we know not who: indeed Arcadians trow
    That very Jove they there have seen, when he his blackening shield
    Hath shaken whiles and stirred the storm amidst the heavenly field.
    Look therewithal on those two burgs with broken walls foredone!
    There thou beholdest tokens left by folk of long agone:
    For one did Father Janus old, and one did Saturn raise,
    Janiculum, Saturnia, they hight in ancient days."

    Amid such talk they reach the roofs whereunder did abide
    Unrich Evander; and they see the herd-beasts feeding wide            360
    And lowing through the Roman Courts amid Carinae's shine.

    But when they came unto the house, "Beneath these doors of mine
    Conquering Alcides went," he said; "this king's house took him in.
    Have heart to scorn world's wealth, O guest, and strive thou too to win
    A godhead's worth: take thou no scorn of our unrich estate."

    He spake, and 'neath the narrow roof AEneas' body great
    He led withal, and set him down; and such a bed was there
    As 'twas of leaves, and overlaid with skin of Libyan bear.

    Night falleth, and its dusky wings spreads o'er the face of earth,
    When Venus, fearful in her soul (nor less than fear 'twas worth),    370
    Sore troubled by Laurentine threats and all the tumult dread,
    Bespeaketh Vulcan, as she lay upon his golden bed,
    And holiness of very love amidst her words she bore:

    "When Argive kings were wasting Troy predestined with their war,
    Were wracking towers foredoomed to fall mid flames of hating men,
    No help of thine for hapless ones, no arms I asked for then,
    Wrought by thy craft and mastery: nor would I have thee spend
    Thy labour, O beloved spouse, to win no happy end;
    Though many things to Priam's house meseemeth did I owe,
    And oftentimes I needs must weep AEneas' pain and woe.                380
    But now that he by Jove's command Rutulian shores hath won,
    I am thy suppliant, asking arms, a mother for her son,
    Praying thy godhead's holiness: time was when Nereus' seed,
    Tithonus' wife, with many tears could bend thee to thy need.
    Look round, what peoples gather now; what cities shut within
    Their barred gates are whetting sword to slay me and my kin."

    She spake: with snowy arms of God she fondled him about,
    And wound him in her soft embrace, while yet he hung in doubt:
    Sudden the wonted fire struck home; unto his inmost drew
    The old familiar heat, and all his melting bones ran through:        390
    No otherwise than whiles it is when rolls the thunder loud,
    And gleaming of the fiery rent breaks up the world of cloud.
    In glory of her loveliness she felt her guile had gained.
    Then spake the Father, overcome by Love that ne'er hath waned:

    "Why fish thy reasons from the deep? where is thy trust in me,
    I prithee, O my God and Love? Had such wish weighed on thee,
    Then, also, had it been my part to arm the Teucrian hand,
    Nor had the Almighty Sire nor Fate forbidden Troy to stand,
    And Priam might have held it out another ten years yet.
    And now if thou wouldst wage the war, if thus thy soul is set,       400
    Thy longing shall have whatsoe'er this craft of mine may lend;
    Whatever in iron may be done, or silver-golden blend;
    Whatever wind and fire may do: I prithee pray no more,
    But trust the glory of thy might."
                                        So when his words wore o'er
    He gave the enfolding that she would, and shed upon her breast
    He lay, and over all his limbs he drew the sleepy rest.
    But when the midmost night was worn, and slumber, past its prime,
    Had faded out, in sooth it was that woman's rising-time,
    Who needs must prop her life with rock and slender mastery           409
    That Pallas gives: she wakes the ash and flames that smouldering lie,
    And, adding night unto her toil, driveth her maids to win
    Long task before its kindled light, that she may keep from sin
    Her bride-bed; that her little ones well waxen-up may be.
    Not otherwise that Might of Fire, no sluggard more than she,
    To win his art and handicraft from that soft bed arose.
    Upon the flank of Sicily there hangs an island close
    To Lipari of AEolus, with shear-hewn smoky steep;
    Beneath it thunder caves and dens AEtnaean, eaten deep
    With forges of the Cyclops: thence men hear the anvils cry
    'Neath mighty strokes, and through the cave the hissing sparkles fly  420
    From iron of the Chalybes, and pants the forge with flame.
    The house is Vulcan's, and the land Vulcania hath to name.

    Thither the Master of the Fire went down from upper air,
    Where Cyclop folk in mighty den were forging iron gear;
    Pyracmon of the naked limbs, Brontes and Steropes.
    A thunderbolt half-fashioned yet was in the hands of these,
    Part-wrought, suchwise as many an one the Father casts on earth
    From all the heaven, but otherwhere unfinished from the birth,
    Three rays they wrought of writhen storm, three of the watery wrack;
    Nor do the three of ruddy flame nor windy winging lack:              430
    And now the work of fearful flash, and roar, and dread they won,
    And blent amid their craftsmanship the flame that followeth on.
    But otherwhere they dight the wain and winged wheels of Mars,
    Wherewith the men and walls of men he waketh up to wars.
    There angry Pallas's arms they wrought and AEgis full of fear,
    And set the gold and serpent scales, and did with mighty care
    The knitted adders, and for breast of very God did deck
    The Gorgon rolling eyen still above her severed neck.
    "Do all away," he said, "lay by the labour so far done;
    Cyclops of AEtna, turn your minds to this one thing alone:            440
    Arms for a great man must be wrought; betake ye to your might;
    Betake ye to your nimble hands and all your mastery's sleight,
    And hurry tarrying into haste."
                    No more he spake: all they
    Fall swift to work and portion out the labour of the day:
    The brazen rivers run about with metal of the gold,
    And soft the Chalyb bane-master flows in the forges' hold.
    A mighty shield they set on foot to match all weapons held
    By Latin men, and sevenfold ring on ring about it weld.
    Meanwhile, in windy bellows' womb some in the breezes take
    And give them forth, some dip the brass all hissing in the lake,     450
    And all the cavern is agroan with strokes on anvil laid.
    There turn and turn about betwixt, with plenteous might to aid,
    They rear their arms; with grip of tongs they turn the iron o'er.

    But while the Lemnian Father thus speeds on the AEolean shore
    The lovely light Evander stirs amid his lowly house,
    And morning song of eave-dwellers from sleep the king doth rouse.
    Riseth that ancient man of days and on his kirtle does,
    And both his feet he binds about with bonds of Tyrrhene shoes;
    Then Tegeaean sword he girds to shoulder and to side,
    And on the left he flings aback the cloak of panther-hide.           460
    Moreover, from the threshold step goes either watchful ward,
    Two dogs to wit, that follow close the footsteps of their lord.
    So to the chamber of his guest the hero goes his way,
    Well mindful of his spoken word and that well-promised stay.
    Nor less AEneas was afoot betimes that morning-tide,
    And Pallas and Achates went each one their lord beside.
    So met, they join their right hands there and in the house sit down,
    And win the joy of spoken words, that lawful now hath grown;
    And thuswise speaks Evander first:

    "O mightiest duke of Trojan men,--for surely, thou being safe,       470
    My heart may never more believe in Troy-town's vanquishing,--
    The battle-help that I may give is but a little thing
    For such a name: by Tuscan stream on this side are we bound;
    On that side come Rutulian arms to gird our walls with sound.
    But 'tis my rede to join to you a mighty folk of fight,
    A wealthy lordship: chance unhoped this hope for us hath dight;
    So draw thou thither whereunto the Fates are calling on.
    Not far hence is a place of men, on rock of yore agone
    Built up; Agylla's city 'tis, where glorious folk of war,
    The Lydian folk, on Tuscan hills pitched their abode of yore.        480
    A many years of blooming once they had, until the king
    Mezentius held them 'neath his pride and cruel warfaring.
    Why tell those deaths unspeakable, and many a tyrant's deed?
    May the Gods store them for the heads of him and all his seed!
    Yea, yea, dead corpses would he join to bodies living yet,
    And hand to hand, O misery! and mouth to mouth would set;
    There, drenched with gore and drenched with dew of death, must they abide,
    A foul embrace unspeakable, and long and long they died.
    Worn out at last, his folk in arms beset his house about,
    And him therein all mad with rage, cut off his following rout,        490
    And cast the wildfire therewithal over his roof on high:
    But he, amidst the slaughter slipped, to fields of Rutuli
    Made shift to flee, and there is held a guest by Turnus' sword.
    So by just anger raised today Etruria is abroad,
    Crying with Mars to aid, 'Give back the king to pay the cost!'
    AEneas, I will make thee now the captain of their host:
    For down the whole coast goes the roar from out their ship-host's pack;
    They cry to bear the banners forth; but them still holdeth back
    The ancient seer, thus singing Fate: _Maeonia's chosen peers,_
    _The heart and flower of men of old, whom grief's just measure bears_  500
    _Against the foe; souls that your king hath stirred to righteous wrath,_
    _No man of Italy is meet to lead this army forth;_
    _Seek outland captains._ Then, indeed, the Tuscan war array,
    Feared by such warnings of the Gods, amidst these meadows lay.
    Tarchon himself hath hither sent sweet speakers, bearing me
    Their lordships' kingly staff and crown, and signs of royalty;
    And bidding take the Tuscan land and join their camp of war.
    But eld adull with winter frost and spent with days of yore,
    My body over-old for deeds begrudged such government.
    I would have stirred my son, but he, with Sabine mother blent,       510
    Shared blood of this Italian land: but thee the Fates endow
    With years and race full meet hereto; the Gods call on thee now.
    Go forth, O captain valorous of Italy and Troy.
    Yea, I will give thee Pallas here, my hope and darling joy,
    And bid him 'neath thy mastery learn in battle to be bold,
    And win the heavy work of Mars, and all thy deeds behold;
    And, wondering at thy valiancy, win through his earliest years.
    Two hundred knights of Arcady, the bloom of all it bears,
    I give thee; in his own name, too, like host shall Pallas bring."

    Scarce had he said, and still their gaze unto the earth did cling,   520
    AEneas of Anchises born and his Achates true,
    For many thoughts of matters hard their minds were running through,
    When Cytherea gave a sign amid the open sky;
    For from the left a flash of light went quivering suddenly,
    And sound went with it, and all things in utter turmoil fared,
    And clangour of the Tyrrhene trump along the heavens blared.
    They look up; ever and anon a mighty clash they hear,
    And gleams they see betwixt the clouds, amid the sky-land clear,
    The glitter of the arms of God, the thunder of their clang.

    The man of Troy, while others' hearts amazed and fearful hang,       530
    Knoweth the sound, the promised help, his Goddess-mother's meed.
    He saith: "Yea, verily, O host, to ask is little need
    What hap this portent draweth on: the Gods will have me wend;
    The God that made me promised erst such heavenly signs to send
    If war were toward; and through the sky she promised to bear down
    Arms Vulcan-fashioned for my need.
    Woe's me for poor Laurentium's folk! what death, what bloody graves!
    --Ah, Turnus, thou shalt pay it me!--how many 'neath thy waves,
    O Father Tiber, shalt thou roll the shields and helms of men,
    And bodies of the mighty ones! Cry war, oath-breakers, then!"        540

    And as he spake the word he rose from off the lofty throne,
    And the slaked fire of Hercules roused on the altar-stone;
    And joyfully he drew anear the God of yesterday
    And little House-Gods: chosen ewes in manner due they slay,
    Evander and the youth of Troy together side by side.
    Then to the ships they wend their ways, where yet their fellows bide:
    There men to follow him in fight he chooseth from the peers,
    The flower of hardy hearts; the rest the downlong water bears;
    Deedless they swim adown the stream, Ascanius home to bring
    The tidings of his coming sire and matters flourishing.              550

    But horses get such Teucrian men as are for Tyrrhene mead;
    By lot they choose AEneas one which yellow lion's weed
    Goes all about; full fair it shone, for it was golden-clawed.
    Then sudden through the little town the rumour flies abroad,
    That knights will speedily ride forth to Tyrrhene kingly stead.
    Then fear redoubleth mothers' prayers, and nigher draweth dread
    In peril's hand, and greater still the face of Mars doth grow.

    Father Evander strains the hand of him that needs must go,
    Clinging with tears insatiate, and such a word doth say:
    "O me! would Jove bring back again the years long worn away!         560
    Were I as when the foremost foes upon Praeneste's field
    I felled, and burnt victoriously a heap of shield on shield:
    When with this very hand I sent King Herilus to Hell,
    Whose dam, Feronia, at his birth,--wild is the tale to tell,--
    Had given him gift of threefold life; three times the sword to shake,
    And thrice to fall upon the field: yet did this right hand take
    That threefold life away from him, thrice spoiled him of his gear.
    O were I such, ne'er would I break from thine embracing dear,
    O son; nor had Mezentius erst, the tyrant neighbour lord,
    In my despite so many deaths wrought with his cruel sword,           570
    Nor widowed this our city here of such a host of sons.
    But ye, O Gods!--thou Mightiest, King of all heavenly ones,
    O Jove, have pity now, I pray, upon the Arcadian King,
    And hear a father's prayers! for if your mighty governing,--
    If Fate shall keep my Pallas safe, and I may live to see
    His face again,--if he return to keep our unity,
    Then may I live, and any toil, such as ye will, abide!
    But, Fortune, if thou threatenest ill, and misery betide,
    Then let me now, yea, now indeed, the cruel life break through,
    While yet my fear is unfulfilled and hope may yet come true;         580
    While thee, beloved joy of eld, I wrap mine arms around,
    Ere yet the tale of evil hap mine ancient ears may wound."

    Thus at their last departing-tide the father poured the prayer,
    Whom, fainting now, the serving-men back within doors must bear;
    While forth from out the open gate the host of horsemen ride,
    AEneas and Achates leal in forefront of their pride,
    And then the other Trojan lords: amidst the company,
    In cloak adorned and painted arms, was Pallas fair to see:
    E'en such as Lucifer, when he bathed in the ocean stream,
    The light beloved of Venus well o'er every starry beam,              590
    Hath raised his holy head in heaven and down the darkness rent.
    The fearful mothers on the walls their eyen after sent,
    Following the dusty cloud of them and ranks of glittering brass.
    But mid the thicket places there by nighest road they pass
    Unto their end in weed of war: with shout and serried band
    The clattering hooves of four-foot things shake down the dusty land.

    There is a mighty thicket-place by chilly Caeres' side,
    By ancient dread of fathers gone held holy far and wide:
    A place that hollow hills shut in and pine-wood black begirds.
    Men say that to Silvanus erst, the God of fields and herds,          600
    The old Pelasgi hallowed it, and made a holy day,
    E'en those who in the time agone on Latin marches lay.
    No great way hence the Tuscan folk and Tarcho held them still
    In guarded camp; the host of them from rising of a hill
    Might now be seen, as far and wide they spread about the field.
    Father AEneas and his folk, the mighty under shield,
    Speed hither, and forewearied now their steeds and bodies tend.
    But through the clouds of heavenly way doth fair white Venus wend,
    Bearing the gift; who when she saw in hidden valley there
    Her son afar, apart from men by river cool and fair,                 610
    Then kind she came before his eyes, and in such words she spake:
    "These promised gifts, my husband's work, O son, I bid thee take:
    So shalt thou be all void of doubt, O son, when presently
    Laurentines proud and Turnus fierce thou bidst the battle try."

    So spake the Cytherean one and sought her son's embrace,
    And hung the beaming arms upon an oak that stood in face.
    But he, made glad by godhead's gift, and such a glory great,
    Marvelleth and rolleth o'er it all his eyes insatiate,
    And turns the pieces o'er and o'er his hands and arms between;
    The helm that flasheth flames abroad with crest so dread beseen:     620
    The sword to do the deeds of Fate; the hard-wrought plates of brass,
    Blood-red and huge; yea, e'en as when the bright sun brings to pass
    Its burning through the coal-blue clouds and shines o'er field and fold:
    The light greaves forged and forged again of silver-blend and gold:
    The spear, and, thing most hard to tell, the plating of the shield.
    For there the tale of Italy and Roman joy afield
    That Master of the Fire had wrought, not unlearned of the seers,
    Or blind to see the days before. The men of coming years,
    Ascanius stem, all foughten fields, were wrought in due array.

    In the green den of Mavors there the fostering she-wolf lay,         630
    The twin lads sporting round the beast, clung to her udders there,
    And sucked the nursing mother-wolf, and nothing knew of fear;
    But she, with lithe neck turned about, now this now that caressed,
    And either body with her tongue for hardy shaping pressed.
    Rome had he done anigh thereto and Sabine maidens caught
    From concourse of the hollow seats when roundway games were wrought
    There for the sons of Romulus the sudden war upstarts
    With Tatius, the old king of days, and Cures' hardy hearts.
    Then those two kings, the battle quenched, yet clad in battle-gear,
    Stand with the bowl in hand before the fire of Jupiter,              640
    As each to each o'er slaughtered sow the troth of peace they plight.

    Anigh is Metius piecemeal dragged by foursome chariots light.
    --Ah, Alban, by the troth of words 'twere better to abide!--
    There Tullus strews his lying flesh about the thicket wide,
    Nor sprinkling of a traitor's blood the bramble-bushes lack.

    There was Porsena bidding men take outcast Tarquin back,
    The while his mighty leaguer lay about the city's weal.
    For freedom there AEneas' sons were rushing on the steel:
    As full of wrath, as one who threats, might ye behold his frown,
    Because that Cocles was of heart to break the bridge adown;          650
    And Cloelia from her bursten bonds was swimming o'er the flood.

    On topmost of Tarpeian burg the warden Manlius stood
    Before the house of God, and held the Capitol high-set;
    Whereon with straw of Romulus the roof was bristling yet.
    There fluttering mid the golden porch the silver goose was done,
    The seer that told of Gaulish feet unto the threshold won:
    Then through the brake the Gauls were come, and held the castle's height,
    Beneath the shielding of the mirk and gift of shadowy night.
    All golden are the locks of these, and golden is their gear,         659
    And fair they shine in welted coats; their milk-white necks do bear
    The twisted gold; each one in hand two Alpine spears doth wield,
    And guarded are their bodies well with plenteous length of shield.

    The Salii in their dancing game; the naked Luperci,
    With crests that bore the tuft of wool and shields from out the sky,
    There had he wrought: the mothers chaste in softly-gliding car
    Bore holy things the city through. Yea, he had wrought afar
    The very house of Tartarus, and doors of Dis the deep,
    And dooms of evil: there wert thou hung on the beetling steep,
    O Catiline, and quaking sore 'neath many a fiendly face;
    While Cato gave the good their laws in happy hidden place.           670

    The image of the swelling sea amidst of these there lay
    All golden, with the blue o'erfoamed with flecks of hoary spray,
    And dolphins shining silver-white with tail-stroke swept the wave,
    And gathered in an orbed band the flowing waters clave.
    And in the midst were brazen fleets and show of Actium's wars
    And all Leucate set a-boil with ordered game of Mars
    There might ye see; and all the flood lit up with golden light.
    Augustus Caesar, leading on Italian men to fight
    With Father-folk, and Household Gods, and Gods of greater name,
    Stood high on deck: his joyful brow flashed forth a twofold flame,   680
    His father's star above his head is shining glory-clear.
    With wind to aid and God to aid, Agrippa otherwhere
    Leads on the host from high; whose brows with glorious battle-sign
    Are decked; for with the crown of beaks, the ship-host's prize, they shine.

    But Antony, with outland force and arms wrought diversely,
    Victorious from the morning-folks and ruddy-stranded sea,
    Bore Egypt and the Eastland might and Bactria's outer ends;
    And after him--O shame to tell!--a wife of Egypt wends.

    They rush together; all the sea is beaten into foam,
    Torn by the great three-tyned beaks and oar-blades driven home:      690
    They seek the deep: ye might have thought that uptorn Cyclades
    Swam o'er the main, that mountains met high mountains on the seas,
    With such a world of towered ships fall on those folks of war.
    The hempen flame they fling from hand; they cast the dart afar
    Of winged steel, and Neptune's lea reddens with death anew.
    The Queen amidst calls on her host with timbrel fashioned due
    In Egypt's guise, nor looks aback the adders twain to see;
    Barking Anubis, shapes of God wild-wrought and diversely
    'Gainst Neptune and 'gainst Venus fair, and 'gainst Minerva's weal
    Put forth the spear; and Mavors' wrath was fashioned forth in steel  700
    Amidst the fight: the Dreadful Ones stooped evil-wrought from heaven,
    And Discord stalked all glad at heart beneath her mantle riven;
    And after her, red scourge in hand, did dire Bellona go.

    All this Apollo, Actian-housed, beheld, and bent his bow
    From high aloft, and with his fear all Egypt fell to wrack,
    And Ind and Araby; and all Sabaeans turned the back.
    Then once again the Queen was wrought, who on the winds doth cry,
    And spreadeth sail; and now, and now, the slackened sheet lets fly.
    The Lord of Fire had wrought her there wan with the death to be,
    Borne on, amid the death of men, by wind and following sea.          710
    But Nile was wrought to meet them there, with body great to grieve,
    And in the folding of his cloak the vanquished to receive,
    To take them to his bosom grey, his flood of hidden home.
    There Caesar threefold triumphing, borne on amidst of Rome,
    Three hundred shrines was hallowing to Gods of Italy
    Through all the city; glorious gift that nevermore shall die;
    The while all ways with joy and game and plenteous praising rang.
    In all the temples altars were; in all the mothers sang
    Before the altars; on the earth the steers' due slaughter lay.
    But on the snow-white threshold there of Phoebus bright as day       720
    He sat and took the nations' gifts, and on the glorious door
    He hung them up: in long array the tamed folks went before,
    As diverse in their tongues as in their arms and garments' guise.
    The Nomads had he fashioned there, that Mulciber the wise,
    And Afric's all ungirded folk; Carians and Leleges,
    Shafted Geloni: softlier there Euphrates rolled his seas;
    The Morini, the last of men, the horned Rhine, were there,
    Danae untamed, Araxes loth the chaining bridge to bear.

    So on the shield, his mother's gift by Vulcan fashioned fair,
    He wondereth, blind of things to come but glad the tale to see,      730
    And on his shoulder bears the fame and fate of sons to be.




BOOK IX.

ARGUMENT.

IN THE MEANTIME THAT AENEAS IS AWAY, TURNUS AND THE LATINS BESET THE
TROJAN ENCAMPMENT, AND MISS BUT A LITTLE OF BRINGING ALL THINGS TO RUIN.


    Now while a long way off therefrom do these and those such deed,
    Saturnian Juno Iris sends from heaven aloft to speed
    To Turnus of the hardy heart, abiding, as doth hap,
    Within his sire Pilumnus' grove in shady valley's lap;
    Whom Thaumas' child from rosy mouth in suchwise doth bespeak:

    "Turnus, what no one of the Gods might promise, didst thou seek,
    The day of Fate undriven now hath borne about for thee:
    AEneas, he hath left his town, and ships, and company,
    And sought the lordship Palatine and King Evander's house;
    Nay more, hath reached the utmost steads, the towns of Corythus       10
    And host of Lydians, where he arms the gathered carles for war.
    Why doubt'st thou? now is time to call for horse and battle-car.
    Break tarrying off, and make thy stoop upon their camp's dismay."

    She spake, and on her poised wings went up the heavenly way,
    And in her flight with mighty bow cleft through the cloudy land.
    The warrior knew her, and to heaven he cast up either hand,
    And with such voice of spoken things he followed as she fled:
    "O Iris, glory of the skies, and who thy ways hath sped
    Amidst the clouds to earth and me? Whence this so sudden clear
    Of weather? Lo, the midmost heaven I see departed shear,              20
    And through the zenith stray the stars: such signs I follow on,
    Whoso ye be that call to war."
                                    And therewithal he won
    Unto the stream, and from its face drew forth the water fair,
    Praying the Gods, and laid a load of vows upon the air.

    And now the host drew out to war amid the open meads,
    With wealth of painted gear and gold, and wealth of noble steeds.
    Messapus leads the first array, and Tyrrheus' children ward
    The latter host, and in the midst is Turnus' self the lord.
    Such is the host as Ganges deep, arising mid the hush
    With sevenfold rivers' solemn flow, or Nile-flood's fruitful rush,    30
    When he hath ebbed from off the fields and hid him in his bed.

    But now the Teucrians see the cloud of black dust grow to head
    From far away, and dusty-dark across the plain arise:
    And first from off the mound in face aloud Caicus cries:
    "Ho! what is this that rolleth on, this misty, mirky ball?
    Swords, townsmen, swords! Bring point and edge; haste up to climb the wall.
    Ho, for the foeman is at hand!"
                                    Then, with a mighty shout,
    The Trojans swarm through all the gates and fill the walls about;
    For so AEneas, war-lord wise, had bidden them abide
    At his departing; if meantime some new hap should betide,             40
    They should not dare nor trust themselves to pitch the fight afield,
    But hold the camp and save the town beneath the ramparts' shield.
    Therefore, though shame and anger bade go forth and join the play,
    They bolt and bar the gates no less and all his word obey;
    And armed upon the hollow towers abide the coming foe.

    But Turnus, flying forward fast, outwent the main host slow,
    And with a score of chosen knights is presently at hand
    Before the town: borne on he was on horse of Thracian land,
    White-flecked, and helmeted was he with ruddy-crested gold.
    "Who will be first with me, O youths, play with the foe to hold?      50
    Lo, here!" he cried; and on the air a whirling shaft he sent,
    The first of fight, and borne aloft about the meadows went.
    His fellows take it up with shouts, and dreadful cry on rolls
    As fast they follow, wondering sore at sluggard Teucrian souls,--
    That men should shun the battle pitched, nor dare the weapon-game,
    But hug their walls. So round the walls, high-horsed, with heart aflame,
    He rides about, and tries a way where never was a way:
    E'en as a wolf the sheep-fold full besetteth on a day,
    And howleth round about the garth, by wind and rain-drift beat,
    About the middle of the night, while safe the lamb-folk bleat         60
    Beneath their mothers: wicked-fierce against them safe and near
    He rageth; hunger-madness long a-gathering him doth wear,
    With yearning for that blood beloved to wet his parched jaws.
    E'en so in that Rutulian duke to flame the anger draws,
    As he beholdeth walls and camp: sore burnt his hardy heart
    For shifts to come at them; to shake those Teucrians shut apart
    From out their walls and spread their host about the meadows wide.

    So on the ships he falls, that lay the campment's fence beside,
    Hedged all about with garth and mound and by the river's flood,
    And to the burning crieth on his folk of joyous mood,                 70
    And eager fills his own right hand with branch of blazing fir:
    Then verily they fall to work whom Turnus' gaze doth stir,
    And all the host of them in haste hand to the black torch lays.
    They strip the hearths; the smoky brand sends forth pitch-laden blaze,
    And starward soot-bemingled flame drave Vulcan as he burned.

    Say, Muse, what God from Teucrian folk such sore destruction turned?
    Who drave away from Trojan keels so mighty great a flame?
    Old is the troth in such a tale, but never dies its fame.
    What time AEneas first began on Phrygian Ida's steep
    To frame his ships, and dight him there to ride upon the deep,        80
    The Berecynthian Mother-Queen spake, as the tale doth fare,
    Unto the Godhead of great Jove:
                                    "Son, grant unto my prayer
    That which thy loved mother asks from heaven all tamed to peace:
    A wood of pines I have, beloved through many years' increase.
    There is a thicket on my height wherein men worship me,
    Dim with the blackening of the firs and trunks of maple-tree:
    These to the Dardan youth in need of ship-host grudged I nought,
    But in my anxious soul as now is born a troubling thought.
    Do off my dread, and let, I pray, a mother's prayers avail,
    That these amid no shattering sea or whirling wind may fail;          90
    Let it avail them that my heights first brought them unto birth."

    Answered her son, that swayeth still the stars that rule the earth:
    "O mother, whither call'st thou Fate? what wouldst thou have them be?
    Shall keels of mortal fashioning gain immortality?
    And shall AEneas well assured stray every peril through?
    Shall this be right? hath any God the power such things to do?
    No less when they have done their work, and safe in Italy
    Lie in the haven, which soe'er have overpassed the sea,
    And borne the Duke of Dardan men to that Laurentine home,
    From such will I take mortal shape, and bid them to become           100
    Queens of the sea-plain, such as are Doto the Nereus child,
    And Galatea, whose bosoms cleave the foaming waters wild."

    He spake and swore it by the flood his Stygian Brother rules,
    And by its banks that reek with pitch o'er its black whirling pools,
    And with the bowing of his head did all Olympus shake.

    And now the promised day was come, nor will the Parcae break
    The time fulfilled; when Turnus' threat now bade the Mother heed
    That she from those her holy ships should turn the fire at need.
    Strange light before the eyes of men shone forth; a mighty cloud
    Ran from the dawning down the sky, and there was clashing loud       110
    Of Ida's hosts, and from the heavens there fell a voice of fear,
    That through Rutulia's host and Troy's fulfilled every ear:
    "Make no great haste, O Teucrian men, these ships of mine to save!
    Nor arm thereto! for Turnus here shall burn the salt sea wave
    Sooner than these, my holy pines. But ye--depart, go free!
    The Mother biddeth it: depart, Queens, Goddesses, of sea!"

    Straightway the ships brake each the chain that tied them to the bank,
    And, as the dolphins dive adown, with plunging beaks they sank
    Down to the deeps, from whence, O strange! they come aback once more;
    As many brazen beaks as erst stood fast beside the shore,            120
    So many shapes of maidens now seaward they wend their ways.

    Appalled were those Rutulian hearts; yea, feared with all amaze,
    Messapus sat mid frighted steeds: the rough-voiced stream grew black;
    Yea, Tiberinus from the deep his footsteps drew aback.
    But Turnus of the hardy heart, his courage nothing died;
    Unmoved he stirs their souls with speech, unmoved he falls to chide:

    "These portents seek the Teucrians home; the very Jupiter
    Snatches their wonted aid from them, that might not bide to bear
    Rutulian fire and sword: henceforth the sea-plain lacketh road
    For Teucrian men: their flight is dead, and half the world's abode   130
    Is reft from them: and earth, forsooth, upon our hands it waits,
    With thousands of Italian swords. For me, I fear no Fates:
    For if the Phrygians boast them still of answering words of God,
    Enough for Venus and the Fates that Teucrian men have trod
    The fair Ausonia's fruitful field: and answering fates have I:
    A wicked folk with edge of sword to root up utterly,
    For stolen wife: this grief hath grieved others than Atreus' sons,
    And other folk may run to arms than those Mycenian ones.
    --Enough one downfall is, say ye?--Enough had been one sin.
    Yea, I had deemed all womankind your hatred well might win.          140
    --Lo, these are they to whom a wall betwixt the sword and sword,
    The little tarrying of a ditch,--such toys the death to ward!--
    Give hearts of men! What, saw they not the war-walls of Troy-town,
    The fashioning of Neptune's hand, amid the flame sink down?
    But ye, my chosen, who is dight with me to break the wall,
    That we upon their quaking camp with point and edge may fall?
    No need I have of Vulcan's arms or thousand ships at sea
    Against these Teucrians; yea, though they should win them presently,
    The Tuscan friendship: deeds of dusk and deedless stolen gain
    Of that Palladium, and the guards of topmost castle slain,           150
    Let them not fear: we shall not lurk in horse's dusky womb:
    In open day to gird your walls with wildfire is the doom.
    Let them not deem they have to put the Danaans to the proof,
    Pelasgian lads that Hector's hand for ten years held aloof.
    --But come, since all the best of day is well-nigh worn to end,
    Joy in our good beginning, friends, and well your bodies tend,
    And bide in hope and readiness the coming of the fight."

    Therewith Messapus hath the charge with outguards of the night
    To keep the gates, and all the town with watch-fires round to ring:
    Twice seven are chosen out to hold the town inleaguering             160
    Of Rutuli: an hundred youths, they follow each of these;
    A purple-crested folk that gleam with golden braveries:
    They pace the round, they shift the turn, or scattered o'er the grass
    Please heart and soul with wine, and turn the empty bowl of brass:
    The watch-fires shine around in ring; through sport and sleeplessness
    Their warding weareth night away.

    The Trojans from their walls of war look down on all these things;
    They hold the heights in arms, and search the great gate's fastenings
    With hurrying fear; or, spear in hand, gangway to battlement         169
    They yoke. There Mnestheus urged the work; there hot Serestus went;
    They whom AEneas, if perchance the time should call thereto,
    Had made first captains of the host, lords of all things to do.
    So all the host along the walls the peril shareth out,
    Falling to watch, and plays its part in turn and turn about.

    Nisus was warder of the gate, the eager under shield,
    The son of Hyrtacus, whom erst did huntress Ida yield
    Unto AEneas' fellowship, keen with the shaft and spear.
    Euryalus, his friend, stood by, than whom none goodlier
    Went with AEneas or did on the battle-gear of Troy:
    Youth's bloom unshorn was on his cheek, scarce was he but a boy.     180
    Like love the twain had each for each; in battle side by side
    They went; and now as gatewards twain together did abide.

    Now Nisus saith: "Doth very God so set the heart on fire,
    Euryalus, or doth each man make God of his desire?
    My soul is driving me to dare the battle presently,
    Or some great deed; nor pleased with peace at quiet will it be.
    Thou seest how those Rutulian men trust in their warding keep;
    How wide apart the watch-fires shine; how slack with wine and sleep
    Men lie along; how far and wide the hush o'er all things lies.
    Note now what stirreth in my mind, what thoughts in me arise:        190
    They bid call back AEneas now, fathers, and folk, and all,
    And send out men to bear to him sure word of what doth fall.
    Now if the thing I ask for thee they promise,--for to me
    The deed's fame is enough,--meseems beneath yon mound I see
    A way whereby to Pallanteum in little space to come."

    Euryalus, by mighty love of glory smitten home,
    Stood all amazed, then answered thus his fiery-hearted friend:
    "O Nisus, wilt thou yoke me not to such a noble end?
    And shall I send thee unto deeds so perilous alone?
    My sire Opheltes, wise in war, nourished no such an one,             200
    Reared mid the terror of the Greeks and Troy-town's miseries;
    Nor yet with thee have I been wont to deedless deeds like these,
    Following AEneas' mighty heart through Fortune's furthest way.
    Here is a soul that scorns the light, and deems it good to pay
    With very life for such a fame as thou art brought anear."

    Saith Nisus: "Nay, I feared of thee no such a thing, I swear,
    No such ill thought; so may he bring thy friend back with the prize,
    Great Jove, or whosoe'er beholds these things with equal eyes.
    But if some hap (thou seest herein how many such may fall),
    If any hap, if any God bear me the end of all,                       210
    Fain were I thou wert left: thine age is worthier life-day's gain;
    Let there be one to buy me back snatched from amidst the slain,
    And give me earth: or if e'en that our wonted fortune ban,
    Do thou the rites, and raise the tomb unto the missing man;
    Nor make me of thy mother's woe the fashioner accurst:
    She who, O friend, alone of all our many mothers durst
    To follow thee, nor heeded aught of great Acestes' town."

    He said: "For weaving of delay vain is thy shuttle thrown;
    Nor is my heart so turned about that I will leave the play:
    Let us be doing!"
                      Therewithal he stirs the guards, and they          220
    Come up in turn, wherewith he leaves the warding-stead behind,
    And goes with Nisus, and the twain set forth the prince to find.

    All other creatures, laid asleep o'er all the earthly soil,
    Let slip the cares from off their hearts, forgetful of their toil,
    But still the dukes of Trojan men and chosen folk of war
    Held counsel of that heavy tide that on the kingdom bore,
    What was to do, or who would go AEneas' messenger.
    There shield on arm, and leaned upon the length of shafted spear,
    They stand amid their stronghold's mead: in eager haste the twain,
    Nisus and young Euryalus, the presence crave to gain,                230
    For matters great and worth the time: straight doth Iulus take
    Those hurried men to him, and bids that Nisus speech should wake.

    Then saith the son of Hyrtacus: "Just-hearted, hearken now,
    Folk of AEneas, neither look upon the things we show
    As by our years. The Rutuli slackened by wine and sleep
    Lie hushed, and we have seen whereby upon our way to creep,
    E'en by the double-roaded gate that near the sea-strand lies:
    Their fires are slaked, and black the smoke goes upward to the skies.
    If ye will suffer us to use this fortune that doth fall
    We will go seek AEneas now and Pallanteum's wall:                     240
    Ye shall behold him and his spoils from mighty victory wrought
    Come hither presently: the way shall fail our feet in nought,
    For we have seen the city's skirts amid the valleys dim
    In daily hunt, whereby we learned the river's uplong brim."

    Then spake Aletes weighty-wise, heart-ripe with plenteous eld:
    "Gods of our fathers, under whom the weal of Troy is held,
    Ye have not doomed all utterly the Teucrian folk undone,
    When ye for us such souls of youth, such hardy hearts have won."

    So saying by shoulder and by hand he took the goodly twain,
    While all his countenance and cheeks were wet with plenteous rain,   250
    "What gifts may I deem worthy, men, to pay such hearts athirst
    For utmost glory? certainly the fairest and the first
    The Gods and your own hearts shall grant: the rest your lord shall give,
    Godly AEneas; and this man with all his life to live,
    Ascanius here, no memory of such desert shall lack."

    "But I," Ascanius breaketh in, "whose father brought aback
    Is all my heal--Nisus, I pray by those great Gods of mine,
    By him of old, Assaracus, by hoary Vesta's shrine,
    Bring back my father! whatsoe'er is left with me today
    Of Fate or Faith, into your breasts I give it all away.              260
    O give me back the sight of him, and grief is all gone by.
    Two cups of utter silver wrought and rough with imagery
    I give you, which my father took from wracked Arisbe's hold;
    Two tripods eke, two talents' weight of fire-beproven gold;
    A beaker of the time agone, Sidonian Dido's gift.
    But if we hap to win the day and spoil of battle shift,
    If we lay hand on Italy and staff of kingship bear,--
    Ye saw the horse that bore today gold Turnus and his gear,
    That very same, the shield withal, and helm-crest ruddy dyed,
    Thy gifts, O Nisus, from the spoil henceforth I set aside.           270
    Moreover of the mother-folk twice six most excellent
    My sire shall give, and captive men with all their armament,
    And therewithal the kingly field, Latinus' garden-place.
    But thou, O boy most worshipful, whom nigher in the race
    Mine own years follow, thee I take unto mine inmost heart,
    Embracing thee my very friend in all to have a part;
    Nor any glory of my days without thee shall I seek,
    Whether I fashion peace or war; all that I do or speak
    I trust to thee."
                      In answer thus Euryalus 'gan say:
    "No day henceforth of all my life shall prove me fallen away         280
    From this my deed: only may fate in kindly wise befall,
    Nor stand against me: now one gift I ask thee over all:
    I have a mother born on earth from Priam's ancient race,
    Who wretched in the land of Troy had no abiding-place,
    Nor in Acesta's steadfast wall; with me she still must wend:
    Her, who knows nought of this my risk, whatever may be the end
    Unto thy safeguard do I leave: Night and thy right hand there
    Be witness that my mother's tears I had no heart to bear.
    But solace thou her lack, I pray; comfort her desert need;
    Yea let me bear this hope with me, and boldlier shall I speed        290
    Amid all haps."
                    Touched to the heart the Dardans might not keep
    Their tears aback, and chief of all did fair Iulus weep,
    The image of his father's love so flashed upon his soul:
    And therewithal he spake the word:

    "All things I duly answer for worthy thy deed of fame;
    Thy mother shall my mother be, nor lack but e'en the name
    To be Creusa: store of thanks no little hath she won
    That bore thee. Whatsoever hap thy valorous deed bear on,
    By this my head, whereon my sire is wont the troth to plight,
    Whatever I promised thee come back, with all things wrought aright,  300
    Thy mother and thy kin shall bide that very same reward."
    So spake he, weeping, and did off his shoulder-girded sword
    All golden, that with wondrous craft Lycaon out of Crete
    Had fashioned, fitting it withal in ivory scabbard meet.

    And Mnestheus unto Nisus gives a stripped-off lion's hide
    And shaggy coat; and helm for helm giveth Aletes tried.
    Then forth they wend in weed of war, and they of first estate,
    Young men and old, went forth with them, and leave them at the gate
    With following vows; and therewithal Iulus, goodly-wrought,
    Who far beyond his tender years had mind of manly thought,           310
    Charged them with many messages unto his father's ear,--
    Vain words the night-winds bore away and gave the clouds to bear.

    Forth now they wend and pass the ditch, and through the mirk night gain
    The baneful camp: yet ere their death they too shall be the bane
    Of many: bodies laid in sleep and wine they see strewed o'er
    The herbage, and the battle-cars upreared along the shore;
    And mid the reins and wheels thereof are men and weapons blent
    With wine-jars: so Hyrtacides such word from tooth-hedge sent:

    "Euryalus, the hand must dare, the time cries on the deed;
    Here lies the way: do thou afar keep watch and have good heed,       320
    Lest any hand aback of us arise 'gainst thee and me:
    Here will I make a waste forsooth, and wide thy way shall be."

    He speaks, and hushes all his voice, and so with naked blade
    Falls on proud Rhamnes; who, as happed, on piled-up carpets laid,
    Amid his sleep was blowing forth great voice from inner breast.
    A king he was; king Turnus' seer, of all beloved best;
    Yet nought availed his wizardry to drive his bane away.
    Three thralls unware, as heeding nought amid the spears they lay,
    He endeth: Remus' shield-bearer withal and charioteer,               329
    Caught 'neath the very steeds: his sword their drooping necks doth shear;
    Then from their lord he takes the head, and leaves the trunk to spout
    Gushes of blood: the earth is warm with black gore all about.
    The beds are wet. There Lamyrus and Lamus doth he slay,
    And young Serranus fair of face, who played the night away
    For many an hour, until his limbs 'neath God's abundance failed,
    And down he lay: ah! happier 'twere if he had still prevailed
    To make the live-long night one game until the morning cold.
    As famished lion Nisus fares amid the sheep-filled fold,
    When ravening hunger driveth on; the soft things, dumb with dread,
    He draggeth off, devouring them, and foams from mouth blood-red.     340

    Nor less the death Euryalus hath wrought; for all aflame
    He wades in wrath, and on the way slays many lacking name:
    Fadus, Herbesus therewithal, Rhoetus and Abaris;
    Unwary they: but Rhoetus waked, and looking on all this,
    Fulfilled of fear was hiding him behind a wine-jar pressed:
    The foe was on him as he rose; the sword-blade pierced his breast
    Up to the hilts, and drew aback abundant stream of death.
    His purple life he poureth forth, and, dying, vomiteth
    Blent blood and wine. On death-stealth still onward the Trojan went,
    And toward Messapus' leaguer drew, where watch-fires well-nigh spent
    He saw, and horses all about, tethered in order due,                 351
    Cropping the grass: but Nisus spake in hasty words and few,
    Seeing him borne away by lust of slaughter overmuch:

    "Hold we our hands, for dawn our foe hasteth the world to touch:
    Deep have we drunk of death, and cut a road amid the foe."

    The gear of men full goodly-wrought of silver through and through
    They leave behind, and bowls therewith, and carpets fashioned fair.
    Natheless Euryalus caught up the prophet Rhamnes' gear
    And gold-bossed belt, which Caedicus, the wealthy man of old,
    Sent to Tiburtine Remulus, that he his name might hold,              360
    Though far he were; who, dying, gave his grandson their delight;
    And he being dead, Rutulian men won them in war and fight
    These now he takes, and all for nought does on his valorous breast,
    And dons Messapus' handy helm with goodly-fashioned crest,
    Wherewith they leave the camp and gain the road that safer lay.

    But horsemen from the Latin town meantime were on the way,
    Sent on before to carry word to Turnus, lord and king,
    While in array amid the fields the host was tarrying.
    Three hundred knights, all shielded folk, 'neath Volscens do they fare.
    And now they drew anigh the camp and 'neath its rampart were,        370
    When from afar they saw the twain on left-hand footway lurk;
    Because Euryalus' fair helm mid glimmer of the mirk
    Betrayed the heedless youth, and flashed the moonbeams back again.
    Nor was the sight unheeded: straight cries Volscens midst his men:
    "Stand ho! why thus afoot, and why in weapons do ye wend,
    And whither go ye?"
                        Nought had they an answer back to send,
    But speed their fleeing mid the brake, and trust them to the night;
    The horsemen cast themselves before each crossway known aright,
    And every outgoing there is with guard they girdle round.            379
    Rough was the wood; a thicket-place where black holm-oaks abound,
    And with the tanglement of thorns choked up on every side,
    The road but glimmering faintly out from where the foot-tracks hide.
    The blackness of overhanging boughs and heavy battle-prey
    Hinder Euryalus, and fear beguiles him of the way.
    Nisus comes out, and now had won unwitting from the foe,
    And reached the place from Alba's name called Alban Meadows now;
    Where King Latinus had as then his high-built herd-houses.
    So there he stands, and, looking round, his fellow nowhere sees:

    "Hapless Euryalus! ah me, where have I left thy face?
    Where shall I seek thee, gathering up that tangle of the ways        390
    Through the blind wood?"
                              So therewithal he turns upon his track,
    Noting his footsteps, and amid the hushed brake strays aback,
    Hearkening the horse-hoofs and halloos and calls of following folk.
    Nor had he long abided there, ere on his ears outbroke
    Great clamour, and Euryalus he sees, whom all the band
    Hath taken, overcome by night, and blindness of the land,
    And wildering tumult: there in vain he strives in battle-play.
    Ah, what to do? What force to dare, what stroke to snatch away
    The youth? Or shall he cast himself amid the swords to die,
    And hasten down the way of wounds to lovely death anigh?             400
    Then swiftly, with his arm drawn back and brandishing his spear,
    He looks up at the moon aloft, and thuswise poureth prayer:

    "To aid, thou Goddess! Stay my toil, and let the end be good!
    Latonian glory of the stars, fair watcher of the wood,
    If ever any gift for me upon thine altars gave
    My father Hyrtacus; if I for thee the hunting drave;
    If aught I hung upon thy dome, or set upon thy roof,
    Give me to break their gathered host, guide thou my steel aloof!"

    He spake, and in the shafted steel set all his body's might,         409
    And hurled it: flying forth the spear clave through the dusk of night,
    And, reaching Sulmo turned away, amidst his back it flew,
    And brake there; but the splintering shaft his very heart pierced through,
    And o'er he rolleth, vomiting the hot stream from his breast:
    Then heave his flanks with long-drawn sobs and cold he lies at rest.
    On all sides then they peer about: but, whetted on thereby,
    The quivering shaft from o'er his ear again he letteth fly.
    Amid their wilderment the spear whistleth through either side
    Of Tagus' temples, and wet-hot amidst his brain doth bide.
    Fierce Volscens rageth, seeing none who might the spear-shot send,
    Or any man on whom his wrath and heat of heart to spend.             420

    "But thou, at least, with thine hot blood shalt pay the due award
    For both," he cries; and therewithal, swift drawing forth the sword,
    He falleth on Euryalus. Then, wild with all affright,
    Nisus shrieks out, and cares no more to cloak himself with night,
    And hath no heart to bear against so great a misery.
    "On me, me! Here--I did the deed! turn ye the sword on me,
    Rutulians!--all the guilt is mine: he might not do nor dare.
    May heaven and those all-knowing stars true witness of it bear!
    Only with too exceeding love he loved his hapless friend."           429

    Such words he poured forth, but the sword no less its way doth wend,
    Piercing the flank and rending through the goodly breast of him;
    And rolls Euryalus in death: in plenteous blood they swim
    His lovely limbs, his drooping neck low on his shoulder lies:
    As when the purple field-flower faints before the plough and dies,
    Or poppies when they hang their heads on wearied stems outworn,
    When haply by the rainy load their might is overborne.

    Then Nisus falls amidst of them, and Volscens seeks alone
    For aught that any man may do: save him he heedeth none.
    About him throng the foe: all round the strokes on him are laid
    To thrust him off: but on he bears, whirling his lightning blade,    440
    Till full in Volscens' shouting mouth he burieth it at last,
    Tearing the life from out the foe, as forth his own life passed.
    Then, ploughed with wounds, he cast him down upon his lifeless friend,
    And so in quietness of death gat resting in the end.

    O happy twain, if anywise my song-craft may avail,
    From out the memory of the world no day shall blot your tale,
    While on the rock-fast Capitol AEneas' house abides,
    And while the Roman Father still the might of empire guides.

    The Rutuli, victorious now with spoils and prey of war,
    But sorrowing still, amid the camp the perished Volscens bore.       450
    Nor in the camp was grief the less, when they on Rhamnes came
    Bloodless; and many a chief cut off by one death and the same;
    Serranus dead and Numa dead: a many then they swarm
    About the dead and dying men, and places wet and warm
    With new-wrought death, and runnels full with plenteous foaming blood.
    Then one by one the spoils they note; the glittering helm and good
    Messapus owned: the gear such toil had won back from the dead.

    But timely now Aurora left Tithonus' saffron bed,
    And over earth went scattering wide the light of new-born day:
    The sun-flood flowed, and all the world unveiled by daylight lay.    460

    Then Turnus, clad in arms himself, wakes up the host to arms,
    And every lord to war-array bids on his brazen swarms;
    And men with diverse tidings told their battle-anger whet.
    Moreover (miserable sight!) on upraised spears they set
    Those heads, and follow them about with most abundant noise,
    Euryalus and Nisus dead.

    Meanwhile AEneas' hardy sons upon their leftward wall
    Stand in array; for on the right the river girdeth all.
    In woe they ward the ditches deep, and on the towers on high         469
    Stand sorrowing; for those heads upreared touch all their hearts anigh,
    Known overwell to their sad eyes mid the black flow of gore.
    Therewith in winged fluttering haste, the trembling city o'er
    Goes tell-tale Fame, and swift amidst the mother's ears doth glide;
    And changed she was, nor in her bones the life-heat would abide:
    The shuttle falls from out her hand, unrolled the web doth fall,
    And with a woman's hapless shrieks she flieth to the wall:
    Rending her hair, beside herself, she faced the front of fight,
    Heedless of men, and haps of death, and all the weapons' flight,
    And there the very heavens she filled with wailing of her grief:

    "O son, and do I see thee so? Thou rest and last relief              480
    Of my old days! hadst thou the heart to leave me lone and spent?
    O cruel! might I see thee not on such a peril sent?
    Was there no time for one last word amid my misery?
    A prey for Latin fowl and dogs how doth thy body lie,
    On lands uncouth! Not e'en may I, thy mother, streak thee, son,
    Thy body dead; or close thine eyes, or wash thy wounds well won,
    Or shroud thee in the cloth I wrought for thee by night and day,
    When hastening on the weaving-task I kept eld's cares at bay?
    Where shall I seek thee? What earth hides thy body, mangled sore,
    And perished limbs? O son, to me bringest thou back no more          490
    Than this? and have I followed this o'er every land and sea?
    O pierce me through, if ye be kind; turn all your points on me,
    Rutulians! Let me first of all with battle-steel be sped!
    Father of Gods, have mercy thou! Thrust down the hated head
    Beneath the House of Tartarus with thine own weapon's stress,
    Since otherwise I may not break my life-days' bitterness."

    Their hearts were shaken with her wail, and Sorrow fain will weep,
    And in all men their battle-might unbroken lay asleep.
    But Actor and Idaeus take that flaming misery,
    As bade Ilioneus, and young Iulus, sore as he                        500
    Went weeping: back in arms therewith they bear her 'neath the roof.

    But now the trump with brazen song cast fearful sound aloof,
    Chiding to war; and shouts rise up and belloweth back the heaven,
    And forth the Volscians fare to speed the shield-roof timely driven.
    Some men fall on to fill the ditch and pluck the ramparts down;
    Some seek approach and ladders lay where daylight rends the crown
    Of wall-wards, and would get them up where stands the hedge of war
    Thinner of men: against their way the Teucrian warders pour
    All weapon-shot: with hard-head pikes they thrust them down the steep.
    Long was the war wherein they learned the battle-wall to keep.       510
    Stones, too, of deadly weight they roll, if haply they may break
    The shield-roof of the battle-rush; but sturdily those take
    All chances of the play beneath their close and well-knit hold.
    Yet fail they; for when hard at hand their world of war was rolled,
    A mighty mass by Teucrians moved rolls on and rushes o'er,
    And fells the host of Rutuli and breaks the tiles of war.
    Nor longer now the Rutuli, the daring hearts, may bear
    To play with Mars amid the dark, but strive the walls to clear
    With storm of shaft and weapon shot.

    But now Mezentius otherwhere, a fearful sight to see,                520
    Was tossing high the Tuscan pine with smoke-wreathed fiery heart:
    While Neptune's child, the horse-tamer Messapus, played his part,
    Rending the wall, and crying out for ladders to be laid.

    Speak, Song-maids: thou, Calliope, give thou the singer aid
    To tell what wise by Turnus' sword the field of fight was strown;
    What death he wrought; what man each man to Orcus sent adown.
    Fall to with me to roll abroad the mighty skirts of war,
    Ye, Goddesses, remember all, and ye may tell it o'er.

    There was a tower built high overhead, with gangways up in air,
    Set well for fight, 'gainst which the foe their utmost war-might bear,  530
    And all Italians strive their most to work its overthrow:
    Gainst whom the Trojans ward it well, casting the stones below,
    And through the hollow windows speed the shot-storm thick and fast.
    There Turnus first of all his folk a flaming firebrand cast,
    And fixed it in the turret's flank: wind-nursed it caught great space
    Of planking, and amid the doors, consuming, kept its place.
    Then they within, bewildered sore, to flee their ills are fain,
    But all for nought; for while therein they huddle from the bane,
    And draw aback to place yet free from ruin, suddenly                 539
    O'erweighted toppleth down the tower, and thundereth through the sky.

    Half-dead the warders fall to earth by world of wrack o'erborne,
    Pierced with their own shafts, and their breasts with hardened splinters torn.
    Yea, Lycus and Helenor came alone of all their peers
    Alive to earth: Helenor, now in spring-tide of his years:
    Bond-maid Licymnia privily to that Maeonian king
    Had borne the lad, and sent him forth to Troy's beleaguering
    With arms forbidden, sheathless sword and churl's unpainted shield.
    But when he saw himself amidst the thousand-sworded field
    Of Turnus, Latins on each side, behind, and full in face,
    E'en as a wild beast hedged about by girdle of the chase             550
    Rages against the point and edge, and, knowing death anear,
    Leaps forth, and far is borne away down on the hunter's spear;
    Not otherwise the youth falls on where thickest spear-points lie,
    And in the middle of the foe he casts himself to die.

    But Lycus, nimbler far of foot, betwixt the foemen slipped,
    Betwixt the swords, and gained the wall, and at the coping gripped,
    And strove to draw him up with hand, the friendly hands to feel;
    But Turnus both with foot and spear hath followed hard at heel,
    And mocks him thus in victory: "How was thy hope so grown
    Of 'scaping from my hand, O fool?"                                   560
                                        Therewith he plucks him down
    From where he hung, and space of wall tears downward with the man.
    As when it chanceth that a hare or snowy-bodied swan
    Jove's shield-bearer hath borne aloft in snatching hooked feet;
    Or lamb, whose mother seeketh him with most abundant bleat,
    Some wolf of Mars from fold hath caught.
                                              Goes up great cry around:
    They set on, and the ditches filled with o'erturned garth and mound,
    While others cast the blazing brands on roof and battlement.
    Ilioneus with mighty stone, a shard from hillside rent,
    Lucetius felled, as fire in hand unto the gate he drew.
    Then Liger felled Emathion, for craft of spear he knew;              570
    Asylas Corynaeus, by dint of skill in bowshaft's ways,
    Caeneus Ortygius fells, and him, victorious, Turnus slays,
    And Itys, Clonius, Promolus, Dioxippus withal,
    And Sagaris, and Idas set on topmost turret-wall.
    Then Capys slays Privernus; him Themilla's light-winged spear
    Had grazed, whereon he dropped his shield, and his left hand did bear
    Upon the hurt; when lo, thereto the winged shaft did win,
    And nailed the hand unto the side, and, buried deep within,
    Burst all the breathing-ways of life with deadly fatal sore.
    But lo, where standeth Arcens' child in goodly weed of war,          580
    Fair with his needle-painted cloak, with Spanish scarlet bright,
    Noble of face: Arcens, his sire, had sent him to the fight
    From nursing of his mother's grove about Symaethia's flood,
    Whereby Palicus' altar stands, the wealthy and the good.
    Mezentius now laid by his spear, and took his whistling sling,
    And whirled it thrice about his head at length of tugging string,
    And with the flight of molten lead his midmost forehead clave,
    And to the deep abundant sand his outstretched body gave.

    Then first they say Ascanius aimed his speedy shafts in war,
    Wherewith but fleeing beasts afield he used to fright before:        590
    But now at last his own right hand the stark Numanus slays,
    Who had to surname Remulus, and in these latter days
    King Turnus' sister, young of years, had taken to his bed:
    He in the forefront of the fight kept crying out, and said
    Things worthy and unworthy tale: puffed up with pride of place
    New-won he went, still clamouring out his greatness and his grace.

    "O twice-caught Phrygians, shames you nought thus twice amid the wars
    To lie in bonds, and stretch out walls before the march of Mars?
    Lo, these are they who woke the war the wives of us to wed!
    What God sent you to Italy? what madness hither sped?                600
    Here are no Atreus' sons, and no Ulysses word-weaver.
    A people hard from earliest spring our new-born sons we bear
    Unto the stream, and harden us with bitter frost and flood.
    Our lads, they wake the dawning-chase and wear the tangled wood;
    Our sport is taming of the horse and drawing shafted bow;
    Our carles, who bear a world of toil, and hunger-pinching know,
    Tame earth with spade, or shake with war the cities of the folk.
    Yea, all our life with steel is worn; afield we drive the yoke
    With spear-shaft turned about: nor doth a halting eld of sloth
    Weaken our mightiness of soul, or change our glory's growth.         610
    We do the helm on hoary hairs, and ever deem it good
    To drive the foray day by day, and make the spoil our food.
    But ye--the raiment saffron-stained, with purple glow tricked out--
    These are your heart-joys: ye are glad to lead the dance about.
    Sleeve-coated folk, O ribbon-coifed, not even Phrygian men,
    But Phrygian wives, to Dindymus the high go get ye then!
    To hear the flute's twi-mouthed song as ye are wont to do!
    The Berecynthian Mother's box and cymbals call to you
    From Ida: let men deal with war, and drop adown your swords."

    That singer of such wicked speech, that caster forth of words,       620
    Ascanius brooked not: breasting now his horse-hair full at strain,
    He aimed the shaft, and therewithal drew either arm atwain,
    And stood so; but to Jupiter first suppliant fell to pray:

    "O Jove Almighty, to my deeds, thus new-begun, nod yea,
    And I myself unto thy fane the yearly gifts will bear,
    And bring before thine altar-stead a snow-white gilt-horned steer,
    Whose head unto his mother's head is evenly upborne,
    Of age to spurn the sand with hoof and battle with the horn."

    The Father heard, and out of heaven, wherein no cloud-fleck hung,
    His leftward thunder fell, wherewith the fateful bow outrung,        630
    The back-drawn shaft went whistling forth with dreadful sound, and sped
    To pierce the skull of Remulus and hollow of his head:
    "Go to, then, and thy mocking words upon men's valour call,
    The twice-caught Phrygians answer back Rutulians herewithal."

    This only word Ascanius spake: the Teucrians raise their cry
    And shout for joy, and lift their heart aloft unto the sky.
    Long-haired Apollo then by hap high-set in airy place,
    Looked down upon Ausonian host and leaguered city's case,
    And thus the victor he bespeaks from lofty seat of cloud:
    "Speed on in new-born valour, child! this is the starward road,      640
    O son of Gods and sire of Gods! Well have the Fates ordained
    That 'neath Assaracus one day all war shall be refrained.
    No Troy shall hold thee."
                              With that word he stoops from heaven aloft
    And puts away on either side the wind that meets him soft,
    And seeks Ascanius: changed is he withal, and putteth on
    The shape of Butes old of days, shield-bearer time agone
    Unto Anchises, Dardan king, and door-ward true and tried;
    But with Ascanius now his sire had bidden him abide.
    Like this old man in every wise, voice, hue, and hoary hair,
    And arms that cried on cruel war, now did Apollo fare,               650
    And to Iulus hot of heart in such wise went his speech:

    "Enough, O child of AEneas, that thou with shaft didst reach
    Numanus' life unharmed thyself, great Phoebus grants thee this,
    Thy first-born praise, nor grudgeth thee like weapons unto his.
    But now refrain thy youth from war."
                                          So spake Apollo then,
    And in the midmost of his speech fled sight of mortal men,
    And faded from their eyes away afar amid the air.
    The Dardan dukes, they knew the God and holy shooting-gear,
    And as he fled away from them they heard his quiver shrill.
    Therefore Ascanius, fain of fight, by Phoebus' word and will       660
    They hold aback: but they themselves fare to the fight again,
    And cast their souls amidst of all the perils bare and plain.

    Then goes the shout adown the wall, along the battlement;
    The javelin-thongs are whirled about, the sharp-springed bows are bent,
    And all the earth is strewn with shot: the shield, the helmet's cup,
    Ring out again with weapon-dint, and fierce the fight springs up.
    As great as, when the watery kids are setting, beats the rain
    Upon the earth; as plentiful as when upon the main
    The hail-clouds fall, when Jupiter, fierce with the southern blasts,
    Breaks up the hollow clouds of heaven and watery whirl downcasts.    670

    Now Pandarus and Bitias stark, Idan Alcanor's seed.
    They whom Iaera of the woods in Jove's brake nursed with heed,
    Youths tall as firs or mountain-cliffs that in their country are,
    The gate their lord hath bid them keep, these freely now unbar,
    And freely bid the foeman in, trusting to stroke of hand;
    But they themselves to right and left before the gate-towers stand,
    Steel-clad, and with their lofty heads crested with glittering gleams;
    E'en as amid the air of heaven, beside the flowing streams
    On rim of Padus, or anigh soft Athesis and sweet,
    Twin oak-trees spring, and tops unshorn uprear the skies to meet,    680
    And with their heads high over earth nod ever in the wind.

    So now the Rutuli fall on when clear the way they find,
    But Quercens, and AEquicolus the lovely war-clad one,
    And Tmarus of the headlong soul, and Haemon, Mavors' son,
    Must either turn their backs in flight, with all their men of war,
    Or lay adown their loved lives on threshold of the door.
    Then bitterer waxeth battle-rage in hate-fulfilled hearts,
    And there the Trojans draw to head and gather from all parts,
    Eager to deal in handy strokes, full fierce afield to fare.

    But as duke Turnus through the fight was raging otherwhere,          690
    Confounding folk, there came a man with tidings that the foe,
    Hot with new death, the door-leaves wide to all incomers throw.
    Therewith he leaves the work in hand, and, stirred by anger's goad,
    Against the Dardan gate goes forth, against the brethren proud:
    There first Antiphates he slew, who fought amid the first,
    The bastard of Sarpedon tall, by Theban mother nursed.
    With javelin-cast he laid him low: the Italian cornel flies
    Through the thin air, pierceth his maw, and 'neath his breast-bone lies
    Deep down; the hollow wound-cave pours a flood of gore and foam,
    And warm amid him lies the steel, amid his lung gone home.           700
    Then Meropes', and Erymas', Aphidnus' lives he spilled;
    Then Bitias of the flaming eyes and heart with ire fulfilled;--
    Not with the dart, for to no dart his life-breath had he given;--
    But whirled and whizzing mightily came on the sling-spear, driven
    Like lightning-flash; against whose dint two bull-hides nought availed,
    Nor yet the golden faithful fence of war-coat double-scaled:
    His fainting limbs fell down afield, and earth gave out a groan,
    And rang the thunder of his shield huge on his body thrown:
    E'en as upon Euboean shore of Baiae falleth whiles
    A stony pillar, which built up of mighty bonded piles                710
    They set amid the sea: suchwise it draggeth mighty wrack
    Headlong adown, and deep in sea it lieth dashed aback:
    The seas are blent, black whirl of sand goes up confusedly;
    And with the noise quakes Prochytas, and quakes Inarime,
    The unsoft bed by Jove's command upon Typhoeus laid.

    Then Mars, the mighty in the war, brings force and strength to aid
    The Latin men, and in their hearts he stirs his bitter goads,
    The while with fleeing and black fear the Teucrian heart he loads:
    From everywhither run the folk, since here is battle rich,
    And in all hearts the war-god wakes.                                 720

    But Pandarus, beholding now his brother laid to earth,
    And whitherward wends Fortune now, and what Time brings to birth,
    Back-swinging on the hinge again with might the door-leaf sends,
    By struggle of his shoulders huge; and many of his friends
    Shut outward of the walls he leaves, amid the fierce debate;
    While others, with himself shut in, poured backward through the gate.
    Madman! who saw not how the king Rutulian mid the band
    Came rushing, but amidst the town now shut him with his hand,
    E'en as a tiger pent amidst a helpless flock of sheep.
    Then dreadfully his armour rings, light from his eyes doth leap,--   730
    A strange new light: the blood-red crest upon his helm-top quakes,
    And from the circle of his shield a glittering lightning breaks.
    Sudden AEneas' frighted folk behold his hated face
    And mighty limbs: but Pandarus breaks forth amid the place
    Huge, and his heart afire with rage for his lost brother's death.

    "Nay, this is not Amata's home, the dowry house," he saith,
    "Nor yet doth Ardea's midmost wall hold kindred Turnus in:
    The foeman's camp thou seest, wherefrom thou hast no might to win."

    But from his all untroubled breast laughed Turnus, as he said:
    "Begin, if thou hast heart thereto, let hand to hand be laid!        740
    Thou shalt tell Priam how thou found'st a new Achilles here."

    He spake: the other put all strength to hurling of his spear,
    A shaft all rough with knots, and still in its own tree-bark bound.
    Straightway the thin air caught it up, but that swift-speeding wound
    Saturnian Juno turned aside and set it in the door.
    --"But now thou 'scapest not this steel mine own hand maketh sure,
    Nought such as thine the weapon-smith, the wound-smith----"
                                                                With the word
    He riseth up unto the high uprising of the sword,
    Wherewith betwixt the temples twain he clave his midmost head,
    And with a fearful wound apart the cheeks unbearded shred.           750
    Then came a sound, and shook the earth 'neath the huge weight of him:
    With armour wet with blood and brain, with fainting, slackened limb,
    He strewed the ground in death; his head, sheared clean and evenly,
    From either shoulder hanging down, this side and that did lie.

    Then turn and flee the Trojan folk, by quaking terror caught;
    And if the conquering man as then one moment had had thought
    To burst the bolts and let his folk in through the opened door,
    That day had been the last of days for Trojans and their war.
    But utter wrath of heart and soul, and wildering lust of death
    Drave him afire amidst the foe.                                      760
    Then Phaleris he catcheth up, and ham-strung Gyges then,
    Whose spears, snatched up, he hurleth on against the backs of men;
    For Juno finds him might enough and heart wherewith to do,
    Halys he sendeth down with these, Phegeus with targe smit through;
    Then, as they roused the war on wall, nor wotted aught of this,
    Alcander stark, and Halius stout, Noemon, Prytanis.
    Then Lynceus, as he ran to aid and cheered his folk withal,
    He reacheth at with sweeping sword from right hand of the wall
    And smiteth; and his helm and head, struck off with that one blow,
    Lie far away: Amycus then, the wood-deer's wasting foe,              770
    He slayeth: happier hand had none in smearing of the shaft
    And arming of the iron head the poison-wound to waft.
    Then Clytius, son of AEolus, and Cretheus Muse-beloved,--
    Cretheus the Muses' fellow-friend, whose heart was ever moved
    By song and harp, and measured sound along the strained string;
    Who still of steeds, and arms, and men, and battle-tide would sing.

    At last the Trojan dukes of men, Mnestheus, Serestus fierce,
    Draw to a head when all this death is borne unto their ears,
    And see their folk all scattering wide, the foe amidst them see.     779
    Then Mnestheus cries: "And whither now, and whither will ye flee?
    What other walls, what other town have ye a hope to find?
    Hath one man, O my town-fellows, whom your own ramparts bind,
    Wrought such a death and unavenged amid your very town,
    And sent so many lords of war by Orcus' road adown?
    O dastards, your unhappy land, your Gods of ancient days,
    Your great AEneas--what! no shame, no pity do they raise?"

    Fired by such words, they gather heart and stand in close array,
    Till step by step 'gins Turnus now to yield him from the play,
    And seek the river and the side the wet wave girds about.
    Then fiercer fall the Teucrians on, and raise a mighty shout,        790
    And lock their ranks: as when a crowd of men-folk and of spears
    Falls on a lion hard of heart, and he, beset by fears,
    But fierce and grim-eyed, yieldeth way, though anger and his worth
    Forbid him turn his back about: no less to fare right forth
    Through spears and men avails him not, though ne'er so fain he be.
    Not otherwise unhasty feet drew Turnus doubtfully
    Abackward, all his heart a-boil with anger's overflow.
    Yea, twice, indeed, he falls again amidmost of the foe,
    And twice more turns to huddled flight their folk along the walls;
    But, gathered from the camp about, the whole host on him falls,      800
    Nor durst Saturnian Juno now his might against them stay;
    For Jupiter from heaven hath sent Iris of airy way,
    No soft commands of his high doom bearing his sister down,
    If Turnus get him not away from Troy's high-builded town.
    So now the warrior's shielded left the play endureth not,
    Nought skills his right hand; wrapped around in drift of weapon shot
    About his temples' hollow rings his helm with ceaseless clink;
    The starkly-fashioned brazen plates amid the stone-cast chink;
    The crest is battered from his head; nor may the shield-boss hold
    Against the strokes: the Trojans speed the spear-storm manifold,     810
    And lightening Mnestheus thickeneth it: then over all his limbs
    The sweat bursts out, and all adown a pitchy river swims:
    Hard grows his breath, and panting sharp shaketh his body spent.
    Until at last, all clad in arms, he leapt adown, and sent
    His body to the river fair, who in his yellow flood
    Caught him, and bore him forth away on ripple soft and good,
    And gave him merry to his men, washed from the battle's blood.




BOOK X.

ARGUMENT.

THE GODS TAKE COUNSEL: AENEAS COMETH TO HIS FOLK AGAIN, AND DOETH MANY
GREAT DEEDS IN BATTLE.


    Meanwhile is opened wide the door of dread Olympus' walls,
    And there the Sire of Gods and Men unto the council calls,
    Amid the starry place, wherefrom, high-throned, he looks adown
    Upon the folk of Latin land and that beleaguered town.
    There in the open house they sit, and he himself begins:

    "O Dwellers in the House of Heaven, why backward thuswise wins
    Your purpose? Why, with hearts unruled, raise ye the strife so sore?
    I clean forbade that Italy should clash with Troy in war.
    Now why the war that I forbade? who egged on these or those
    To fear or fight, or drave them on with edge of sword to close?       10
    Be not o'ereager in your haste: the hour of fight shall come,
    When dreadful Carthage on a day against the walls of Rome,
    Betwixt the opened doors of Alps, a mighty wrack shall send;
    Then may ye battle, hate to hate, and reach and grasp and rend:
    But now forbear, and joyfully knit fast the plighted peace."

    Few words spake Jove; but not a few in answer unto these
    Gave golden Venus back again:
    "O Father, O eternal might of men and deeds of earth--
    For what else may be left to me whereto to turn my prayers?--
    Thou seest the Rutuli in pride, and Turnus, how he fares?             20
    Amidst them, borne aloft by steeds, and, swelling, war-way sweeps
    With Mars to aid: the fenced place no more the Teucrians keeps,
    For now within the very gates and mound-heaped battlement
    They blend in fight, and flood of gore adown the ditch is sent,
    Unware AEneas is away.--Must they be never free
    From bond of leaguer? lo, again the threatening enemy
    Hangs over Troy new-born! Behold new host arrayed again
    From Arpi, the AEtolian-built; against the Teucrian men
    Tydides riseth. So for me belike new wounds in store,
    And I, thy child, must feel the edge of arms of mortal war.           30
    Now if without thy peace, without thy Godhead's will to speed,
    The Trojans sought for Italy, let ill-hap pay ill deed,
    Nor stay them with thine help: but if they followed many a word
    Given forth by Gods of Heaven and Hell, by whom canst thou be stirred
    To turn thy doom, or who to forge new fate may e'er avail?
    Of ship-host burnt on Eryx shore why should I tell the tale?
    Or of the king of wind and storm, or wild and windy crowd
    AEolia bred, or Iris sent adown the space of cloud?
    But now withal the Gods of Hell, a world untried before,
    She stirreth, and Alecto sent up to the earthly shore                 40
    In sudden hurry raves about towns of Italian men.
    No whit for lordship do I yearn: I hoped such glories then
    While Fortune was: let them be lords whom thou wilt doom for lords!
    But if no land thy hard-heart wife to Teucrian men awards,
    Yet, Father, by the smoking wrack of overwhelmed Troy
    I pray thee from the weapon-dint safe let me send a boy,
    Yea, e'en Ascanius: let me keep my grandson safe for me!
    Yea, let AEneas toss about on many an unknown sea,
    And let him follow wheresoe'er his fortune shall have led:
    But this one let me shield, and take safe from the battle's dread.    50
    Paphus, Cythera, Amathus, are mine, and I abide
    Within Idalia's house: let him lay weed of war aside,
    And wear his life inglorious there: then shalt thou bid the hand
    Of Carthage weigh Ausonia down, and nothing shall withstand
    The towns of Tyre.--Ah, what availed to 'scape the bane of war?
    Ah, what availed that through the midst of Argive flames they bore
    To wear down perils of wide lands, and perils of the main,
    While Teucrian men sought Latin land and Troy new-born again?
    Ah, better had it been for them by Troy's cold ash to stay,
    To dwell on earth where Troy hath been. Father, give back, I pray,    60
    Their Xanthus and their Simois unto that wretched folk,
    And let them toil and faint once more 'neath Ilium's woeful yoke!"

    Then spake Queen Juno, heavy wroth: "Why driv'st thou me to part
    My deep-set silence, and lay bare with words my grief of heart?
    What one of all the Gods or men AEneas drave to go
    On warring ways, or bear himself as King Latinus' foe?
    Fate-bidden he sought Italy?--Yea, soothly, or maybe
    Spurned by Cassandra's wilderment--and how then counselled we
    To leave his camp and give his life to make the winds a toy?
    To trust his walls and utmost point of war unto a boy?                70
    To trust the Tuscan faith, and stir the peaceful folk to fight?
    What God hath driven him to lie, what hardness of my might?
    Works Juno here, or Iris sent adown the cloudy way?
    'Tis wrong for Italy, forsooth, the ring of fire to lay
    Round Troy new-born; for Turnus still to hold his fathers' earth!--
    Though him, Pilumnus' own son's son, Venilia brought to birth--
    But what if Trojans fall with flame upon the Latin folk,
    And drive the prey from off their fields oppressed by outland yoke?
    Or choose them sons-in-law, or brides from mothers' bosoms tear?
    Or, holding peace within their hands, lade ships with weapon-gear?    80
    Thou erst hadst might from Greekish hands AEneas' self to draw,
    To thrust a cloud and empty wind in stead of man of war,
    And unto sea-nymphs ship by ship the ship-host mayst thou change.
    But we to help the Rutuli, 'tis horrible and strange!
    --Unware AEneas is away?--let him abide unware!
    Paphus thou hast, Idalium, and high Cythera fair,
    Then why with cities big with war and hearts of warriors deal?
    What! we it was who strove to wrack the fainting Trojan weal?
    We!--or the one who thwart the Greeks the wretched Trojans dashed?
    Yea, and what brought it all about that thus in arms they clashed,    90
    Europe and Asia? that men brake the plighted peace by theft?
    Did I the Dardan lecher lead, who Sparta's jewel reft?
    Did I set weapons in his hand, breed lust to breed debate?
    Then had thy care for thine been meet, but now indeed o'erlate
    With wrongful plaint thou risest up, and bickerest emptily."

    So pleaded Juno, and all they, the heavenly folk anigh,
    Murmured their doom in diverse wise; as when the first of wind
    Caught in the woods is murmuring on, and rolleth moanings blind,
    Betraying to the mariners the onset of the gale.
    Then spake the Almighty Sire, in whom is all the world's avail,      100
    And as he spake the high-built house of God was quieted,
    And earth from her foundations shook, and heaven was hushed o'erhead,
    The winds fell down, the face of sea was laid in quiet fair:

    "Take ye these matters to your hearts, and set my sayings there;
    Since nowise the Ausonian folk the plighted troth may blend
    With Teucrians, and your contest seems a strife without an end;
    What fortune each may have today, what hope each one shears out,
    Trojan or Rutulan, will I hold all in balanced doubt,
    Whether the camp be so beset by fate of Italy,
    Or hapless wanderings of Troy, and warnings dealt awry.              110
    Nor loose I Rutulans the more; let each one's way-faring
    Bear its own hap and toil, for Jove to all alike is king;
    The Fates will find a way to wend."
                                        He nodded oath withal
    By his own Stygian brother's stream, the pitchy waters' fall,
    And blazing banks, and with his nod shook all Olympus' land.
    Then fell the talk; from golden throne did Jupiter upstand,
    The heaven-abiders girt him round and brought him to the door.

    The Rutuli amid all this are pressing on in war,
    Round all the gates to slay the men, the walls with fire to ring,
    And all AEneas' host is pent with fenced beleaguering.                120
    Nor is there any hope of flight; upon the towers tall
    They stand, the hapless men in vain, thin garland for the wall;
    Asius, the son of Imbrasus, Thymoetes, and the two
    Assaraci, and Thymbris old, with Castor, deeds they do
    In the forefront; Sarpedon's sons, twin brethren, with them bide,
    Clarus and Themon, born erewhile in lofty Lycia's side.
    And now Lyrnessian Acmon huge with strain of limbs strives hard,
    And raises up a mighty stone, no little mountain shard;
    As great as father Clytius he, or brother Mnestheus' might:          129
    So some with stones, with spear-cast some, they ward the walls in fight,
    They deal with fire or notch the shaft upon the strained string.
    But lo amidst, most meetly wrought for Venus cherishing,
    His goodly head the Dardan boy unhooded there doth hold,
    As shineth out some stone of price, cleaving the yellow gold,
    Fair for the bosom or the head; or as the ivory shines,
    That with Orician terebinth the art of man entwines,
    Or mid the boxwood; down along his milk-white neck they lie
    The streams of hair, which golden wire doth catch about and tie.
    The mighty nations, Ismarus, there saw thee deft to speed
    The bane of men, envenoming the deadly flying reed;                  140
    Thou lord-born of Moeonian house, whereby the tiller tills
    Rich acres, where Pactolus' flood gold overflowing spills.
    There, too, was Mnestheus, whom his deed late done of thrusting forth
    King Turnus from the battlements hath raised to heavenly worth,
    And Capys, he whose name is set upon Campania's town.

    But while the bitter play of war went bickering up and down,
    AEneas clave the seas with keel amidst the dead of night:
    For when Evander he had left and reached the Tuscan might,
    He met their king and told his name, and whence his race of old,
    And what he would and how he wrought: and of the host he told,       150
    Mezentius now had gotten him, and Turnus' wrothful heart;
    He warned him in affairs of men to trust not Fortune's part;
    And therewithal he mingleth prayers: Tarchon no while doth wait,
    But joineth hosts and plighteth troth; and so, set free by Fate,
    A-shipboard go the Lydian folk by God's command and grace,
    Yet 'neath the hand of outland duke: AEneas' ship hath place
    In forefront: Phrygian lions hang above its armed tyne
    O'ertopped by Ida, unto those Troy's outcasts happy sign:
    There great AEneas sits, and sends his mind a-wandering wide
    Through all the shifting chance of war; and by his left-hand side    160
    Is Pallas asking of the stars and night-tide's journey dim,
    Or whiles of haps by land or sea that fortuned unto him.

    Ye Goddesses, ope Helicon, and raise the song to say
    What host from out the Tuscan land AEneas led away,
    And how they dight their ships, and how across the sea they drave.

    In brazen Tiger Massicus first man the sea-plain clave;
    A thousand youths beneath him are that Clusium's walls have left
    And Cosae's city: these in war with arrow-shot are deft,
    And bear light quivers of the bark, and bear the deadly bow.

    Then comes grim Abas, all his host with glorious arms aglow,         170
    And on his stern Apollo gleams, well wrought in utter gold.
    But Populonia's mother-land had given him there to hold
    Six hundred of the battle-craft; three hundred Ilva sent,
    Rich isle, whose wealth of Chalyb ore wastes never nor is spent.

    The third is he, who carrieth men the words God hath to say,
    Asylas, whom the hearts of beasts and stars of heaven obey,
    And tongues of birds, and thunder-fire that coming tidings bears.
    A thousand men he hurrieth on with bristling of the spears;
    Pisa, the town Alpheues built amid the Tuscan land,
    Bids them obey.
                    Came Astur next, goodliest of all the band;          180
    Astur, who trusteth in his horse and shifty-coloured weed;
    Three hundred hath he, of one heart to wend as he shall lead:
    And these are they in Caeres' home and Minios' lea that bide,
    The Pyrgi old, and they that feel Gravisca's heavy tide.

    Nor thee, best war-duke, Cinyras, of that Ligurian crew,
    Leave I unsung: nor thee the more, Cupavo lord of few,
    Up from the cresting of whose helm the feathery swan-wings rise.
    Love was thy guilt; thy battle-sign was thine own father's guise.
    For Cycnus, say they, while for love of Phaethon he grieves.
    And sings beneath his sisters' shade, beneath the poplar-leaves;     190
    While with the Muse some solace sweet for woeful love he won,
    A hoary eld of feathers soft about him doth he on,
    Leaving the earth and following the stars with tuneful wails;
    And now his son amid his peers with Tuscan ship-host sails,
    Driving with oars the Centaur huge, who o'er the waters' face
    Hangs, threatening ocean with a rock, huge from his lofty place,
    And ever with his length of keel the deep sea furrows o'er.

    Then he, e'en Ocnus, stirreth up folk from his father's shore,
    Who from the love of Tuscan flood and fate-wise Manto came,
    And gave, O Mantua, walls to thee, and gave his mother's name:       200
    Mantua, the rich in father-folk, though not one-stemmed her home.
    Three stems are there, from each whereof four peoples forth are come,
    While she herself, the head of all, from Tuscan blood hath might.
    Five hundred thence Mezentius arms against himself in fight,
    Whom Mincius' flood, Benacus' son, veiled in the sedges grey,
    Was leading in the fir of fight across the watery way.

    Then heavy-huge Aulestes goes; the oar-wood hundred-fold
    Rises for beating of the flood, as foam the seas uprolled.
    Huge Triton ferries him, whose shell the deep blue sea doth fright:
    Up from the shaggy naked waist manlike is he to sight                210
    As there he swims, but underneath whale-bellied is he grown;
    Beneath the half-beast breast of him the foaming waters moan.

    So many chosen dukes of men in thrice ten keels they sail,
    And cut with brass the meads of brine for Troy and its avail.

    And now had day-tide failed the sky, and Phoebe, sweet and fair,
    Amid her nightly-straying wain did mid Olympus wear.
    AEneas, who might give his limbs no whit of peacefulness,
    Was sitting with the helm in hand, heeding the sail-gear's stress,
    When lo a company of friends his midmost course do meet:
    The Nymphs to wit, who Cybele, the goddess holy-sweet,               220
    Bade turn from ships to very nymphs, and ocean's godhead have.
    So evenly they swam the sea, and sundered wave and wave,
    As many as the brazen beaks once by the sea-side lay;
    Afar they know their king, and round in dancing-wise they play;
    But one of them, Cymodocea, who speech-lore knew the best,
    Drew nigh astern and laid thereon her right hand, with her breast
    Above the flood, the while her left through quiet waves rowed on,
    And thus bespoke him all unware:
                                      "Wak'st thou, O Godhead's son!
    AEneas, wake! and loose the sheets and let all canvas fill!
    We were the pine-trees on a time of Ida's holy hill,                 230
    Thy ship-host once, but sea-nymphs now: when that Rutulian lord
    Fell faithless, headlong, on our lives with firebrand and the sword,
    Unwillingly we brake our bonds and sought thee o'er the main.
    The Mother in her pity thus hath wrought our shape again,
    And given us gift of godhead's life in house of ocean's ground.
    Lo now, the boy Ascanius by dyke and wall is bound
    Amid the spears, the battle-wood that Latins forth have sent.
    And now the horse of Arcady, with stout Etruscans blent,
    Holdeth due tryst. Now is the mind of Turnus firmly set
    To thrust between them, lest thy camp they succour even yet.         240
    Wherefore arise, and when the dawn first climbs the heavenly shore
    Call on thy folk, and take thy shield unconquered evermore,
    The Fire-lord's gift, who wrought its lips with circling gold about:
    Tomorrow's light, unless thou deem'st my words are all to doubt,
    Shall see Rutulian death in heaps a-lying on the land."

    Therewith departing, forth she thrust the tall ship with her hand,
    As one who had good skill therein, and then across the seas
    Swifter than dart she fled, or shaft that matcheth well the breeze,
    And straight the others hastened on. All mazed was he of Troy,
    Anchises' seed, but yet the sign upraised his heart with joy,        250
    And, looking to the hollow heaven, in few words prayed he thus

    "Kind Ida-Mother of the Gods, whose heart loves Dindymus
    And towered towns, and lions yoked and tamed to bear the bit,
    Be thou my battle-leader now, and do thou further it,
    This omen, and with favouring foot the Trojan folk draw nigh."

    But while he spake, Day, come again, had run adown the sky,
    With light all utter perfect wrought, and driven away the night.
    Then folk he biddeth follow on the banners of the fight,
    And make them ready for the play and shape their hearts for war.
    But he, aloft upon the poop, now sees them where they are,           260
    His leaguered Teucrians, as his left uprears the blazing shield;
    And then, the sons of Dardanus up to the starry field
    Send forth the cry, and hope is come to whet their battle-wrath.
    Thick flies their spear-storm: 'tis as when the Strymon cranes give forth
    Their war-sign on the mirky rack, and down the heavens they run
    Sonorous, fleeing southern breeze with clamour following on.
    But wondrous to Rutulian king and dukes of Italy
    That seemed, until they look about, and lo, the keels they see
    Turned shoreward; yea, a sea of ships onsetting toward the shore.
    Yea, and the helm is all ablaze, beams from the crest outpour,       270
    The golden shield-boss wide about a world of flame doth shed.
    E'en so, amid the clear of night, the comets bloody-red
    Blush woeful bright; nor otherwise is Sirius' burning wrought,
    When drought and plagues for weary men the birth of him hath wrought,
    And that unhappy light of his hath saddened all the heaven.
    But nought from Turnus' hardy heart was high hope ever driven
    To take the strand of them and thrust those comers from the shore:
    Eager he chid, hot-heart, with words men's courage he upbore:

    "Lo, now your prayers have come about, that hand meet hand in strife,
    And Mars is in the brave man's hand: let each one's home and wife
    Be in his heart! Call ye to mind those mighty histories,             281
    The praises of our father-folk! Come, meet them in the seas,
    Amid their tangle, while their feet yet totter on the earth:
    For Fortune helpeth them that dare."

    So saying, he turneth in his mind with whom on these to fall,
    And unto whom to leave meanwhile the leaguering of the wall.
    Meanwhile AEneas from his ships high-built his folk doth speed
    Ashore by bridges: many men no less the back-draught heed
    Of the spent seas, and, trusting shoals, they make the downward leap;
    And others slide adown the oars. Tarchon the shore doth sweep,       290
    Espying where the waves break not, nor back the sea doth roar,
    But where the sea-flood harmlessly with full tide swims ashore,
    And thither straight he lays his keels, and prays unto his folk:

    "O chosen, on the stark oars lay! now up unto the stroke;
    Bear on the ships, and with your beaks cleave ye this foeman's earth;
    And let the very keels themselves there furrow them their berth.
    On such a haven nought I heed, though ship and all we break,
    If once we gain the land."
                                Therewith, as such a word he spake,
    His fellows rise together hard on every shaven tree,
    In mind to bear their ships befoamed up on the Latin lea,            300
    Until their tynes are high and dry, and fast is every keel
    Unhurt: save, Tarchon, thine alone, that winneth no such weal;
    For on the shallows driven aground, on evil ridge unmeet,
    She hangeth balanced a long while, and doth the waters beat;
    Then, breaking, droppeth down her men amidmost of the waves,
    Entangled in the wreck of oars, and floating thwarts and staves;
    And in the back-draught of the seas their feet are caught withal.

    No dull delay holds Turnus back; but fiercely doth he fall,
    With all his host, on them of Troy, and meets them on the strand.    309
    The war-horns sing. AEneas first breaks through the field-folk's band,
    --Fair omen of the fight--and lays the Latin folk alow.
    Thero he slays, most huge of men, whose own heart bade him go
    Against AEneas: through the links of brass the sword doth fare,
    And through the kirtle's scaly gold, and wastes the side laid bare.
    Then Lichas smites he, ripped erewhile from out his mother dead,
    And hallowed, Phoebus, unto thee, because his baby head
    Had 'scaped the steel: nor far from thence he casteth down to die
    Hard Cisseus, Gyas huge, who there beat down his company
    With might of clubs; nought then availed that Herculean gear,
    Nor their stark hands, nor yet their sire Melampus, though he were   320
    Alcides' friend so long as he on earth wrought heavy toil.
    Lo Pharo! while a deedless word he flingeth mid the broil,
    The whirring of the javelin stays within his shouting mouth.
    Thou, Cydon, following lucklessly thy new delight, the youth
    Clytius, whose first of fallow down about his cheeks is spread
    Art well-nigh felled by Dardan hand, and there hadst thou lain dead,
    At peace from all the many loves wherein thy life would stray,
    Had not thy brethren's serried band now thrust across the way
    E'en Phorcus' seed: sevenfold of tale and sevenfold spears they wield:
    But some thereof fly harmless back from helm-side and from shield,   330
    The rest kind Venus turned aside, that grazing past they flew;
    But therewithal AEneas spake unto Achates true:

    "Reach me my shafts: not one in vain my right hand now shall speed
    Against Rutulians, of all those that erst in Ilian mead
    Stood in the bodies of the Greeks."
                                        Then caught he a great spear
    And cast it, and it flew its ways the brazen shield to shear
    Of Maeon, breaking through his mail, breaking his breast withal:
    Alcanor is at hand therewith, to catch his brother's fall
    With his right hand; but through his arm the spear without a stay
    Flew hurrying on, and held no less its straight and bloody way,      340
    And by the shoulder-nerves the hand hung down all dead and vain.
    Then Numitor, his brother's spear caught from his brother slain,
    Falls on AEneas; yet to smite the mighty one in face
    No hap he had, but did the thigh of great Achates graze.
    Clausus of Cures, trusting well in his young body's might,
    Now cometh, and with stiff-wrought spear from far doth Dryops smite
    Beneath the chin; home went its weight, and midst his shouting's birth
    From rent throat snatc