tee rimages and feelings, that sometimes raised me
to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In
the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting
story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon
what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that I found in it a
never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and
domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which
were for ever alive in my own bosom. But I thought Werter himself a
more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined; his character
contained no pretension, but it sank deep. The disquisitions upon
death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder. I did not
pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards
the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely
understanding it.

“As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and
condition. I found myself similar yet at the same time strangely
unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I
was a listener. I sympathised with and partly understood them, but I
was unformed in mind; I was dependent on none and related to none.
‘The path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my
annihilation. My person was hideous and my stature gigantic. What did
this mean? Who was I? What was I? Whence did I come? What was my
destination? These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to
solve them.

“The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed contained the
histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. This book
had a far different effect upon me from the _Sorrows of Werter_. I
learned from Werter’s imaginations despondency and gloom, but Plutarch
taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my
own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. Many
things I read surpassed my understanding and experience. I had a very
confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers,
and boundless seas. But I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and
large assemblages of men. The cottage of my protectors had been the
only school in which I had studied human nature, but this book
developed new and mightier scenes of action. I read of men concerned
in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. I felt the
greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
far as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they
were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these
feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, Numa,
Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and Theseus. The
patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a
firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had
been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should
have been imbued with different sensations.

“But _Paradise Lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. I read
it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
a true history. It moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the
picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of
exciting. I often referred the several situations, as their similarity
struck me, to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to
any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine
in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God a
perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of
his Creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from
beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for
often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
gall of envy rose within me.

“Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon
after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the pocket of
the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. At first I had
neglected them, but now that I was able to decipher the characters in
which they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It was
your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You
minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
occurrences. You doubtless recollect these papers. Here they are.
Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
horrors and rendered mine indelible. I sickened as I read. ‘Hateful
day when I received life!’ I exclaimed in agony. ‘Accursed creator!
Why did you form a monster so hideous that even _you_ turned from me in
disgust? God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
and encourage him, but I am solitary and abhorred.’

“These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
but when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that when they should
become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would
compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity. Could they turn
from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way
to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. I
postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance
attached to its success inspired me with a dread lest I should fail.
Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every
day’s experience that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking
until a few more months should have added to my sagacity.

“Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. The
presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and I also
found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there. Felix and Agatha
spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
their labours by servants. They did not appear rich, but they were
contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while
mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase of knowledge only
discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I
cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my person
reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail
image and that inconstant shade.

“I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial
which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my
thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and
dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my
feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
smiles of consolation. But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my
sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam’s
supplication to his Creator. But where was mine? He had abandoned me,
and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him.

“Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. Yet I did
not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better fitted by my
conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief
delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention
towards the cottagers. Their happiness was not decreased by the
absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and
their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the
greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost
limit of my ambition. I dared not think that they would turn them from
me with disdain and horror. The poor that stopped at their door were
never driven away. I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
little food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not
believe myself utterly unworthy of it.

“The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
place since I awoke into life. My attention at this time was solely
directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally
fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I
thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain
the good will and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means
be tolerated by my younger protectors.

“One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha,
and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own
desire, was left alone in the cottage. When his children had departed,
he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before. At first his
countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued,
thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

“My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were gone to a
neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my plan, my
limbs failed me and I sank to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting
all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had
placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The fresh air revived
me, and with renewed determination I approached the door of their
cottage.

“I knocked. ‘Who is there?’ said the old man. ‘Come in.’

“I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am
a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you
would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.’

“‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what
manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are
from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to
procure food for you.’

“‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is
warmth and rest only that I need.’

“I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute was
precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence
the interview, when the old man addressed me.

‘By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman; are you
French?’

“‘No; but I was educated by a French family and understand that
language only. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.’

“‘Are they Germans?’

“‘No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an
unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and I have no relation
or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I go have never
seen me and know little of me. I am full of fears, for if I fail
there, I am an outcast in the world for ever.’

“‘Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
full of brotherly love and charity. Rely, therefore, on your hopes;
and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’

“‘They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable
monster.’

“‘That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
you undeceive them?’

“‘I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that I
feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these friends; I
have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and
it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.’

“‘Where do these friends reside?’

“‘Near this spot.’

“The old man paused and then continued, ‘If you will unreservedly
confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them. I am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
there is something in your words which persuades me that you are
sincere. I am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure
to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.’

“‘Excellent man! I thank you and accept your generous offer. You
raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid,
I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
creatures.’

“‘Heaven forbid! Even if you were really criminal, for that can only
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am
unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.’

“‘How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor? From your lips
first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall
be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success
with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.’

“‘May I know the names and residence of those friends?’

“I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. I struggled vainly for
firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that
moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had not a moment
to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the
time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I
seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’

“‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Who are you?’

“At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and
Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on
beholding me? Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her
friend, rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with
supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently
with a stick. I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
the antelope. But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and
I refrained. I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the general
tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.”




Chapter 16


“Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I live? Why, in that instant, did I
not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have
destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
their shrieks and misery.

“When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my
anguish in fearful howlings. I was like a wild beast that had broken
the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging
through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! What a miserable
night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird
burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest
or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and
finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
the ruin.

“But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I became
fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
the sick impotence of despair. There was none among the myriads of men
that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness
towards my enemies? No; from that moment I declared everlasting war
against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

“The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that it was
impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid
myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
to reflection on my situation.

“The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some
degree of tranquillity; and when I considered what had passed at the
cottage, I could not help believing that I had been too hasty in my
conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that
my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and I was a
fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I
ought to have familiarised the old De Lacey to me, and by degrees to
have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have
been prepared for my approach. But I did not believe my errors to be
irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to the
cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my
party.

“These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank into a profound
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by
peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged Felix
tearing me from his father’s feet. I awoke exhausted, and finding that
it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
search of food.

“When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the
well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace.
I crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the
accustomed hour when the family arose. That hour passed, the sun
mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I
trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside
of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the
agony of this suspense.

“Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they
entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not
understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix
approached with another man; I was surprised, as I knew that he had not
quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from
his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.

“‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him,
‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose
the produce of your garden? I do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and
I beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
determination.’

“‘It is utterly useless,’ replied Felix; ‘we can
never again inhabit your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest
danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have related. My wife and
my sister will never recover from their horror. I entreat you not to reason
with me any more. Take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this
place.’

“Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion
entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then
departed. I never saw any of the family of De Lacey more.

“I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of
utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed and had broken
the only link that held me to the world. For the first time the
feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to
control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I
bent my mind towards injury and death. When I thought of my friends,
of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the
exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of
tears somewhat soothed me. But again when I reflected that they had
spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to
injure anything human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As
night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage,
and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
operations.

“As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore
along like a mighty avalanche and produced a kind of insanity in my
spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted the
dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
nearly touched. A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my
brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath,
and bushes, which I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the
cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and
licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.

“As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of
the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.

“And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my steps? I
resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the
thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from your papers that you
were my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with more fitness
than to him who had given me life? Among the lessons that Felix had
bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been omitted; I had learned from
these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
You had mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town, and towards
this place I resolved to proceed.

“But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a
southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my
only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass
through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but I
did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although
towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling,
heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I
determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from
any other being that wore the human form.

“My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense. It was
late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long resided.
I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a
human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless;
rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface
of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter. Oh,
earth! How often did I imprecate curses on the cause of my being! The
mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall
and bitterness. The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more
deeply did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow
fell, and the waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents
now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country; but I
often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me
no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could
not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived
on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth
and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.

“I generally rested during the day and travelled only when I was
secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, finding
that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey
after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of
these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by them, and
forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears
again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with
thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.

“I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to its
boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many
of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard
the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade
of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running
towards the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from
someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides
of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
rapid stream. I rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour,
from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. She
was senseless, and I endeavoured by every means in my power to restore
animation, when I was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic,
who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. On
seeing me, he darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms,
hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. I followed speedily, I
hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun,
which he carried, at my body and fired. I sank to the ground, and my
injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.

“This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being
from destruction, and as a recompense I now writhed under the miserable
pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone. The feelings of
kindness and gentleness which I had entertained but a few moments
before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by
pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. But the
agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I fainted.

“For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
cure the wound which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder,
and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
rate I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented
also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge,
such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had
endured.

“After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The
labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insulted my
desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for
the enjoyment of pleasure.

“But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from this time I
reached the environs of Geneva.

“It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among
the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I should apply
to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to
enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting
behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.

“At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection,
which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came
running into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiveness of
infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this
little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have
imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him and
educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in
this peopled earth.

“Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him
towards me. As soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before
his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; I drew his hand forcibly from his
face and said, ‘Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to
hurt you; listen to me.’

“He struggled violently. ‘Let me go,’ he cried;
‘monster! Ugly wretch! You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. You
are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell my papa.’

“‘Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’

“‘Hideous monster! Let me go. My papa is a syndic—he is M.
Frankenstein—he will punish you. You dare not keep me.’

“‘Frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom I have
sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.’

“The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried
despair to my heart; I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
moment he lay dead at my feet.

“I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation;
my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and
a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.’

“As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his
breast. I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite
of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a few moments I
gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; I remembered that I was
for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could
bestow and that she whose resemblance I contemplated would, in
regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
expressive of disgust and affright.

“Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I only
wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the
attempt to destroy them.

“While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I had
committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I
entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty. A woman was
sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her
whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those whose
joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. And then I bent over
her and whispered, ‘Awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would
give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my
beloved, awake!’

“The sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me. Should she
indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? Thus
would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
The thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not I, but
she, shall suffer; the murder I have committed because I am for ever
robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had
its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of
Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now to work
mischief. I bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of
the folds of her dress. She moved again, and I fled.

“For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
its miseries for ever. At length I wandered towards these mountains,
and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning
passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have
promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone and miserable; man
will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
would not deny herself to me. My companion must be of the same species
and have the same defects. This being you must create.”




Chapter 17


The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the
expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
proposition. He continued,

“You must create a female for me with whom I can live in the
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. This you alone
can do, and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to
concede.”

The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had
died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
as he said this I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within
me.

“I do refuse it,” I replied; “and no torture shall ever extort a
consent from me. You may render me the most miserable of men, but you
shall never make me base in my own eyes. Shall I create another like
yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I
have answered you; you may torture me, but I will never consent.”

“You are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and instead
of threatening, I am content to reason with you. I am malicious because I
am miserable. Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind? You, my creator,
would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I
should pity man more than he pities me? You would not call it murder if you
could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the
work of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he condemns me? Let him
live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would
bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
But that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our
union. Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. I will
revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and
chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear
inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor
finish until I desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
your birth.”

A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled
into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
he calmed himself and proceeded—

“I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for you do
not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. If any being felt
emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and a
hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the
whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I demand a creature of
another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it
is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be
monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
attached to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but they will be
harmless and free from the misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me
happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I
excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my
request!”

I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences
of my consent, but I felt that there was some justice in his argument.
His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature
of fine sensations, and did I not as his maker owe him all the portion
of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? He saw my change of
feeling and continued,

“If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not
that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will
be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful
and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as you have been towards me,
I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment
and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire.”

“You propose,” replied I, “to fly from the habitations of
man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
persevere in this exile? You will return and again seek their kindness, and
you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I cannot consent.”

“How inconstant are your feelings! But a moment ago you were moved by
my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that
with the companion you bestow, I will quit the neighbourhood of man and
dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. My evil passions
will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly
away, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my maker.”

His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him and
sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when I looked upon him, when
I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle
these sensations; I thought that as I could not sympathise with him, I
had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
was yet in my power to bestow.

“You swear,” I said, “to be harmless; but have you not
already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust
you? May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by
affording a wider scope for your revenge?”

“How is this? I must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer. If
I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall
become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. My vices
are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will
necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel
the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
existence and events from which I am now excluded.”

I paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various
arguments which he had employed. I thought of the promise of virtues which
he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight
of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
manifested towards him. His power and threats were not omitted in my
calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers
and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. After a
long pause of reflection I concluded that the justice due both to him and
my fellow creatures demanded of me that I should comply with his request.
Turning to him, therefore, I said,

“I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe for ever,
and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall
deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile.”

“I swear,” he cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of
heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. Depart to your
home and commence your labours; I shall watch their progress with
unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall
appear.”

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
sea of ice.

His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to hasten my descent
towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
heart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the
little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced
perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences
of the day had produced. Night was far advanced when I came to the
halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars
shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the
ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, I
exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as
nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.”

These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe to you
how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I
listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its
way to consume me.

Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I took no
rest, but returned immediately to Geneva. Even in my own heart I could
give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with a
mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I
answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I were placed
under a ban—as if I had no right to claim their sympathies—as if
never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I
loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate
myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of such an occupation
made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream,
and that thought only had to me the reality of life.




Chapter 18


Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and
I could not collect the courage to recommence my work. I feared the
vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my
repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. I found that I could not
compose a female without again devoting several months to profound
study and laborious disquisition. I had heard of some discoveries
having been made by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was
material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my
father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to
every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to
me. A change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had
hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My
father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts
towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring
blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took
refuge in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake
alone in a little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the
rippling of the waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air and
bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure, and
on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile
and a more cheerful heart.

It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father,
calling me aside, thus addressed me,

“I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet you are still
unhappy and still avoid our society. For some time I was lost in
conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me,
and if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a
point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.”

I trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued—

“I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your
marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the
stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other from your
earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and
tastes, entirely suited to one another. But so blind is the experience of
man that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any
wish that she might become your wife. Nay, you may have met with another
whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to
Elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear
to feel.”

“My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and
sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my
warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are
entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.”

“The expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear Victor,
gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced. If you
feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
a gloom over us. But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so
strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate. Tell me,
therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the
marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us
from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You
are younger; yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent
fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. Do not suppose,
however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on
your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words
with candour and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and
sincerity.”

I listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable
of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of
thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me
the idea of an immediate union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and
dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise which I had not yet fulfilled
and dared not break, or if I did, what manifold miseries might not
impend over me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival
with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the
ground? I must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
his mate before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from
which I expected peace.

I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to
England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers
of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
use to me in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining
the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, I
had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my
loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar
intercourse with those I loved. I knew that a thousand fearful
accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to
thrill all connected with me with horror. I was aware also that I
should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my
unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus
employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be
restored to my family in peace and happiness. My promise fulfilled,
the monster would depart for ever. Or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
slavery for ever.

These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a wish to
visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I
clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I
urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
comply. After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that
resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find
that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey,
and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my
return, have restored me entirely to myself.

The duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or
at most a year, was the period contemplated. One paternal kind
precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without
previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth,
arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered
with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the
commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be
an impediment, and truly I rejoiced that thus I should be saved many
hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between
me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were alone, would he not at times
force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task or to
contemplate its progress?

To England, therefore, I was bound, and it was understood that my union
with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. My father’s
age rendered him extremely averse to delay. For myself, there was one
reward I promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my
unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when,
enfranchised from my miserable slavery, I might claim Elizabeth and
forget the past in my union with her.

I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me
which filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should
leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and
unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my
departure. But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and
would he not accompany me to England? This imagination was dreadful in
itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
I was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of
this might happen. But through the whole period during which I was the
slave of my creature I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of
the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his
machinations.

It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my native
country. My journey had been my own suggestion, and Elizabeth
therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of
my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. It had
been her care which provided me a companion in Clerval—and yet a man
is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s
sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand
conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent
farewell.

I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly
knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around.
I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on
it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful
and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. I could
only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy
me whilst they endured.

After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed
many leagues, I arrived at Strasburgh, where I waited two days for
Clerval. He came. Alas, how great was the contrast between us! He
was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the
setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new
day. He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and
the appearances of the sky. “This is what it is to live,” he cried;
“now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are
you desponding and sorrowful!” In truth, I was occupied by gloomy
thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden
sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, would be far more
amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an
eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. I, a
miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to
enjoyment.

We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to
Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this
voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from
Strasburgh, arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below Mainz
becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly and winds
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw
many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by
black woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the Rhine, indeed,
presents a singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view
rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with
the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory,
flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river
and populous towns occupy the scene.

We travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers
as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits
continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the
bottom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to
drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a stranger. And if these
were my sensations, who can describe those of Henry? He felt as if he had
been transported to Fairy-land and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by
man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes
of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the
snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black
and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance
were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay
appearance; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore
up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be
on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain,
where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and
where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the
nightly wind; I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud;
but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The
mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a
charm in the banks of this divine river that I never before saw equalled.
Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the
island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now
that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village
half hid in the recess of the mountain. Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits
and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who
pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of
our own country.”

Clerval! Beloved friend! Even now it delights me to record your words and
to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. He was a
being formed in the “very poetry of nature.” His wild and
enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. His
soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that
devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only
in the imagination. But even human sympathies were not sufficient to
satisfy his eager mind. The scenery of external nature, which others regard
only with admiration, he loved with ardour:—

    ——The sounding cataract
    Haunted him like a passion: the tall rock,
    The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
    Their colours and their forms, were then to him
    An appetite; a feeling, and a love,
    That had no need of a remoter charm,
    By thought supplied, or any interest
    Unborrow’d from the eye.

          [Wordsworth’s “Tintern Abbey”.]

And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being lost
for ever? Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful
and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the
life of its creator;—has this mind perished? Does it now only exist
in my memory? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and
beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and
consoles your unhappy friend.

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight
tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart,
overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will
proceed with my tale.

Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we resolved to
post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of
the river was too gentle to aid us.

Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we
arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England.
It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of December, that I first saw
the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of the Thames presented a new scene;
they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the
remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish
Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had heard
of even in my country.

At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul’s towering
above all, and the Tower famed in English history.




Chapter 19


London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval desired the
intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this
time, but this was with me a secondary object; I was principally
occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of
introduction that I had brought with me, addressed to the most
distinguished natural philosophers.

If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a blight had
come over my existence, and I only visited these people for the sake of
the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest
was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when alone, I
could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory
peace. But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to
my heart. I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my
fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of William and
Justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled
my soul with anguish.

But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive
and anxious to gain experience and instruction. The difference of
manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
instruction and amusement. He was also pursuing an object he had long
had in view. His design was to visit India, in the belief that he had
in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views he had
taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the
execution of his plan. He was for ever busy, and the only check to his
enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to conceal this
as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures
natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by
any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him,
alleging another engagement, that I might remain alone. I now also
began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this
was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling
on the head. Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme
anguish, and every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips
to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.

After passing some months in London, we received a letter from a person in
Scotland who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva. He mentioned the
beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient
allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as Perth,
where he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and I,
although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and
all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.

We had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it was now
February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the
north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not
intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford,
Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of
this tour about the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and
the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some
obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland.

We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at
Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a new scene to us
mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
stately deer were all novelties to us.

From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this city, our minds
were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted
there more than a century and a half before. It was here that Charles
I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him,
after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of
Parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king and his
companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring, his queen, and
son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city which they
might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a
dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these
feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of
the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
The colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it through meadows
of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters,
which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and
domes, embosomed among aged trees.

I enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the
memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed
for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never
visited my mind, and if I was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what
is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in
the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate
elasticity to my spirits. But I am a blasted tree; the bolt has
entered my soul; and I felt then that I should survive to exhibit what
I shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.

We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs
and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most
animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery
were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented
themselves. We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hampden and the
field on which that patriot fell. For a moment my soul was elevated
from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas
of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments
and the remembrancers. For an instant I dared to shake off my chains
and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten
into my flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my
miserable self.

We left Oxford with regret and proceeded to Matlock, which was our next
place of rest. The country in the neighbourhood of this village
resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland; but
everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of
distant white Alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my
native country. We visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets
of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same
manner as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix. The latter name
made me tremble when pronounced by Henry, and I hastened to quit
Matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.

From Derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in
Cumberland and Westmorland. I could now almost fancy myself among the
Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the
rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. Here also we
made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into
happiness. The delight of Clerval was proportionably greater than
mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found
in his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could have
imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his
inferiors. “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among
these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.”

But he found that a traveller’s life is one that includes much pain
amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and
when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit
that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again
engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.

We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmorland
and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period
of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them
to travel on. For my own part I was not sorry. I had now neglected my
promise for some time, and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s
disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance
on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment
from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited
for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed I was
miserable and overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrived and I
saw the superscription of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to
read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that the fiend
followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment,
but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of
his destroyer. I felt as if I had committed some great crime, the
consciousness of which haunted me. I was guiltless, but I had indeed
drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.

I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like it so well
as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic
castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, Arthur’s
Seat, St. Bernard’s Well, and the Pentland Hills, compensated him for
the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was
impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.

We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and
along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us.
But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into
their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and
accordingly I told Clerval that I wished to make the tour of Scotland
alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our
rendezvous. I may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with
my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short
time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more
congenial to your own temper.”

Henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to
remonstrate. He entreated me to write often. “I had rather be with
you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch
people, whom I do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return,
that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, which I cannot do in
your absence.”

Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote spot of
Scotland and finish my work in solitude. I did not doubt but that the
monster followed me and would discover himself to me when I should have
finished, that he might receive his companion.

With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of
the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours. It was a place
fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high sides were
continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely
affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they
indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from
the mainland, which was about five miles distant.

On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of
these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two
rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
penury. The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be repaired, bought some
furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have
occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been
benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I lived ungazed at
and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes
which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations
of men.

In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening,
when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea to
listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. It was a
monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of Switzerland; it was
far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. Its hills
are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the
plains. Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when
troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively
infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.

In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first arrived, but
as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and
irksome to me. Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to enter my
laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night
in order to complete my work. It was, indeed, a filthy process in
which I was engaged. During my first experiment, a kind of
enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my
mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes
were shut to the horror of my proceedings. But now I went to it in
cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.

Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in
a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from
the actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I
grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared to meet my
persecutor. Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing
to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so much
dreaded to behold. I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow
creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion.

In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably
advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager
hope, which I dared not trust myself to question but which was
intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
in my bosom.




Chapter 20


I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just
rising from the sea; I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I
remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether I should leave my
labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention
to it. As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led me to
consider the effects of what I was now doing. Three years before, I was
engaged in the same manner and had created a fiend whose unparalleled
barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest
remorse. I was now about to form another being of whose dispositions I was
alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her
mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had
sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she
had not; and she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and
reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her
creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived
loathed his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence
for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn
with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him,
and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
deserted by one of his own species.

Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world,
yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon
thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon
the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a
condition precarious and full of terror. Had I right, for my own benefit,
to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before been moved
by the sophisms of the being I had created; I had been struck senseless by
his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my
promise burst upon me; I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me
as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at
the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.

I trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, I saw by
the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. A ghastly grin
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task
which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he
had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the
fulfilment of my promise.

As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my
promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion,
tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me
destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for
happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.

I left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own
heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, I
sought my own apartment. I was alone; none were near me to dissipate
the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most
terrible reveries.

Several hours passed, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea;
it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fishing vessels alone
specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
of voices as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the silence,
although I was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
person landed close to my house.

In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled from head to foot; I felt a
presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was overcome by the sensation
of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain
endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.

Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door
opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared. Shutting the door, he
approached me and said in a smothered voice,

“You have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you
intend? Do you dare to break your promise? I have endured toil and misery;
I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among
its willow islands and over the summits of its hills. I have dwelt many
months in the heaths of England and among the deserts of Scotland. I have
endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my
hopes?”

“Begone! I do break my promise; never will I create another like
yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.”

“Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
unworthy of my condescension. Remember that I have power; you believe
yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of
day will be hateful to you. You are my creator, but I am your master;
obey!”

“The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
arrived. Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but
they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in
vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæmon whose
delight is in death and wretchedness? Begone! I am firm, and your
words will only exasperate my rage.”

The monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the
impotence of anger. “Shall each man,” cried he, “find a
wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone? I had
feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
Man! You may hate, but beware! Your hours will pass in dread and misery,
and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for
ever. Are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my
wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge
remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
misery. Beware, for I am fearless and therefore powerful. I will watch with
the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall
repent of the injuries you inflict.”

“Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend
beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable.”

“It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your
wedding-night.”

I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.”

I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with
precipitation. In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot
across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the
waves.

All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. I burned with rage to
pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. I
walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me. Why had I not
followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? But I had suffered him
to depart, and he had directed his course towards the mainland. I shuddered
to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
And then I thought again of his words—“_I will be with you on
your wedding-night._” That, then, was the period fixed for the
fulfilment of my destiny. In that hour I should die and at once satisfy and
extinguish his malice. The prospect did not move me to fear; yet when I
thought of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she
should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first I
had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fall
before my enemy without a bitter struggle.

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became
calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into
the depths of despair. I left the house, the horrid scene of the last
night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I
almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow
creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. I
desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true,
but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it was to
be sacrificed or to see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a
dæmon whom I had myself created.

I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it
loved and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the
sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep
sleep. I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves
were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep
into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I awoke, I again felt as
if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to
reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the
words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared
like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.

The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my
appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet;
it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to
join him. He said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where
he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in London desired
his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his
Indian enterprise. He could not any longer delay his departure; but as
his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now
conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of
my society on him as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to
leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed
southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and
I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.

Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered
to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose I
must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and I must
handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. The next
morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door
of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had
destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had
mangled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect myself and
then entered the chamber. With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments
out of the room, but I reflected that I ought not to leave the relics of my
work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly
put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them
up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the
meantime I sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my
chemical apparatus.

Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. I had
before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with
whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film
had been taken from before my eyes and that I for the first time saw
clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not
reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had resolved in
my own mind that to create another like the fiend I had first made
would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I
banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different
conclusion.

Between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my
basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land,
but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the commission of a
dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my
fellow creatures. At one time the moon, which had before been clear, was
suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantage of the moment of
darkness and cast my basket into the sea; I listened to the gurgling sound
as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. The sky became clouded, but
the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then
rising. But it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable sensations
that I resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a
direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the
moon, everything was obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat as its
keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time I
slept soundly.

I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I awoke I
found that the sun had already mounted considerably. The wind was high, and
the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. I found
that the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from
which I had embarked. I endeavoured to change my course but quickly found
that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with
water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I
confess that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no compass with me
and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the
world that the sun was of little benefit to me. I might be driven into the
wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in
the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had already
been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to
my other sufferings. I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds
that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; I looked upon the
sea; it was to be my grave. “Fiend,” I exclaimed, “your
task is already fulfilled!” I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and
of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his
sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so
despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of
closing before me for ever, I shudder to reflect on it.

Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became
free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick
and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a line of high
land towards the south.

Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured
for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of
warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.

How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have
of life even in the excess of misery! I constructed another sail with a
part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land. It had a
wild and rocky appearance, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived
the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself
suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. I
carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed a steeple which I at
length saw issuing from behind a small promontory. As I was in a state of
extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place
where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with
me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small neat town and a good
harbour, which I entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected
escape.

As I was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several
people crowded towards the spot. They seemed much surprised at my
appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered
together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me
a slight sensation of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they
spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My
good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me the name of
this town and inform me where I am?”

“You will know that soon enough,” replied a man with a hoarse voice.
“Maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste,
but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you.”

I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a
stranger, and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
angry countenances of his companions. “Why do you answer me so
roughly?” I replied. “Surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to
receive strangers so inhospitably.”

“I do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the
English may be, but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains.”

While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly
increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which
annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. I inquired the way to the inn, but
no one replied. I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the
crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man
approaching tapped me on the shoulder and said, “Come, sir, you must
follow me to Mr. Kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.”

“Who is Mr. Kirwin? Why am I to give an account of myself? Is not
this a free country?”

“Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate,
and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was
found murdered here last night.”

This answer startled me, but I presently recovered myself. I was innocent;
that could easily be proved; accordingly I followed my conductor in silence
and was led to one of the best houses in the town. I was ready to sink from
fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic
to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into
apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that
was in a few moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair
all fear of ignominy or death.

I must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of
the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my
recollection.




Chapter 21


I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old
benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however,
with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors,
he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.

About half a dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the
magistrate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the night before with
his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o’clock,
they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in
for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did
not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about
two miles below. He walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle,
and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding
along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his
length on the ground. His companions came up to assist him, and by the
light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man,
who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was the
corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the
waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even
that the body was not then cold. They instantly carried it to the cottage
of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it
to life. It appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty
years of age. He had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of
any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.

The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but
when the mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the murder of
my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for
support. The magistrate observed me with a keen eye and of course drew
an unfavourable augury from my manner.

The son confirmed his father’s account, but when Daniel Nugent was
called he swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he
saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore;
and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same
boat in which I had just landed.

A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door
of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour
before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with
only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
was afterwards found.

Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
body into her house; it was not cold. They put it into a bed and
rubbed it, and Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was
quite gone.

Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed
that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
was very probable that I had beaten about for many hours and had been
obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which I had departed.
Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the body
from another place, and it was likely that as I did not appear to know
the shore, I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance
of the town of —— from the place where I had deposited the corpse.

Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be taken into
the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what
effect the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was probably
suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the mode of the
murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate
and several other persons, to the inn. I could not help being struck by the
strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but,
knowing that I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had
inhabited about the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly
tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.

I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. How
can I describe my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with
horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and
agony. The examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
passed like a dream from my memory when I saw the lifeless form of Henry
Clerval stretched before me. I gasped for breath, and throwing myself on
the body, I exclaimed, “Have my murderous machinations deprived you
also, my dearest Henry, of life? Two I have already destroyed; other
victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my
benefactor—”

The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and
I was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.

A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death; my
ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the
murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval. Sometimes I entreated my
attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was
tormented; and at others I felt the fingers of the monster already grasping
my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. Fortunately, as I spoke
my native language, Mr. Kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and
bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.

Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was before, why did I not
sink into forgetfulness and rest? Death snatches away many blooming
children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and
youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the
next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of what materials was I
made that I could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of
the wheel, continually renewed the torture?

But I was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from
a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by
gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon.
It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding; I had
forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some
great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I looked around
and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which I
was, all flashed across my memory and I groaned bitterly.

This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside
me. She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her
countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise
that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her
tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English,
and the voice struck me as one that I had heard during my sufferings.

“Are you better now, sir?” said she.

I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, “I believe I am;
but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am
still alive to feel this misery and horror.”

“For that matter,” replied the old woman, “if you mean about the
gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you
were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you! However, that’s none
of my business; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty
with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.”

I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a
speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt
languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. The whole series
of my life appeared to me as a dream; I sometimes doubted if indeed it
were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force
of reality.

As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew
feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed
me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The
physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared
them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the
second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the
hangman who would gain his fee?

These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had
shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison
to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who
had provided a physician and a nurse. It is true, he seldom came to
see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of
every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and
miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see
that I was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long
intervals.

One day, while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes
half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. I was overcome by gloom
and misery and often reflected I had better seek death than desire to
remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness. At one time I
considered whether I should not declare myself guilty and suffer the
penalty of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my
thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered.
His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to
mine and addressed me in French,

“I fear that this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to
make you more comfortable?”

“I thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole
earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving.”

“I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to
one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. But you will, I
hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can
easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.”

“That is my least concern; I am, by a course of strange events, become
the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am and
have been, can death be any evil to me?”

“Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the
strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some
surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality,
seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was
presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
your path.”

As Mr. Kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation I endured on
this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at
the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose some
astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for Mr. Kirwin hastened
to say,

“Immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on
your person were brought me, and I examined them that I might discover some
trace by which I could send to your relations an account of your misfortune
and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I
discovered from its commencement to be from your father. I instantly wrote
to Geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any
kind.”

“This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event;
tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder I am
now to lament?”

“Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with
gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.”

I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
misery and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as a new incitement for
me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my eyes,
and cried out in agony,

“Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, do not
let him enter!”

Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could not help
regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in
rather a severe tone,

“I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.”

“My father!” cried I, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed
from anguish to pleasure. “Is my father indeed come? How kind, how
very kind! But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?”

My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium,
and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He rose and
quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.

Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the
arrival of my father. I stretched out my hand to him and cried,

“Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?”

My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by
dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my
desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of
cheerfulness. “What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!”
said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance
of the room. “You travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems
to pursue you. And poor Clerval—”

The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears.

“Alas! Yes, my father,” replied I; “some destiny of the
most horrible kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I
should have died on the coffin of Henry.”

We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and insisted that my
strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. But the
appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and I
gradually recovered my health.

As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black
melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was
for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation
into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous
relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and detested a
life? It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now
drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these
throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears
me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also
sink to rest. Then the appearance of death was distant, although the
wish was ever present to my thoughts; and I often sat for hours
motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that
might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.

The season of the assizes approached. I had already been three months
in prison, and although I was still weak and in continual danger of a
relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the country
town where the court was held. Mr. Kirwin charged himself with every
care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. I was spared
the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not
brought before the court that decides on life and death. The grand
jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was on the Orkney
Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight
after my removal I was liberated from prison.

My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a
criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh
atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country. I did not
participate in these feelings, for to me the walls of a dungeon or a
palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned for ever, and
although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes
they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark
orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as I
first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.

My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He talked
of Geneva, which I should soon visit, of Elizabeth and Ernest; but
these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a
wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved
cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more
the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early
childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a
prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and
despair. At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the
existence I loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance
to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence.

Yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally
triumphed over my selfish despair. It was necessary that I should
return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
I so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any
chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to
blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
the existence of the monstrous image which I had endued with the
mockery of a soul still more monstrous. My father still desired to
delay our departure, fearful that I could not sustain the fatigues of a
journey, for I was a shattered wreck—the shadow of a human being. My
strength was gone. I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day
preyed upon my wasted frame.

Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
my father thought it best to yield. We took our passage on board a vessel
bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores.
It was midnight. I lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to
the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my
sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when I reflected that I should
soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream;
yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested
shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly
that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest
companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I
repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for
Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on
to the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the night in
which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of thought; a
thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly.

Ever since my recovery from the fever, I had been in the custom of taking
every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug
only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of
life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, I now
swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. But sleep did
not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a
thousand objects that scared me. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind
of nightmare; I felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free
myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. My father, who was
watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves
were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of
security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour
and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a kind of calm
forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly
susceptible.




Chapter 22


The voyage came to an end. We landed, and proceeded to Paris. I soon
found that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must repose before I
could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were
indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my sufferings and
sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to
seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not
abhorred! They were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt
attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an
angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no right
to share their intercourse. I had unchained an enemy among them whose
joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. How they
would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world, did they know
my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!

My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by
various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I
felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of
murder, and he endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.

“Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know me. 
Human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such
a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent
as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause
of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all
died by my hands.”

My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same
assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an
explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of
delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented
itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I preserved in my
convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence
concerning the wretch I had created. I had a persuasion that I should be
supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue. But,
besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my
hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of
his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was
silent when I would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably
from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part
relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.

Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder,
“My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat
you never to make such an assertion again.”

“I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who
have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the
assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed I could not
sacrifice the whole human race.”

The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and
endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as
possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my
misfortunes.

As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my
heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own
crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. By the utmost
self-violence I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners
were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey
to the sea of ice.

A few days before we left Paris on our way to Switzerland, I received the
following letter from Elizabeth:

“My dear Friend,

“It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle
dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may
hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much you
must have suffered! I expect to see you looking even more ill than
when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been passed most miserably,
tortured as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in
your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of
comfort and tranquillity.

“Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable
a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not disturb you at
this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a
conversation that I had with my uncle previous to his departure renders
some explanation necessary before we meet.

Explanation! You may possibly say, What can Elizabeth have to explain? If
you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet
be pleased with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the
case, I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I
have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.

“You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of
your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young, and
taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take
place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I
believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But
as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each
other without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our
case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you by our mutual
happiness, with simple truth—Do you not love another?

“You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last
autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every
creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our
connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of
your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love
you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant
friend and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as well as my
own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally
miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now
I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest
misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that
love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who
have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries
tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. Ah! Victor, be assured
that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be
made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you
obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth
will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.

“Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle
will send me news of your health, and if I see but one smile on your
lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I
shall need no other happiness.

“Elizabeth Lavenza.



“Geneva, May 18th, 17—”



This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat of
the fiend—“_I will be with you on your
wedding-night!_” Such was my sentence, and on that night would the
dæmon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of
happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. On that night he
had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a
deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he were
victorious I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. If he
were vanquished, I should be a free man. Alas! What freedom? Such as the
peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his
cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless,
penniless, and alone, but free. Such would be my liberty except that in my
Elizabeth I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of
remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.

Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and reread her letter, and some
softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal
dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
angel’s arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make
her happy. If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My
destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer
should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would
surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed
_to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consider that
threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that
he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately
after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my
immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life
should not retard it a single hour.

In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and
affectionate. “I fear, my beloved girl,” I said, “little happiness
remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is centred in
you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life
and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a
dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
wonder that I survive what I have endured. I will confide this tale of
misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place,
for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. But
until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. This I most
earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply.”

In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth’s letter we returned
to Geneva. The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were
in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a
change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly
vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of
compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I
was.

The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness
with it, and when I thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed
me; sometimes I was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and
despondent. I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless,
bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.

Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice
would soothe me when transported by passion and inspire me with human
feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and for me. When reason
returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with
resignation. Ah! It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the
guilty there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is
otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.

Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
Elizabeth. I remained silent.

“Have you, then, some other attachment?”

“None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to our union with
delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate
myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.”

“My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have befallen
us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love
for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. Our circle will be
small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
And when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of
care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly
deprived.”

Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of the
threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had
yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as
invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words “_I shall be with
you on your wedding-night_,” I should regard the threatened fate as
unavoidable. But death was no evil to me if the loss of Elizabeth were
balanced with it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful
countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the
ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined,
the seal to my fate.

Great God! If for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish
intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have banished myself
for ever from my native country and wandered a friendless outcast over
the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if
possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real
intentions; and when I thought that I had prepared only my own death, I
hastened that of a far dearer victim.

As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or
a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I concealed my
feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the
countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer
eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to our union with placid contentment,
not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed,
that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate
into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.

Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own
heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness
into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the
decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of
the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian
government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It
was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa
Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake
near which it stood.

In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the
fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger
constantly about me and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and
by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the
period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be
regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for
in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed
for its solemnisation drew nearer and I heard it continually spoken of
as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.

Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to
calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my
destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her;
and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which I had
promised to reveal to her on the following day. My father was in the
meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in
the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.

After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my
father’s, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our
journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our
voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable;
all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.

Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the
feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we
were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the
beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw
Mont Salêve, the pleasant banks of Montalègre, and at a distance,
surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc, and the assemblage of snowy
mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the
opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the
ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost
insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.

I took the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If
you knew what I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would
endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this
one day at least permits me to enjoy.”

“Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied Elizabeth; “there is, I hope,
nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not
painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me
not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I
will not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe how fast we move
along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise
above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more
interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in
the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at
the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature
appears!”

Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all
reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating;
joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place
to distraction and reverie.

The sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and
observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the
lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached
the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The
spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range
of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.

The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity,
sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water
and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the
shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and
hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touched
the shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp
me and cling to me for ever.




Chapter 23


It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the
shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and
contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured
in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.

The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence
in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was
beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the
flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the
scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves
that were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.

I had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the
shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was anxious
and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in
my bosom; every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would sell my
life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that
of my adversary was extinguished.

Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and
trembling, she asked, “What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor?
What is it you fear?”

“Oh! Peace, peace, my love,” replied I; “this night, and
all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.”

I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how
fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife,
and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her
until I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.

She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages
of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to
my adversary. But I discovered no trace of him and was beginning to
conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the
execution of his menaces when suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful
scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had retired. As I
heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the blood
trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This
state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed
into the room.

Great God! Why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the
destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was
there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down
and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I
turn I see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung
by the murderer on its bridal bier. Could I behold this and live? Alas!
Life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. For a moment
only did I lose recollection; I fell senseless on the ground.

When I recovered I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their
countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of others
appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I
escaped from them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, my
wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the
posture in which I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon
her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have
supposed her asleep. I rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but
the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I now held
in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished.
The murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the
breath had ceased to issue from her lips.

While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up.
The windows of the room had before been darkened, and I felt a kind of
panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be
described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred.
A grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his
fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards
the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me,
leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning,
plunged into the lake.

The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to
the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with
boats; nets were cast, but in vain. After passing several hours, we
returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a
form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to
search the country, parties going in different directions among the
woods and vines.

I attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the
house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken
man, I fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my
eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state I
was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had
happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that
I had lost.

After an interval I arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room
where the corpse of my beloved lay. There were women weeping around; I
hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no
distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to
various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their
cause. I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death
of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly
of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my only remaining
friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now
might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his
feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to action. I started
up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.

There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake; but the
wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was
hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men
to row and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from
mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt,
and the excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any
exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way
to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were
familiar to me in my happier time and which I had contemplated but the day
before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection.
Tears streamed from my eyes. The rain had ceased for a moment, and I saw
the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before; they had
then been observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful to the human mind as
a great and sudden change. The sun might shine or the clouds might lower,
but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before. A fiend had
snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been
so miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of
man.

But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last
overwhelming event? Mine has been a tale of horrors; I have reached their
_acme_, and what I must now relate can but be tedious to you. Know
that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was left desolate. My
own strength is exhausted, and I must tell, in a few words, what remains of
my hideous narration.

I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk
under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old
man! His eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their
delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with
all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having
few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. Cursed, cursed
be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste
in wretchedness! He could not live under the horrors that were accumulated
around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to
rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.

What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and
darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes,
indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales
with the friends of my youth, but I awoke and found myself in a
dungeon. Melancholy followed, but by degrees I gained a clear
conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my
prison. For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I
understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.

Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I
awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. As the
memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their
cause—the monster whom I had created, the miserable dæmon whom I had
sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed by a
maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed
that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal
revenge on his cursed head.

Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to
reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about
a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town
and told him that I had an accusation to make, that I knew the
destroyer of my family, and that I required him to exert his whole
authority for the apprehension of the murderer.

The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be
assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall
be spared to discover the villain.”

“I thank you,” replied I; “listen, therefore, to the
deposition that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange that I
should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth
which, however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to
be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood.” My
manner as I thus addressed him was impressive but calm; I had formed in my
own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose
quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled me to life. I now related
my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with
accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.

The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as I continued
he became more attentive and interested; I saw him sometimes shudder with
horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted
on his countenance.

When I had concluded my narration, I said, “This is the being whom I
accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your
whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and hope that
your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those
functions on this occasion.”

This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own
auditor. He had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given
to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was called upon
to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity
returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you
every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to
have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an
animal which can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where
no man would venture to intrude? Besides, some months have elapsed since
the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he
has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.”

“I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit, and if
he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois
and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts; you do not
credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
punishment which is his desert.”

As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
“You are mistaken,” said he. “I will exert myself, and if
it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer
punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have
yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove
impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should
make up your mind to disappointment.”

“That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail. My
revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I
confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My rage
is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turned
loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have
but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life or death, to
his destruction.”

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a frenzy
in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness
which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. But to a Genevan
magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of
devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of
madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child and
reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

“Man,” I cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of
wisdom! Cease; you know not what it is you say.”

I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on
some other mode of action.




Chapter 24


My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone
endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and
allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise
delirium or death would have been my portion.

My first resolution was to quit Geneva for ever; my country, which, when I
was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became
hateful. I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels
which had belonged to my mother, and departed.

And now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. I have
traversed a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships
which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I
have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbs upon
the sandy plain and prayed for death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared
not die and leave my adversary in being.

When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I
might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled,
and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain
what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the
entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father
reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their
graves. Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which
were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the
scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
observer. The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to
cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
mourner.

The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to
rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived,
and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence. I knelt on the grass
and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the
sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the
deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and the
spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who caused this misery,
until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will
preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun
and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my
eyes for ever. And I call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering
ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. Let the cursed
and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now
torments me.”

I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me
that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but
the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance.

I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish
laugh. It rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed
it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by frenzy and have
destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that I
was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known
and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an
audible whisper, “I am satisfied, miserable wretch! You have
determined to live, and I am satisfied.”

I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil
eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone
full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than
mortal speed.

I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task. Guided by a
slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The
blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the fiend
enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I
took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how.

Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I
have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by
this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself,
who feared that if I lost all trace of him I should despair and die,
left some mark to guide me. The snows descended on my head, and I saw
the print of his huge step on the white plain. To you first entering
on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the
least pains which I was destined to endure; I was cursed by some devil
and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good
followed and directed my steps and when I most murmured would suddenly
extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes,
when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast
was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The
fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
I will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had
invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and
I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
few drops that revived me, and vanish.

I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon
generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom
seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
path. I had money with me and gained the friendship of the villagers
by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed,
which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had
provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.

My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during
sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most
miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture. The
spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of
happiness that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of
this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I was
sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep I saw my
friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again I saw the benevolent
countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth’s
voice, and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied by
a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should
come and that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest
friends. What agonising fondness did I feel for them! How did I cling to
their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and
persuade myself that they still lived! At such moments vengeance, that
burned within me, died in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the
destruction of the dæmon more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the
mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious, than as the
ardent desire of my soul.

What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know. Sometimes, indeed, he
left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided
me and instigated my fury. “My reign is not yet
over”—these words were legible in one of these
inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. Follow me; I
seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of
cold and frost, to which I am impassive. You will find near this place, if
you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my
enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable
hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.”

Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee,
miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give up my search
until he or I perish; and then with what ecstasy shall I join my
Elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the
reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!

As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the
cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. The peasants were
shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to
seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to
seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be
procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.

The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. One
inscription that he left was in these words: “Prepare! Your toils
only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter
upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting
hatred.”

My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I
resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support
me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary
of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to the blue seasons of the
south! Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by
its superior wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy when
they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with
rapture the boundary of their toils. I did not weep, but I knelt down
and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in
safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe,
to meet and grapple with him.

Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs and thus
traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. I know not whether the
fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as before I had
daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so that
when I first saw the ocean he was but one day’s journey in advance, and
I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new
courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched
hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said,
had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of
his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter
food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a
numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same
night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his
journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they
conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the
ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.

On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair.
He had escaped me, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless
journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few
of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a
genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea
that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance
returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered
round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey.

I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of
the Frozen Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I
departed from land.

I cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but I have endured
misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution
burning within my heart could have enabled me to support. Immense and
rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often heard
the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But
again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.

By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should guess that
I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction
of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of
despondency and grief from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured
her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery. Once, after
the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the
summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue,
died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye
caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to
discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I
distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known
form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might
not intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was
dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that
oppressed me, I wept aloud.

But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their
dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an
hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible, nor
did I again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short
time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed
perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I
beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within
me.

But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more utterly than I had
ever done before. A ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as
the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous
and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. The wind arose; the sea roared;
and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a
tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished; in a few
minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I was left
drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and
thus preparing for me a hideous death.

In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I
myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw your
vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life.
I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded
at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and
by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in
the direction of your ship. I had determined, if you were going southwards,
still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my
purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which I could pursue
my enemy. But your direction was northwards. You took me on board when my
vigour was exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under my multiplied
hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.

Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the dæmon, allow
me the rest I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do,
swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him
and satisfy my vengeance in his death. And do I dare to ask of you to
undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have undergone?
No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if he should appear, if
the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he
shall not live—swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated
woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent
and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
trust him not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
and fiend-like malice. Hear him not; call on the names of William,
Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched Victor, and
thrust your sword into his heart. I will hover near and direct the
steel aright.

Walton, _in continuation._


August 26th, 17—.


You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not
feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles
mine? Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not continue his
tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with
difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes
were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow
and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his
countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a
tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.

His tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth,
yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me,
and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a
greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations,
however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence!
I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I
endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his
creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable.

“Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your
senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the
world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and do not seek
to increase your own.”

Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history; he asked
to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held
with his enemy. “Since you have preserved my narration,” said
he, “I would not that a mutilated one should go down to
posterity.”

Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest
tale that ever imagination formed. My thoughts and every feeling of my
soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale
and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. I wish to soothe
him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of
every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! The only joy that he can
now know will be when he composes his shattered spirit to peace and
death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and
delirium; he believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his
friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or
excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his
fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a
remote world. This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render
them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.

Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays
unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension. His
eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when he relates
a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love,
without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been in the days
of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems
to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.

“When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for
some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a coolness
of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. This sentiment of
the worth of my nature supported me when others would have been oppressed,
for I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that
might be useful to my fellow creatures. When I reflected on the work I had
completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensitive and rational
animal, I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But
this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now
serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes
are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am
chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I
conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man. Even now I cannot
recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. I trod
heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea
of their effects. From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and a lofty
ambition; but how am I sunk! Oh! My friend, if you had known me as I once
was, you would not recognise me in this state of degradation. Despondency
rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell,
never, never again to rise.”

Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have
sought one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert
seas I have found such a one, but I fear I have gained him only to know his
value and lose him. I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea.

“I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so
miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh
affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any
man be to me as Clerval was, or any woman another Elizabeth? Even
where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence,
the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our
minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. They know our
infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified,
are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more
certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. A sister or a
brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend,
however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be
contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only
through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever
I am, the soothing voice of my Elizabeth and the conversation of
Clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. They are dead, and but one
feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I
were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive
utility to my fellow creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. But
such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to whom I
gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die.”

My beloved Sister,

September 2d.


I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever
doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit
it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape and
threaten every moment to crush my vessel. The brave fellows whom I
have persuaded to be my companions look towards me for aid, but I have
none to bestow. There is something terribly appalling in our
situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is
terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered
through me. If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.

And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will not hear of my
destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and
you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My
beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is,
in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a husband
and lovely children; you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so!

My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He
endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession
which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have
happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite
of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the sailors feel
the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he
rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these
vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the
resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory; each day of
expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny
caused by this despair.

September 5th.


A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is
highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot
forbear recording it.

We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger
of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, and many of
my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of
desolation. Frankenstein has daily declined in health; a feverish fire
still glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly
roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent
lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny.
This morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance of my friend—his
eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly—I was roused by half
a dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin. They
entered, and their leader addressed me. He told me that he and his
companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation
to me to make me a requisition which, in justice, I could not refuse.
We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they
feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free
passage be opened, I should be rash enough to continue my voyage and
lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted
this. They insisted, therefore, that I should engage with a solemn
promise that if the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my
course southwards.

This speech troubled me. I had not despaired, nor had I yet conceived
the idea of returning if set free. Yet could I, in justice, or even in
possibility, refuse this demand? I hesitated before I answered, when
Frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly
to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards the men,
he said,

“What do you mean? What do you demand of your captain? Are you, then,
so easily turned from your design? Did you not call this a glorious
expedition? “And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was
smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and
terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth
and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and
these you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this
was it an honourable undertaking. You were hereafter to be hailed as the
benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men
who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now,
behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first
mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content
to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and
peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm
firesides. Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come
thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat merely to prove
yourselves cowards. Oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your
purposes and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your
hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it
shall not. Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace
marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered and
who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”

He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed
in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can
you wonder that these men were moved? They looked at one another and were
unable to reply. I spoke; I told them to retire and consider of what had
been said, that I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously
desired the contrary, but that I hoped that, with reflection, their courage
would return.

They retired and I turned towards my friend, but he was sunk in languor and
almost deprived of life.

How all this will terminate, I know not, but I had rather die than
return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my
fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never
willingly continue to endure their present hardships.

September 7th.


The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back
ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess
to bear this injustice with patience.

September 12th.


It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of utility
and glory; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to detail these
bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while I am wafted
towards England and towards you, I will not despond.

September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard
at a distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction. We were
in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief
attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in
such a degree that he was entirely confined to his bed. The ice cracked
behind us and was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from
the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly
free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native
country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them,
loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the
cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they
will soon return to England.”

“Do you, then, really return?”

“Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them
unwillingly to danger, and I must return.”

“Do so, if you will; but I will not. You may give up your purpose, but
mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not. I am weak, but
surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with
sufficient strength.” Saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the
bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.

It was long before he was restored, and I often thought that life was
entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with
difficulty and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a composing
draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime he
told me that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.

His sentence was pronounced, and I could only grieve and be patient. I sat
by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and I thought he slept; but
presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near,
said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that I shall
soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think
not, Walton, that in the last moments of my existence I feel that burning
hatred and ardent desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself
justified in desiring the death of my adversary. During these last days I
have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I find it blamable.
In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature and was
bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and
well-being. This was my duty, but there was another still paramount to
that. My duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to
my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or
misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did right in refusing, to
create a companion for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity
and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction
beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I
know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself that he may
render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction was
mine, but I have failed. When actuated by selfish and vicious motives, I
asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and I renew this request now,
when I am only induced by reason and virtue.

“Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil
this task; and now that you are returning to England, you will have
little chance of meeting with him. But the consideration of these
points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, I
leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near
approach of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for I
may still be misled by passion.

“That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in
other respects, this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the
only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of
the beloved dead flit before me, and I hasten to their arms. Farewell,
Walton! Seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it
be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
science and discoveries. Yet why do I say this? I have myself been
blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.”

His voice became fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhausted by his
effort, he sank into silence. About half an hour afterwards he
attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and
his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed
away from his lips.

Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely extinction of this
glorious spirit? What can I say that will enable you to understand the
depth of my sorrow? All that I should express would be inadequate and
feeble. My tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of
disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may there find
consolation.

I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight; the
breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again there
is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine.
Good night, my sister.

Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy with the
remembrance of it. I hardly know whether I shall have the power to detail
it; yet the tale which I have recorded would be incomplete without this
final and wonderful catastrophe.

I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable
friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to
describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its
proportions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long
locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and
apparent texture like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my
approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung
towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of
such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and
endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
I called on him to stay.

He paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning towards the
lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and
every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some
uncontrollable passion.

“That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my
crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its
close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it
avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee
by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he cannot answer
me.”

His voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to
me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his
enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I
approached this tremendous being; I dared not again raise my eyes to his
face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I
attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The monster
continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I
gathered resolution to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion.

“Your repentance,” I said, “is now superfluous. If you
had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse
before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity,
Frankenstein would yet have lived.”

“And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “Do you think that I was then
dead to agony and remorse? He,” he continued, pointing to the corpse,
“he suffered not in the consummation of the deed. Oh! Not the
ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the
lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me
on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. Think you that the
groans of Clerval were music to my ears? My heart was fashioned to be
susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice
and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without
torture such as you cannot even imagine.

“After the murder of Clerval I returned to Switzerland, heart-broken
and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; I
abhorred myself. But when I discovered that he, the author at once of
my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for
happiness, that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the
indulgence of which I was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter
indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. I
recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished. I
knew that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was the
slave, not the master, of an impulse which I detested yet could not
disobey. Yet when she died! Nay, then I was not miserable. I had
cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my
despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no
choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had willingly
chosen. The completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable
passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!”

I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I called
to mind what Frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and
persuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my
friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “Wretch!” I said.
“It is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you
have made. You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are
consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend!
If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would
he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you
feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
from your power.”

“Oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being.
“Yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to
be the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of
virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being
overflowed, that I wished to be participated. But now that virtue has
become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am
content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when I die, I am
well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. Once
my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. Once
I falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would
love me for the excellent qualities which I was capable of unfolding. I was
nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. But now crime has
degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no
malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the
frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same
creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent
visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is even so; the
fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man
had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone.

“You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my
crimes and his misfortunes. But in the detail which he gave you of them
he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured
wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did
not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever ardent and craving; still
I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spurned. Was there no
injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all
humankind sinned against me? Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his
friend from his door with contumely? Why do you not execrate the rustic
who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? Nay, these are virtuous
and immaculate beings! I, the miserable and the abandoned, am an
abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my
blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.

“But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and
the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to
death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing. I have
devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and
admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that
irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but
your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself. I look on the
hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the
imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands
will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.

“Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My work
is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to
consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done,
but it requires my own. Do not think that I shall be slow to perform this
sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me
thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall
collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its
remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would
create such another as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the
agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet
unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no
more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no
longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light,
feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my
happiness. Some years ago, when the images which this world affords first
opened upon me, when I felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the
rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to
me, I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by
crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in
death?

“Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these
eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive
and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better
satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was not so; thou
didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater wretchedness;
and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think
and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than
that which I feel. Blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to
thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my
wounds until death shall close them for ever.

“But soon,” he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “I
shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning
miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and
exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration
will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit
will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
Farewell.”

He sprang from the cabin-window as he said this, upon the ice raft
which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by the waves and
lost in darkness and distance.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRANKENSTEIN; OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


eeThe Project Gutenberg eBook, The Hearth-Stone, by Samuel Osgood


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Hearth-Stone
       Thoughts upon Home-Life in Our Cities


Author: Samuel Osgood



Release Date: September 26, 2011  [eBook #37540]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEARTH-STONE***


E-text prepared by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (http://www.archive.org/)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/hearthstonethoug00osgoiala





THE HEARTH-STONE:

Thoughts upon Home-Life in Our Cities.

by

SAMUEL OSGOOD,

Author of "Studies in Christian Biography,"
"God with Men, or Footprints of Providential Leaders," &C.


      "This is the famous stone
        That turneth all to gold:
  For that which God doth touch and own
        Cannot for less be told."
                                 GEORGE HERBERT.







New-York:
D. Appleton and Company,
200 Broadway.
London: 10 Little Britain.
1854.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1858 by
D. Appleton And Company,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern
District of New-York.





PREFACE.


These thoughts are published for the same reason that led the author from
time to time to put them upon paper,--a wish to meet a want in the sphere
of the affections rather than to claim any honor in the kingdom of ideas.
Wherever important questions have been at issue he has not avoided them,
however conspicuous or controverted; but the volume aims to breathe a
kindly spirit above the reach of sect and party. He is not ashamed to have
his style show something of the habit of his profession, and to use, in
part, ideas that he has expressed in the lyceum and the pulpit in a
different form.

It will be seen that the several subjects connect themselves more or less
closely with a year's life in the household, and that the light which
cheers the whole twelvemonth is kindled on the hearth-stone at Christmas
and New Year.

The state of things in our American cities is now so peculiar, so marked
by privilege and peril, that no earnest plea for home affections and
virtues can be wholly thrown away. To dedicate books to conspicuous names
is a custom now almost obsolete, and if the Author were to venture upon
any dedication of this little volume it would read somewhat thus:--

  TO THOSE WHO HAVE EVER LOVED HOME,
  AND WHO WISH TO LOVE IT ALWAYS.

NEW-YORK, _Oct. 22, 1853_.




CONTENTS.


                                  Page

  HOME VIEWS OF AMERICAN LIFE        7

  THE IDEAL OF WOMANHOOD            27

  THE HOPE OF CHILDHOOD             45

  NEW THINGS                        63

  SOLICITUDE OF PARENTS             79

  REVERENCE IN CHILDREN             91

  BROTHERS AND SISTERS             105

  MARRIAGE                         119

  OUR FRIENDS                      135

  MASTER AND SERVANT               151

  THE DIVINE GUEST                 167

  THE ORPHAN                       183

  THE YOUNG PRODIGAL               199

  EDUCATION OF DAUGHTERS           213

  BUSINESS AND THE HEART           233

  SUMMER IN THE COUNTRY            249

  RETURNING HOME                   265

  THE CHURCH IN THE HOUSE          277




Home Views of American Life.




HOME VIEWS OF AMERICAN LIFE.


What day of all the year gives an American a happier sense of his civil
and domestic blessings, than the old feast of the ingathering--the
time-hallowed Thanksgiving? Once more it has come round; and our pen is
disposed to catch a little of its genial temper before the hearth-stone.

This is peculiarly the home festival of our people, and throughout all the
States of our republic it is affectionately cherished. As such, resting
upon a good old precedent, it appeals to a permanent want, and gains
interest with years. The character of the day has somewhat changed, and
the domestic element in its uses preponderates far over the
ecclesiastical. Yet much of the old feeling remains, and thousands gather
in the churches, all the better prepared by the hour of worship, for the
hours of fireside enjoyment. Large scope is usually given the preacher at
this time, and many a timid man ventures upon bold themes, quite free to
take the political, or social, or philanthropic, or ecclesiastical view of
the country or the world, as he may choose. The preacher may not
complain, then, of the essayist for taking something of the same liberty,
and trenching a little upon the prerogative of the pulpit. It is surely
not amiss to open this series of discursive papers with some thoughts upon
our home blessings, upon God's hand in giving them, and our work in
spreading them.

Our home blessings! Take first the most obvious view of them. Consider the
plenty that abounds. I speak not of the few affluent, but of the great
majority who enjoy the common lot. What abundance in their homes! Look at
the household of any unpretending citizen, and say what realm of earth,
what domain of nature, does not send its treasures thither? The orchards,
the fields, the pastures, the hills, the rivers, the mines, the oceans,
bring their tribute to the fireside. From the shores of the Mediterranean
come the olive, the grape, the orange, the fig, the date. The farther
Indies send their fragrant herbs and sweet spices. The repast of a frugal
family is rarely set forth without offerings from all quarters of the
globe. The cottager's lamp, that burns by night, is fed with oil from the
Arctic zone. The light of day shines through clear crystal, that shows the
perfection of the arts, and the cheapness of their most beautiful
products. In humble abodes the wonders of manufacture appear. Rich cotton
stuffs tell of the affluence of the Southern soil and the skill of the
Northern artisan. Luxuries, of old the prerogative of princes, are now
familiar things. The silks of France and Italy are worn by the wife and
daughters of the farmer and the mechanic. I will not try to describe the
mansions of the wealthy, although these, when graced by refinement, and
exalted by piety and charity, may give impressive views of the ample
bounty of Providence. It is better to contemplate the plenty within reach
of the common lot. Among what people, in what age, has the common lot been
so favored as with us? When in the earth's history have so many persons
had reason to be grateful at the feast of the ingathering as now? We boast
not of great banquets, in which the luxury of the few is wrung from the
misery of the many. We speak not of pearls dissolved in the wine cup, and
the price of cities thus quaffed at a draught. Our country, prouder than
the empire of a Caligula, or a Cleopatra, can point to the households of
her people, and in the amount of their combined blessings pity the poverty
of the builders of the Coliseum or the Pyramids. Other lands may have
prouder palaces and more princely fortunes. None can show so many favored
homes. Go to thy home, and tell how great things the Lord, the giver of
the harvests, hath done for thee in its plenty.

Consider too its peace as well as its plenty. No wars disturb it, nor
rumors of war. No civil strifes threaten its tranquillity. No tyrannical
powers intrude upon its freedom. Every household is better guarded than
any feudal castle. Equal laws make it more impregnable than walls or
moats. Public opinion is a host of defence stronger than an army with
banners. We do not indeed forget our own imperfections and failings. We do
not forget that millions are in bondage in our land, and that if they have
homes in favored cases, they have them by their owners' mercy, not by
their own legal right. Yet to-day the slave is somewhat a sharer in his
master's bounty, and this feast, that carries our thoughts back to the
time of the great Hebrew Exodus, allows us to enjoy the liberty that God
has bestowed upon us and these free States, and forbids us to despair of
the redemption of any of the races yet held in bondage. It is something to
boast of, that slavery is the exception now among civilized nations,
instead of being, as of old, the universal law for the weaker from the
stronger. For ourselves, we disclaim all share in its origin and
continuance, deeming it to be a local misfortune to be deplored, not a
national institution to be honored.

As a nation, we are lovers of equal law. The sober thought, nurtured by
the best experience of the Atlantic States, finds its response in the new
regions of the farthest West, and not even the mad thirst for gold has
made the restless people on our Pacific coast forgetful of their
birthright of liberty and law. A mighty habit of civil order has entered
into our national life. The strongholds of order are in our homes. There
each man finds the motive that leads him to resist alike the disorganizer
and the invader. Thence we derive the assurance of the best of standing
armies; for men that have households to defend, will be as little inclined
to yield to hostile invasion as to destructive revolution. How peaceful
our homes! As mighty is the power nurtured within them that makes them so.

Go home, and in addition to the blessings of plenty and of peace, consider
the means of intellectual and spiritual culture there. The laboring man
may own a better library than a prince or prelate of the olden time. For a
pittance trifling even to him, he may have tidings daily from all quarters
of his own country, and from foreign lands. His children bring with them
more learning from the common school, than would have sufficed of old to
constitute the wisdom of a sage. For a less sum than the tippler gives for
the draught that fevers his blood and crazes his brain, the artisan may
adorn his house with choice works of art, through the cheap and beautiful
products of the engraver's skill; and thus the beautiful from the hand of
man and of God, may refine and cheer the common lot. Music, that voice of
the beautiful arts, is becoming a familiar blessing, and a part of
ordinary education. Groups of children by the fireside, and in the field
and garden, sometimes at the corners of the streets or in their walk home
from school, are heard singing their songs and hymns together, thus
exchanging discord for peace, quarrels for harmony. Even the utilities
that are becoming the custom of our time, have their refining and exalting
influences. The light that streams up in our streets and houses, is the
handmaid of a light brighter than its own. The pure water that gushes up
in so many homes, has connections far more substantial than fanciful with
the living water of the divine word. Facts enough show that human
civilization needs, in the most literal sense, its water-baptism before
its spirit-baptism can be realized.

The spirit is not lost sight of even in this utilitarian age. In religion
the means of culture have their consummation. Within every home, in any
degree worthy the name, Christianity proves its power, whether the gospel
be nominally professed or not. The very unity of the family comes from
Him, who has decreed the purity of the home by his fundamental law, and
bound parents to each other and their offspring by a tie at once of
principle and affection. Greater still the blessing where Christianity is
fully known and practised in its truths and graces, where the pleasant
fireside is a consecrated altar, and the earthly mansion opens ever into
the heavenly.

Consider then the blessings of our homes--their plenty, their peace, their
means of intellectual and spiritual culture.

Consider them well, and moreover, own God's hand in them.

God is Creator and Lord of nature. From him comes the plenty of our homes.
Man does not create, he finds the bounties of his lot. His utmost industry
and skill but find the blessings stored up for him. We may look upon the
kingdom of nature from many points of view. We may consider the organism
of the heavens, the great periods of the earth's apparent formation, the
influence of climate and position upon the history of nations, and see
God's hand in natural laws. But what view of the universe is more sublime,
and at the same time more touching, than that from the home? The heavens
themselves help in keeping it upon its foundation by the force of the
great law of attraction, whilst every element and domain of the earth
conspires to give it blessing. Tenderly indeed does the Lord of this
great Cosmos care for the dwellings of men. His love looks down from the
stars of heaven that shine into the casement, and is reflected from the
little flower that blooms in the garden, or cheers the sick man's chamber.
To God, Creator and Preserver, be our thanksgiving.

God is in history, and to his hand we trace the peace of our homes. Our
familiar social blessings are not the exhalations of a day, but the growth
of ages. No clearer or more striking view of the development of the Divine
plans in the course of events can be given than the domestic view. All
that God has done for man as an individual soul or as a social being, thus
is made to appear. There is a providence in the development of liberty,
and so too in the progress of law, and in the combination of them both in
a true social order. What better symbol of their combination and proof of
providential guidance than the peaceful home? How vast the providential
agencies instrumental in framing that statute-book which, next to the
Bible, is the safeguard of the dwelling, and which bands the whole nation
together in defence of every citizen's right,--the constitution of our
country, to us the bequest of ages, guided by an arm mightier than man's,
and to issues beyond his dream. In two grand lines of influence it brings
to every household the co-ordinate powers which, from quarters once
antagonistic, unite in a true civilization. It guarantees to every family
the liberty so dearly prized by the old parent races of the Germanic
North, whilst it gathers them into a great nation under the guidance of
that law which was the bequest of the Roman empire to the world. These
and all the leading lines of history meet in the home, and in them we own
God's guiding hand. From the East with the Star of true empire, came the
benign power that united these two mighty agencies of our civilization.
Surely it was the religion of Jesus that wedded Roman law to Germanic
liberty, and laid the foundations of constitutional freedom and domestic
peace. Blessed indeed was that bridal, and the living Word that hallowed
the union still dispenses the blessing, and calls the children of its
lineage to a future brightening unto the perfect day.

The Constitution, and above it, the Bible! In this is the Word of God, and
the way of life, present and eternal. It is the chief agency in
intellectual and spiritual culture, giving the mind its true aim, the soul
its rightful dignity, life its highest grace. Where the Bible is held in
honor, the home has purity and elevation. Interesting indeed is the
ecclesiastical view of Christianity. For its priests and temples we have
no words of disparagement. Yet we most honor the church in honoring the
home, for where the family is most blessed, there the church is most
worthy. The history of the gospel neither ends nor begins with that of
cathedrals and priesthoods. Since God laid the foundation of domestic
purity on Sinai, since Jesus bore the grace of the gospel to the homes of
Judah and Galilee, the brightest illustrations of the beauty and power of
religion have been given in abodes far less stately than the temple, or
the cloister, or the palace. The end is not yet, not yet developed are our
grounds of gratitude to the Heavenly Father for the gospel in the
blessings of our homes. God's love in giving them, we own and adore.

Responsibility walks ever hand in hand with privilege, and human duty
follows in the path of Divine goodness. No topic of graver import can be
urged now, than that of the obligation of Christian people to diffuse
domestic blessings. This topic carries us into the heart of the momentous
social questions of our age. The Christian should have his answer ready,
an answer too which considers all the needs of man's being, and respects
alike his physical and moral wants.

The most obvious, certainly the most obtrusive evil in the homes of the
wretched, is poverty. The love of God, who has given for man's use the
earth and its fulness, the gospel of Him who fed the hungry and healed the
sick, teach us to look with tender interest upon the poor, and try to
redeem them from a lot as full of temptation as of suffering. Of public
and private almsgiving, I will not speak now, important in their places as
these are. There is a need far greater than these can alleviate, and I
cannot dwell upon them here, pertinent as it would be to urge the worth of
those benevolent schemes that aim to provide comfortable homes for the
poor, and commodious baths and wash-houses in their neighborhoods. These
charities appeal to enlightened self-interest, as well as humanity, and,
if we will not ask in kindness who is my neighbor, we shall ask in fear,
either of pestilent disease or aggressive violence. The springs of human
energy are to be moved as never before, and the wretched are to be made to
help themselves as never before; or our civilization, certainly European
civilization, will stand on the brink of an abyss fearful as at the
dissolution of the old Roman Empire. Poverty has, in some cases, made an
alliance that gives omens of a conspiracy worse than Catiline's, and, with
cunning quickened by want, sharpens its knife upon the stone which has
fallen to its lot instead of bread,--bent upon living by destruction, if
it is not taught to live by producing. It is an indisputable fact that in
many countries the majority are so ignorant and inefficient, that the
whole annual product of the land is not sufficient to provide for their
decent wants. The theorists of France, who have been losing their wits in
the airy heights of pantheistic socialism, hoping to find a way to plenty,
other than the old way of labor and frugality, may well remember the
answer of the admirable political economist, Chevalier, and look for
plenty rather in making property more desirable than less so, and giving
the whole people the desire and the opportunity of profitable labor. The
material product of France at the highest estimate, he declares, does not
exceed ten thousand millions of francs, and thus at this estimate, an
equal division would give each person 78 centimes, or about 14-1/2 cents
per day, for food, lodging, clothing, education, enjoyment. Thus, he adds,
even upon the supposition of an absolute distribution of products, France
is not in a condition to give the majority of her children a tolerable
subsistence. Of course millions of citizens now come far short of this
miserable pittance. What is the inference? Certainly the productive
industry of the nation must be increased, that there may be plenty in the
home. Let more wealth be produced, and each man be put in a position to
get a due share of it, and the misery is alleviated, and plenty in the
household stops the spirit of reckless revolution, and gives the spirit of
peace, and motive and time for the higher aims of life.

What shall increase the national wealth and distribute it with due justice
in the homes of the people? Communism? Not so; for destroying the very
idea of property is not the way to increase the aggregate of property. Who
will work, if his gains are not secured to him and his children? Who will
plant the grain or the vine, if the field or the vineyard is to be an open
pasture, which any idler may waste? The way to enlarge and distribute
wealth is rather to strengthen the foundations of property, and give all
motive to earn their share of it by labor, temperance, and economy.

Here we believe that every nation is bound to apply the force of law to
reach the root of the difficulty. I am not proposing to discuss the
various projects set on foot to insure the more equable distribution of
property--such as the homestead laws of some of our own States, or the
measures in train to redeem the peasants of Ireland from their slavish
penury. Very certain it is, that we need to watch jealously the
distribution of the public lands, to keep them from the grasp of avarice
and intrigue, and to hold out the utmost inducements to actual settlers to
till and own the soil. It is interesting to find that upon this one point,
the most sanguine of the Land Reformers have much countenance from the
most judicious conservatives, and the wary sagacity of Webster himself
saw no peril in securing a part of the national domain to every
persevering cultivator. It is also interesting to observe that, whilst the
ultraist advocates of a protective tariff have signally lowered their
tone, some of the most earnest advocates of free trade, as the only
philosophical theory, are favoring such judicious protective duties as
shall tend to bring the producer and consumer near together, check the
wastefulness of needless transportation, and thus prepare the way for the
final triumph of free trade by the action of associative industry. All
such expedients however good in themselves, are of no avail apart from a
broad and energetic policy that meets the difficulty in the face. We mean
the education of the entire people in schools open to all the children of
the nation. Thus we reach the home--thus we open the eyes and quicken the
energies of the people--thus we enlarge the products of intelligent labor,
and guard against the worst evils of human inequality. Thus we open the
way for a better social science and organization, and favor the associated
enterprise, which is the best safeguard against communism. The educated,
industrious population will take their own lot into their own hands, and
by practising a truer philosophy of accommodation, they will apply in
their home economy something of that wise policy which has been left too
exclusively to the use of the favored few. The architecture of the house,
and the arrangements of the neighborhood, will show the influence. Whilst
gardens, filled with rare exotics, and stately mansions adorned with the
graces of art, may still be the prerogative of affluence; we shall see the
comfortable and tasteful houses of the unpretending classes ranged about
pleasant and salubrious squares, with all the appliances of health and
order, usually deemed beyond their means. For my own part, I know no more
cheering aspect of our country and our age, than that which is furnished
by some of those villages, which have been built up in the vicinity of our
great cities by associations of mechanics, securing to each man an
independent home. The fact that a set of men, educated in our free
schools, and with no means but the fruit of their own honest toil, provide
such homes for themselves, must give a benevolent observer more genuine
satisfaction, and more encouraging hope, than any of the proudest triumphs
of capital, whether a palace in the city or a palace upon the water. It is
not out of place here to say, that the highest honor will belong to him
among our architects, who most skilfully plans a model house for the many
of us who have moderate or slender means--a house that shall for the least
outlay best secure the retirement, the refinement, and the health that
make a true home. Honor to the science that has busied itself with this
problem, and to the capital which has tried to carry the solution into
practice thus far!

A true system of popular education in connection with our laws regarding
inheritance, is raising up a generation which will not long be ignorant of
the power of intelligence, industry, and friendly accommodation, in
developing a social policy beyond the reach of the fanatical theorists of
the old world, who have impoverished the nations in their promise of
plenty, and shed blood in rivers in the name of fraternity. The great mass
of the people, it is to be hoped, will continue to have that home feeling,
which is as mighty in conservation as in defence. We shall remain as we
are in the best sense of the term--the most conservative nation on the
face of the earth. That race of Ishmaelites, the homeless, the desperate,
the Bedouins of civilization, whose hand is against every man's, whose
delight is in commotion, whose life is in destruction, whose hope is in
the despair of others, will disappear, kept down in their true place, or
what is better, transformed into intelligent, industrious citizens, lovers
of the state, the church, and the home.

Thus do we commend the worth of industry and the education upon which it
rests, in diffusing the household blessings that we enjoy. But we build
upon a sandy foundation without a positive religious basis. Upon that the
household rests for its primary dependence, and they that sustain and
practise Christian principles are benefactors alike of the dwelling and
the church. Not merely among the wretched and ignorant does the gospel
utter its rebukes, and urge its duties in reference to this point. It is
in quarters far different that the great wrong has been done, and a great
work is demanded. Errors of principle as errors of life, have power from
the station that renders them conspicuous, or the refinement that clothes
them with grace. Of errors of life in those who give to dissipation the
prestige of eloquence, and throw the grace of splendor around vices that
strike at the foundations of domestic purity, I will not now undertake to
treat. A passing word, however, upon certain modes of thinking and
talking, which sow the seeds of those vices in quarters the most opposite.
The pantheistic theories that confound all moral distinctions by
confounding the distinction between God and nature, and make of passion a
devotion, by calling all enthusiasm inspiration, have had their origin
chiefly among secluded dreamers, bent, perhaps, upon amusing leisure by
reckless speculation. Idly as the summer winds that float the thistle-down
on their breath, have they vented their speculations, until amazed that
their own fields and their neighbor's have been sown with tares by these
gossamer voyagers. Wherever pantheism goes, there license follows in its
train. More perilous than atheism, because more alluring, it defies
passion, and in the name of inspiration degrades man to the brute. It
blasts life with its torrid fires, as atheism freezes by its polar cold.
In the extremes of society--the affluent and the wretched--this tendency
is found, alike in its speculative and practical form, in its denial of
personal responsibility, its enthroning of indulgence in the place of
discipline. Many a stately home is desolate, many an humble dwelling
miserable, because the God of the gospel is denied, and that
uncompromising law which secures the home its purity, peace and power, has
been broken.

Chief among the blessings of the household, then, we name the gospel. It
gives the crown to industry and education. Crowning industry and education
thus alike by our personal bearing, our public policy, we give as we have
received, and acknowledge our duty, as we own God's love in our domestic
blessings.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bring near to ourselves now, in its personal and cheering aspect, the
topic before us. To God, the Lord of nature, Ruler of events, Father of
our spirits, be all the glory. Be his love the spring of our humanity. In
the bounty of our hand, in the bounty of an example personal and domestic,
which in itself is a benefaction, in an enlarged public, nay Christian
spirit, let us freely give as we have received; that plenty, peace, piety,
may cheer the dwellings of men and regenerate the world. This day be our
thanksgiving at once a prayer of faith and a vow of humanity. It is the
old home festival of our fathers that we are to keep. Whose heart does not
yearn with sacred remembrances and affections to-day? The emigrant, the
traveller, the sailor, all turn their thoughts homeward as the day
approaches, and lament that their steps cannot follow their desires. Under
sunny skies, amid the balmy gales and luscious fruits of the tropics, the
wanderer yearns to cross the familiar threshold, and our bleak North in
her wintry robe is dearer than Italy or the Indies. Many an exile has
feelings that speak in such simple words as these:

  "My father's bones, New England,
    Sleep in thy hallowed ground,
  My living kin, New England,
    In thy precious paths are found;
  And though my body dwelleth here,
    And my weary feet here roam,
  My spirit and my hopes are still
    In thee, my own loved home."

Yet distance does not rob even the exile of all the blessings, and he
knows that he is not forgotten. Families separated throughout the year,
now gather together. Sons and daughters return to the parental fireside
and are children again. The patriarchal times, surely among all of the
Pilgrim race, and not among them alone, come back. The father stands as
head and minister of the family. Many a happy band of children rise up and
call the mother blessed. The absent are not forgotten--the departed are
tenderly remembered--seats vacant at the table have occupants in the
hearts of the survivors.

It is well--it is well--this home-festival of the ingathering. God gives
the abounding harvest, and our fellow-men are to us the stewards of his
bounty. Devoutly to Him, kindly to them, let the hours pass. Health to the
absent, a tear for the departed--a smile for the present--good will to all
on earth--glory to God in the highest.

Let the young rejoice, and the old be young again. Let memory solemnize us
by her images of scenes and days gone by, whilst hope cheers us by
auspicious promises of the future on earth, and of the heavenly mansions,
the soul's eternal home.

_Thanksgiving Day._




The Ideal of Womanhood.




THE IDEAL OF WOMANHOOD.


It is the Eve of Christmas, and above the cheerful family circle that
gathers about the hearth, the faces of the holy family look benignly down,
and Mary's own smile seems to brighten the genial light. All surely must
call that mother blessed, who celebrate the birth of the Holy Child. The
Angel of the annunciation seems always to be speaking anew in the anthem
of the Nativity as if the voice which told Mary of her high destiny
celebrated also its fulfilment, and the "Hail Mary" were but the prelude
of the "Glory to God in the Highest."

Our thought this evening turns upon the Mother of Christ, as illustrating
the ideal of woman and the sources of her power. In the manger at
Bethlehem, the mother and child were together--together during the years
of preparation for the public ministry--together at the cross. We honor
both in honoring either. Especially in calling Mary blessed, do we honor
Christ, for we remember not merely what she was to him, but what he has
been to her and her sex and her race.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us look at the subject from our own point of view, nor try to put on
the mask of affected sentiment or to stand on the stilts of borrowed
dogmas. There is much beauty and power in the Catholic notions of the
Blessed Virgin, but they are not our convictions. The sweetest hymns in
the Breviary are in her praise, and her heavenly face has been the chief
charm of Catholic art, else altogether too grim with spectral monks and
ghostly confessors. This one fact it is most interesting to remark, that
as Christianity was divested of its genial and humane graces, and our
Saviour himself was removed from the personal sympathies of men by a faith
too forgetful of his humanity in vindicating his divinity, the affections
of Christians sought in the Blessed Mother the solace denied them by
prevalent views of the Divine Son. As the monkish spirit grew darker, the
face of Mary beamed more brightly. The age that embodied its terrors in
the "Dies Irae," breathed its tenderness in the "Stabat Mater," the
exquisite hymn whose authorship, strange to say, has been with show of
reason ascribed to the most thorough-going of the Popes, Innocent the
Third, the man who dared to put England under an interdict. It is not for
such reasons that we are moved to speak of Mary now. We are not oppressed
by a religion that so crushes the natural affections and rebukes the
domestic feelings, that we need to look for solace to one taken
arbitrarily from her place among women and invoked as Queen of Heaven,
above all saints and angels, next to God. Looking upon our homes, so
pleasant and so genial with woman's graces and children's gladness, we
prefer to say the "Hail Mary" as the gospel gives it, and not as the
priest has understood it. We can say, "Blessed art thou _among_
women"--_among_ them, not _above_ them--among them to illustrate their
mission from God, their work on earth--their part in heaven.

       *       *       *       *       *

Think of Mary first as illustrating true womanhood in its mission from
God. Fathers and sons, as well as mothers and daughters, think. In our
notions of education, society, reform, we are all afloat unless we start
with right ideas; and whence are they but from the Eternal Mind. We know
God as he reveals himself, and creation in its highest aspects reveals the
thought of God. The Divine Being is Self-Existent, Almighty, All-wise,
Ever-blessed, dwelling in light and love unspeakable. But the moment that
we pass from the contemplation of his attributes to the survey of his
works, we see every where partial manifestations of his fulness. Only as
we bring together the various elements and beings of nature, do we
comprehend the universe as expressing the mind of God. Throughout the
whole we observe a law of duality, a harmony of contrasts, the two
parallel footprints in the majestic march of Him who is the infinite
Wisdom and Love. We see this form of development from the lowest to the
highest plane of nature--in the affinities of the gases--in the strange
and mighty forces of electricity and magnetism--in the rays of light--in
the kingdom of plants--in the animated kingdom. In the human race it has
its fullest expression. There the Most High has left most clearly the
image of himself, and recorded the might and the loveliness of his own
attributes. To the one sex he has given, in largest measure, strength,--to
the other, beauty; to the one, aggressive force--to the other, winning
affections--to the one, the palm in the empire of thought--to the other,
the palm in the empire of feeling. We need not pursue the parallel, nor
rebuke the folly of those who would make the line of separation too sharp,
and deny heart to man or wisdom to woman, forgetting that in man thought
should be pervaded with feeling, and in woman feeling should be guided by
thought. It is enough to look to Mary as she stood in the hour of her joy,
and listen to what she said, who has been called beyond any other of her
sex, to be their benefactor and interpreter:--

  My soul doth magnify the Lord,
  And my spirit doth rejoice in God, my Saviour,
  For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden;
  For behold! from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Various ages may have various degrees of culture, and in knowledge and
accomplishment the daughters of Christendom may now far surpass those
taught in the simpler homes of Israel. Yet where among those favored with
education or gifted with genius, shall we find a better interpreter of
womanhood in its mission from God, than that trusting Hebrew in her filial
faith and unwavering devotion. Of her, the Aspasias proud of the society
of sages and orators, might learn that there is a faith passing knowledge,
and a purity more refining than any literary taste; from her the Cornelias
might learn of a kingdom greater than that to which they vowed their sons;
from her the Sapphos might hear of a vision beyond that of any
impassioned fancy; and the Cleopatras of a gem brighter than any in their
crown. Her soul attuned to devotion by the Psalms of her great ancestor,
David, and inflamed with hope by the visions of prophets, and schooled to
patient charity by the choicest examples of the mothers in Israel, she
stands at the centre of Providential history, receiving from the former
ages their mantle of honor, and transmitting it to the new ages enriched
with a divine grace, destined to brighten with time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of Mary's life and work, few particulars are given--but those few are
expressive of her whole character. She who kept her faithful watch on the
night of the nativity, never belied the promise of that time. With mingled
solicitude and reverence, tenderness and fortitude, she guarded her child,
marked the gradual rising of the consciousness of Divinity within him, and
waited between hope and fear for the development of his mysterious life.

One of the most gifted women of our age, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, thus
portrays Mary's feelings as she looked upon her child sleeping:

  "Sleep, sleep, mine Holy One.
    *       *       *       *
  I am not proud--meek angels, put ye on
  New meeknesses to hear such utterance rest
  On mortal lips, 'I am not proud'--_not proud_!
  Albeit in my flesh God sent His Son,
  Albeit over Him my head is bowed,
  As others bow before Him, still mine heart,
  Bows lower then their knees! O centuries
  That roll, in vision, your futurities
        My grave athwart!
  Whose murmurs seem to reach me while I keep
        Watch o'er this sleep!
  Say of me as the Heavenly said, 'Thou art
  The blessedest of women!' blessedest,
  Not holiest, not noblest--no high name,
  Whose height misplaced may pierce me like a shame,
  When I sit meek in heaven!--
        For me--for me--
  I often wandered forth, more child than maiden,
  Among the lonely hills of Galilee,
  Whose summits looked heaven-laden!
  Listening to silentness, that seemed to be
  God's voice, so soft, yet strong--so fain to press
  Upon my heart, as Heaven did on the height,--
  And waken up its shadows by a light,
  And show its vileness by a holiness!
  Then I knelt down, as silent as the night,
        Too self-renounced for fears;
  Raising my small face to the boundless blue,
  Whose stars did mix and tremble in my tears!
  God heard _them_ falling often--with his dew."

Think of the lot of Christ, and remember how closely another heart beat in
unison with his heart--how nearly parallel her life ran with his life.
Pass from the manger to the Cross, and those two scenes are enough to
suggest the outlines of her experience during that eventful interval.
Listen to the words--"Woman, behold thy son"--and to the disciple, "behold
thy mother." Think of what followed--the joy at Christ's rising to dwell
in visible presence with his own, and after his ascension to dwell with
them in his witnessing Spirit. Among those who remembered the promise: "Lo
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world," there was one who
added a mother's love to a disciple's faith, as in the coming of the
Comforter to her soul, she received her new birth into the kingdom of God,
through him who had his birth on earth from her. Confided as she had been
to the disciple whom Jesus so loved, a guest in his household, the
constant companion of the growing circle of believers, how could she be
without great influence on their faith and fellowship? When she passed
away, a new light rose for them in the heavens. Their religion was not a
code of moral precepts, or a set of theological propositions, but a gospel
of speaking facts and living words. Their religion was Christ and all that
is Christlike. Their heaven was no ethereal abstraction, no pantheistic
merging of spirits in infinity; but the home of true souls--the mansions
of the Father opened by Christ to all the faithful, and surely unto her
who guarded his infant weakness and wept over his dying agonies. On earth
and in heaven the blessed mother stood to them for the ideal of true
womanhood, and early Christian antiquity is full of traces of the tender
and beautiful affection felt for her, before superstition seized upon the
lovely sentiment and hardened it into a priestly dogma. Yet under the
dogma, the true feeling has never been wholly lost sight of, and with many
who are called idolatrous, the homage to St. Mary is but an exalted form
of reverence to a moral loveliness, now in heaven. Our own Germanic
ancestors shared more deeply in the sentiment probably than any other
people, as they came from their cold homes in northern Europe--received
the gospel of Christ from the missionaries of the church, and rejoiced to
find their national feeling of chivalrous respect for woman confirmed and
spiritualized by the honors paid to her, whom angels hailed as full of
grace, and whose name all Christendom spoke with blessing. This high
sentiment, somewhat sobered by our Protestant faith and our household
utilities, has come to us with our religion and our homes.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is becoming a somewhat practical, and in both hemispheres, an agitating
question, how far the accepted Christian idea of true womanhood should be
enlarged or amended to meet the demands of our own age. The voice of Mary
Wolstoncroft, claiming masculine freedom for sex, has found a thousand
echoes, and assemblies of women, no strangers to Christian culture, clamor
for a new day of social and political emancipation. Their demands are not
to be treated with ridicule, for under all their extravagance lurk truths
of momentous import. Who can think of the thousands and hundreds of
thousands of the sex, whose utmost labors hardly keep off cold and
starvation--of the wretched notions of education and life, which so
enfeeble the poor and corrupt the affluent--of the false social system
which is so ready to smile upon the destroyer of innocence, and curse the
victim of his arts; who can think of the scenes in the hovels of innocent
poverty, the dens of loathsome vice, and the gilded saloons of painted
misery, upon which the shadows of this blessed eve are now falling, and
not be willing to pardon some thing to the spirit of mercy, even if its
tones seem to us too shrill for gentle lips? Who is not willing to
remember, moreover, that if they assert a folly, who claim for woman the
political offices that must rob the home of her fidelity; they assert, and
actually are diffusing a more dangerous error, who in more silken speech
brand the household virtues as servile drudgery, and whose lives are a
continued and studious round of elegant and jewelled vagrancy from the
sacred uses and blessed companionships of their own fireside; nay, whose
eyes seem only to open when the lights of the theatre and ball-room blaze,
and whose pulses really beat only in exciting assemblies under the
delirium of the wine-cup and the voluptuous dance. From both errors the
true idea of womanhood may save our time, and, nevertheless, confer upon
us the substantial good, which is so dimly seen by the rival schools of
culture--the fashionable and the masculine. Well taught and trained, our
daughters may have all true graces without Parisian levity, and all
intellectual discipline without Amazonian boldness.

No greater mistake can be made than that which would take woman from her
sphere of dignity and power, and make her the rival of man in pursuits
which require his ruder nature and sterner will. Mary, the wife of Godwin,
with her obtrusive band of far more extravagant followers, opens no path
of honor and power compared with that pointed out by Mary of Nazareth, the
light of her home, the guardian of her Holy Child; encouraging the
disciples by a voice, the mightier on account of its not being heard in
the streets, and to them and to all after them, a name for spiritual
loveliness, and all gentle and confiding graces, among the souls exalted
to heaven. Using present agencies, and following the guidance of the
gospel, the mothers and sisters in our Israel, may deal more wisely and
strongly with the social problems of our time, and do their part for the
kingdom of God--than by crowding to the ballot-box, screaming in the
caucus, or snatching at the staff of office. So deeply is this the
conviction of the most judicious of the sex, that many words on the
subject would be superfluous. Nor would we add any to the many words that
have been shed upon the question of the equality of the sexes. As well let
the rays of the solar light dispute for precedence, and the red ray, so
blazing, presume to deny the equal worth of the violet ray, which, science
teaches us, has power to make iron magnetic, and which more than its more
bold companion on the other side of the prism, makes the impression on the
silvered plate--itself the most magical pencil in the skilful hand of that
unrivalled painter, the sun. God has united both rays in the sweet light
of true humanity, and what He has joined together, let not man try to put
asunder.

The greater danger is in a servile acquiescence in prevalent worldliness
and mediocrity--a disposition to repeat the common pleas of precedent,
and to live solely in the externals of society. In our own beloved
country, where liberty, without example, is extended to woman, and a
courtesy, without limit, is shown her, they who hold in their keeping the
future of their sex should not be content to follow the rule of court
journals, or bow to the dicta of Parisian modists, who are fond of ruling
over morals, as over costume. Our liberty should give them a stronger and
more rational intellectual discipline than in the lands more enslaved by
precedent. Our courtesy, that national chivalry, which insists on
deference as much towards the rustic maiden as the city belle, will be
sadly abused if made the occasion of an obtrusive arrogance, which claims
precedence as a right, and elbows its way through crowds of men who are
more ready to yield by grace than by command.

Our country has from the first cherished a noble idea of womanhood, and
under its influence the strength of its sons, and the refinement of its
daughters have been nurtured. Kindly omens abounded in the first days of
its history. Our continent itself is one of the omens. That you may not
call me too fanciful or sentimental, let me quote from an eloquent writer
on the philosophy of geography, as he compares the Old and New Worlds.
"The number of the continents in the Old World," which is double that of
the New World, their grouping in a more compact and solid mass--make it
already and pre-eminently the continental world. It is a mighty oak, with
a stout and sturdy trunk, whilst America is the slender and flexible
palm-tree, so dear to this continent. The Old World, if it is allowable to
employ here comparisons of this nature, calls to mind the square, solid
figure of man; America the lithe shape and delicate form of woman.

So America stood like a fair bride in her ocean home, adorned for her
husband, that mighty race from the East, that came in the path of the
sunshine, as if following the lord of day, who is as a bridegroom coming
out of his chamber. Our heroes bore with them a Christian ideal of
womanhood, and by it were gentle as they were strong. It came with
Columbus in the cherished image of that noble queen, who gave gold and
hope to an enterprise elsewhere rejected with derision; and the thought of
Isabella mingled with that of the Blessed Mother, as he planted the cross
on the western shores. It came with the cavaliers who gave Virginia its
name and honor, and whose foremost and noblest chief found a counterpart
of his own ideal in the Indian girl, who saved his life by risking her
own, giving Christian mercy, to receive in return the Christian's faith
and home; owning, by the baptismal vow, the Great Spirit whom she had seen
in cloud and heard in the wind, thenceforth, as the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. It came with the Huguenots of Carolina, the Catholics
of Maryland, the Friends of Pennsylvania, the Hollanders of Manhattan, and
not last nor least, with the Pilgrims of that Mayflower, whose seeds
struck deep into the New England soil, and whose scions have borne beauty
and fragrance to the hills and valleys, the farms and cities of our
motherland, making the wilderness blossom as the rose, when the sweet
Marys gave grace to Puritan homes.

Herein lies a great element of power and of hope for our country. Our soil
is rich, our lakes and rivers are vast, our strength is great, our courage
good, our schools are many, our wealth is unexampled. But these are not
all--nor are these the elements that are to tame our barbaric borders, and
lead to harmony our chaotic and scattered members. The church and home
must go together, and unite our nation under the empire of Christ, as
under the empire of civil law. The church and home are advancing together
from the Atlantic to the Pacific shore. The farmer of Oregon, the miner of
California, are not to be beyond the pale of Christian civilization. Even
they shall hear the chimes that tell of the nativity of the Saviour--they
shall find in their homes, rude cabins though they may be, pleasant faces,
whose womanly grace and childish confidence shall reveal a light kindled
of old by the Blessed Mother, and nurtured for ever by her Holy Child.

Here patriotism and Christianity blend in one. Anathema upon the false
speculations and foul vices that assault the family institution. Blessed
be the gospel of Him who asserts the uncompromising law of domestic
purity, and opens most tenderly the Divine benignity, when most urging the
Divine commandment.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a branch of this subject which I cannot treat--one, perhaps, that
dwells too much in the region of higher sentiment to be the theme of
popular discussion, and which no writer can easily handle, without seeming
to be borrowing from the ancient theology its comments on the Song of
Songs, or delving in the dark but rich mines of Swedenborg's Arcana. Yet
it would be no far-fetched topic, whilst speaking of her who has been
called the Queen of Heaven, and regarded by the Fenelons and Catharines of
faith, as the type of celestial loveliness, to treat of the ideal of
womanhood in the spiritual world. Surely the higher a true culture rises,
the more clearly each great family of souls becomes more true to its own
genius, and the higher companionship known on earth, in the most refined
society, and the worthiest families, illustrates the permanence of those
traits that give man and woman their intellectual and moral
characteristics. The earthly loves, which Christ came to consecrate, bear
the germs of immortal uses, and are like Mary's own emblem the rose,
which, though born in the earth, lifts its bloom and wafts its fragrance
to the heavens. I know no more elevated illustration of this view than
that given by the Milton of Italy, the solemn Dante, who, in his vision of
Heaven, wanders through the celestial courts with the spirit that had been
the charm of his earthly life, and who, often as he stood confounded
before some new mystery, found his perplexities solved by the readier
intuition of his sainted companion. The higher companionship in
literature, art, society, religion, which we enjoy in this world, and
which is so incomplete when men or women are alone, gives some idea of the
state of souls on high, where they that shine most, and they that love
most, cherubim and seraphim, blend their holy ministries and bow together
before the Eternal Presence.

A homelier view of the subject must end our meditation--a view, however,
that opens into the heavenly world. The homelier the better--the nearer to
our hearts. Let us call Mary blessed to-day for ourselves, and for our own
families and friends. Bless her, now that we are thinking of all good
mothers, whether the queen true to her children on her island-throne, or
the faithful mother in the farmer's cottage;--so many on the earth--so
many who have gone from the world, and whose remembered faces now bring
heaven near. Bless her now, that we are thinking of the happy children
gathered together in the name of her Holy Child--as we think of the hosts
of little children whom He has called and is calling to Himself. It is a
time to be sober, and a time to be merry. In our soberness and our mirth,
alike let us remember God's love for us in Jesus Christ our Lord.

God's blessing, readers, upon you all--mothers, fathers, children,
brothers, sisters, friends--meeting or to meet in the sanctuary, or in
your homes! His love bring all together at last around the tree of life,
whose fruit is peace eternal!

_Christmas Eve._




The Hope of Childhood.




THE HOPE OF CHILDHOOD.


The account of the Flight to Egypt, so illustrated by the old masters,
brings three images before us, all in themselves interesting, and
expressive of lasting realities. Central, is the figure of a young child,
speaking at once of childhood and the God who blesses it. On either side
what contrast in the associated forms! On one hand stands Mary, watching
with unwearied vigils over her precious charge. In the distance, in his
stately palace, the dark form of the tyrant king rises before us; his
hands stained with the blood of a noble wife and three sons, his
conscience torn by remorse, his wrath the more inflamed from the
consciousness of deserving vengeance, his despotic will brooking no
thought of rivalry, and dooming to death the infant innocents of a whole
town to make sure of destroying the predicted Messiah.

Here is an emblem of what is over in the world. Here is childhood, its
guardian angel, and its evil genius. May not the scene suggest some
thoughts upon Christianity as the guardian of childhood against the spirit
of the world, which is its foe?

The mother and child fled to Egypt, there to languish or be forgotten?
Herod sat in his palace hall, there to rule and prosper? No. Ere the year
closed, he died; before death came, already a mass of putrefaction. He
died, signing with his fainting hands his will and the death-warrant of
his oldest son; thus dispensing death and empire in his last act. He died,
and the magnificence of his funeral mocked the wretchedness of his
decease. The body was borne aloft on a bier, which was adorned with gems;
the winding-sheet was of purple; his whole army, native and foreign,
marched in war array to his grave. As the gorgeous procession by slow
stages passed to the stately mausoleum, twenty-five miles distant at the
Herodium, word went to the fugitives in Egypt, that the tyrant was dead.
Who at that time, in the excitement of the funeral, or the festivities of
the succession--who cared for the obscure family, that stole on its way
quietly to Nazareth? The mother and child lived! They founded a kingdom
that dies never.

Richly that Christ-child repaid his mother's watching, alike to her and to
her sex. The religion of Christ has been the strength and comfort of
parents, and the hope of their children. Its power in the nurture of the
young mind has been illustrated in every age, and connects itself now
momentously with the most important topics of our time. What topic more
congenial with this Christmas season, so consecrated to associations with
childhood and youth, leading us back to the cradle of the infant Redeemer,
and opening a festival in which young hearts all over the world rejoice?
The child ever needs protection; Herod ever in some form rages;
Christianity like a mighty maternal heart needs ever to keep its watch.

       *       *       *       *       *

Look upon the past history of Christendom from this point of view, and how
novel and interesting is the result! We have been taught to associate the
progress of Christianity with the account of theological controversies,
bitter disputes, bloody persecutions, proud hierarchies; and thus we too
often read the annals of the Church with shame or contempt. But take a
fairer and more intimate view: think of Christianity in connection with
childhood and youth, trace its influence upon the home, the school, the
Church, in this aspect. Do this, and we shall find ourselves moved by the
annals of every age to tenderness and gratitude; for in every age
Christianity has been the guardian of childhood against the spirit of the
world, its foe. When the Saviour took young children in his arms and
blessed them, he performed an act which has not been without significance
in all subsequent time.

In the primitive time the Christian confessors showed how fondly they had
been taught to regard their offspring, to care for their souls in life and
in death, to commend them with deathless love to Him who had opened the
gates of everlasting life. In the Roman catacombs, far beneath the city,
the places of early Christian worship and burial, the inscriptions on the
tombstones well express the parental feelings of that time. An uncommonly
large portion of the epitaphs given in the description belong to
children, and they express the tenderest affection. "Virginius remained
but a short time with us." "Sweet Faustina, may you live in God."
"Laurence to his sweetest son, Severus, borne away by angels on the
seventh Ides of January." How different the spirit breathed in such
inscriptions from that inspired by the idolatry, that formed a god of the
war-spirit that makes childhood desolate and orphaned, or bows down before
Moloch and casts children into the fire at his feet!

Turn even to those ages that are called by eminence dark--the time of
monkish austerity and priestly sway. There is much in their annals to move
indignation and sometimes horror. But interpret them fairly, and we find
much to move our admiration and love. Consider that embodiment of the
middle ages, the Gothic cathedral, wonderful alike for the vastness of its
proportions and the delicacy of its details. There may be austerity in the
priests that attend its altars, fanaticism in the monks who chant its
litanies, cruelty in the mailed men who kneel at its chancel. But how
tender is the expression of the whole in reference to childhood! The Holy
Mother and her Divine child beam upon the worshipper from illuminated
missals and painted windows. Conspicuous at the vestibule or by the altar,
stands the baptismal font. Thither the child of the poorest peasant is
brought, and by the baptismal water the child is recognized as belonging
to the kingdom not of this world, a lamb of the good Shepherd. Not for the
few rich, noble or mighty, but even for him, the least of the earth, this
temple was erected, and by that rite the church, imperial in its stately
palace, promises to watch over the child, care for his soul in sorrow,
sickness and death. What would childhood have been in the dark ages
without the Church? What other power could have stood between innocence
and its tempter and destroyer? Who would have withstood Herod, if the
mother heart of Christianity had withheld its guardianship?

The Protestant Reformation consider, and through all its conflicts and
persecutions, what tenderness is shown on both sides towards childhood! To
secure the young heart to Christ and the Church, the rival parties labored
with indefatigable zeal. In the zeal and policy of Loyola we may see how
tenderly the old Church sought to keep or regain her hold upon the young
by measures suited to the time. Would we know Luther's mind, look upon him
as he sits with lute in hand at his fireside, enjoying the gladness of his
children at the Christmas tree;--look at him, as with pen in hand and the
veins of his forehead dilated with the excitement, he writes the immortal
appeal to the powers of Germany in behalf of free schools, which has
joined his name with Milton's as champion of popular education. Think too
of the Pilgrim Fathers, so tender and thoughtful in their stern
self-denial, in their wilderness home erecting church and school-house
side by side, both sacred to God and his people.

       *       *       *       *       *

But it is time to look round upon the world as it now is. The most
important question is: What is to be done for the young? This question
comprises every other, for the generation that is growing up will soon
have the destinies of the race in its charge. Surely Christianity needs to
be watchful, for Herod is still abroad. His spirit is still the spirit of
the world--of the world's passions and its policy--breathing now in the
oppression that neglects or overburdens the young, and now in the
capricious indulgence that betrays with a kiss and kills in the name of
love.

The world's passions conspire against childhood and youth. The lust and
intemperance, which degrade the parent, press heavily upon the child, and
because of them, thousands of young hearts find themselves in a world that
for them has few smiles. All the temptations that inflame the senses,
prompt to vice, and kindle hatred, conspire against the young, alike by
corrupting those who should be their protectors, and sowing prematurely
the seeds of wickedness in youth itself. Every haunt of dissipation, every
resort of revelry, whether the drunkard's den or the fashionist's
brilliant saloon of corruption, is a conspiracy against youth, and coins
its gold from the life-blood of young hearts. The massacre of the
Innocents still goes on. The spirit of Herod yet lives, and acts in a
manner more insidious than an open death-warrant. It lives in the passions
of a world ready to sacrifice all to its lusts.

And the world's policy is not kind to childhood. What murderers are those
its chief idols, Mars and Mammon! How cruel the game of war and the lust
of gold! Who rules over the strife that robs children of parents who go to
die in foreign lands? What genius, Herod or Christ, presides over the
scene, when death-dealing batteries are planted before peopled cities, and
the blood and brains of women and children are dashed out at every volley?
Ye Christian chivalry, ye battle-loving parents, answer that question as
for yourselves and your children!

The lust of gold, that moves the world's habitual policy, is less savage
but not much more merciful. The spirit of trade demands gain, and claims
childhood too much as an instrument of gain. In the Old World, what
myriads whom school or church never blesses or knows, are, almost from
infancy, trained to the mine or loom, shut out from free air and play,
cramped in body, as in mind. The conscience of Christians is waking up to
the subject, I know, still what a world of wretchedness remains
unalleviated! No poem in the language contains more terrific truth, than
that noted ode, called "The Cry of the Children," blending, as it does,
the tragic depth of Aeschylus with the tender pathos of Cowper.

  They look up with their pale and sunken faces,
      And their looks are sad to see,
  For the man's grief abhorrent, draws and presses
      Down the cheek of infancy--
  "Your old earth," they say, "is very dreary;"
      "Our young feet," they say, "are very weak!
  Few paces have we taken, yet are weary--
      Our grave-rest is very far to seek!"
  Ask the old why they weep, and not the children,
      For the outside earth is cold,--
  And we young ones stand without, in our bewildering,
      And the graves are for the old!

  Two words, indeed, of praying we remember;
      And at midnight's hour of harm,--
  "Our Father," looking upward in the chamber,
      We say softly for a charm.
  We know no other words, except "Our Father,"
      And we think that, in some pause of angels' song,
  God may pluck them with the silence sweet to gather,
      And hold both within his right hand which is strong.
  "Our Father!" If He heard us, He would surely
      (For they call him good and mild)
  Answer, smiling down the steep world very purely,
      "Come and rest with me, my child!"

  And well may the children weep before you;
      They are weary, ere they run;
  They have never seen the sunshine, nor the glory
      Which is brighter than the sun:
  They know the grief of men, but not the wisdom;
      Are bitter with despairing, but not calm--
  Are slaves, without the liberty in Christdom--
      Are martyrs, by the pang without the palm,--
  Are worn, as if with age, yet unretrievingly
      No dear remembrance keep;
  Are orphans of the earthly love and heavenly:
      Let them weep! let them weep!
  They look up with their pale and sunken faces,
      And their look is dread to see,
  For you think you see their angels in their places,
      With eyes meant for Deity.

An ode such as this was not without effect upon the heart of England; nor
is the humanity which it imbodies rare in our land. The spirit of trade
among us is not wilfully cruel, but it is too devoted to gain--negligent
of the claims of youth, when not unkind. Neglected ones in our own streets
have too frequent cause to reproach us--neglected ones who are strangers
to the blessings of our civilization, and who learn our laws first from
their penalties, and become acquainted with the lessons of the prison, not
of church or school. They, alas, who might be an honor to their sex, are
made to recruit the ranks of shame, and what is the spirit of Herod
compared with the world's heart to fallen woman, alike in the wickedness
that tempts and the scorn that awaits the fall.

And not solely among the neglected of the earth does the spirit of the
world lie in wait for childhood and youth. We might speak of the
indulgence that pampers and vainly ruins the soul--of the kindness that
kills those whom it aims to bless--of the neglect of health, natural and
spiritual laws, which luxury introduces into modes of home education--of
the want of a firm discipline that is kindest when firmest--of a practical
infidelity that robs childhood of its sacred birthright, by robbing it of
trust in God and the eternal life. Herod rages truly in the passions and
the policy of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

But not unchecked! Christianity with its great maternal heart is true to
her watch, and calling helpers to her side. Let us acknowledge it. The
great work of Christians now, is with the young. The work is two-fold, one
of growth and of conquest, one that would rear up the offspring of faith
within the divine kingdom, and one which would visit the neglected and
reclaim them from the enemies' power.

The work must begin, indeed, in the hearts of the mature, fostered there
by communion with God and Christ, fostered by sacred thought and earnest
resolution. Beginning there, it is to be carried out into the great
spheres of life, in which childhood receives its direction. Vain for us to
attempt to imbue the young mind with truths, which we receive only in
name--vain the attempt to feed yearning souls with empty words, or breathe
into them a higher life, with appeals so faithless and loveless as to bear
falsity in their very tone, and fall dead upon the ear. As the bee watched
by Solomon alighted upon the living rose, and shunned the pretended one,
so childhood knows well the tone of sincerity, and craves reality for its
mental food. Let it find the reality.

Let it find it in the home. Home, blessed word always, thrice blessed,
this day, that speaks to us of Jesus, who has secured to the household so
much of its purity and affection, and that brings to mind the loved ones
beneath our own roofs, who have hardly slept the night from anxious
waiting for the morning dawn. Home--what an engine of power, alike to harm
and to bless! Let it be Christian in form and in spirit. There let God be
acknowledged in praise and prayer. There let the eternal world be
unveiled, and every blessing bring it near in gratitude, and every trial
draw down its consolation. There let the young breathe in the spirit of
the gospel. There let Mary keep her watch of love, and Herod waits in vain
to destroy.

Let the world's bad spirit be withstood, too, in the schools. The cry is
now rising in every part of Christendom--from the backwoodsmen of the
Rocky Mountains to the cities of the Old World, of late, stirred by a
mighty want--Education, Universal Education! In no section, certainly, of
our land, is this spirit comparatively more earnest than with us--for,
beyond question, this State has been recently passing through an
intellectual revival altogether unexampled in the annals of our Free
Schools. Christians should rejoice in the movement, and should rescue
popular education from the blighting touch of avarice and superstition.
Let it go on in its work of growth and conquest--nurturing the children of
the privileged, reclaiming the offspring of the neglected, carrying out a
mode of education based upon the laws of God and the soul of man, mindful
of every faculty, grace, affection, that God has hallowed and human wisdom
unfolds. Let nothing that has been done lead us to be unmindful of what is
to be done, alike in the extension and elevation of the schools. We wonder
at the system of training pursued of old, which led youth to regard the
school as a prison. Higher yet the idea must rise, as better views are
entertained of the capacities of the child, and the intellectual helps and
moral associations that bring them out. We need the idea of the
Christ-child in the school. Let that haunt the minds of parents and
teachers, and that sacred ideal of childhood will not be without loving
disciples, whose voices shall make the songs of the schoolroom as sacred
and acceptable as temple chants or choral litanies. A better spirit, and
one that demands the co-operation of all Christian people, has shown
itself in our city of late, in the new efforts to seek out neglected
children, and open to them the blessings of education, and industry and
religion. The establishment of the Mission at the Five Points, of the
Children's Aid Society, of the Asylum for Friendless Boys, have made an
era in the Christian annals of New-York, which all right-minded persons
should bless, alike in their word and their work. Add to these efforts for
the poor and neglected, the new institutions, such as the Free College and
the Cooper Institute, which offer such unwonted privileges to worthy boys
of the humblest means, and we have no reason to despair of the future of
this great city, or to distrust the school as a noble ally of the church.

The Christian church! Here the spirit of the guardian mother ought
eminently to prevail. The church should be the mother of the young. Oh,
how cold and dreary is the idea, deemed by many the essential of
Protestant truth, the idea that the young, or at least, little children,
can have no vital connection with the Church; but must wait for some
preternatural visitation in maturer years to call them to the arms of the
great spiritual mother, and make them feel themselves hers. How
unsatisfactory the doctrine, that children are to grow up, as if outside
of the church, with the prospect of one day being taken in. Be ours the
cheering view, sanctioned, surely, by the analogies of revelation, the
faith of centuries, and by the love of parents, that the child should be
regarded as by birth and baptism admitted into the Christian kingdom, and
to be nurtured from the very first in the principles and affections
congenial with the government of God. Let this idea be accepted, and power
and blessing would come in its train. Higher consecration would crown the
home, better wisdom would guide the strength of father, and holier love
fill the soul of mother, from their communion with the kingdom that claims
parent and child for its own. The Christ-child should be remembered in the
Christian Church. When remembered truly, he will save childhood from
Herod's hands.

This season is a time of anticipation and hope. It needs no very vivid
imagination to bring before us the myriads of homes over Christendom, that
ring with young mirth, and look cheerfully upon the opening age. Yet the
grave question cannot but press itself upon us, What is in store for the
generation, that is soon to stand in our places, and bear the burdens of
life in our stead? Interesting, engrossing indeed are the fields of
science, art, enterprise, enjoyment, now dawning upon us and promising a
bright meridian to the new generation. Yet fearfully many dark spots in
the horizon rise in the distance, and portend ill to many whose experience
of the world is yet to come. The great want is of an earnest purpose,
looking to an eternal aim, and enforced by a true plan of social life. The
young host is ready, but needs better guidance. Muratori, the Italian
historian, tells us, that in the twelfth century, in the contagion of the
crusades, children caught the spirit, and an army of 30,000 was gathered
from village and city, and marshalled by a child, started for the Holy
Land and the Tomb of Christ. They marched on till they came to Marseilles,
and the great sea stopped their fond dream. They wandered about
distracted, and thousands miserably perished. Perhaps too romantic story
for sober truth! But what a parallel to it in our age! A mighty host of
youths starts on its way to a land of imagined holiness and peace. Vague
aspirations, selfish passions, spiritual yearnings for the good and true,
move their hearts. A child will lead them; the child who is to be the
strong man of the age, and who is not yet known. Sadly, sadly, will they
be disappointed, unless the leader is himself divinely led, and the heart
of the Christ-child lives in him, and thus in the hearts of this
generation, the Messiah is born anew.

Every true purpose, all genuine faith speeds the day of his new coming,
and hastens the downfall of Herod and his host.

       *       *       *       *       *

Friends, Readers, let your hearts apply the lesson of this day, and let
your hearts be cheered and solemnized by its associations. Think of your
homes and the loved ones there. Think too of the loved ones departed, and
deem them not lost, but gone before! Love your children, and love them the
more by looking on them in the gospel light, by loving them as in God and
Christ!

Think too of our own early days. How vividly they at times come back, so
that we almost forget maturity and its cares, and are children once more.
Let them come back now, and with them all their tender associations--with
them thoughts of early home; brothers, sisters, father, and more than all
of her, who stood to us in Mary's place, and blessed us with a Christian
Mother's love!

But can the association rest there? No! Upward to Him, so holy in
childhood, so glorious in maturity--to Him, Friend and Saviour, Messiah,
from whom our best blessings flow, let our gratitude rise, and to God,
through Him, let our devotion be exalted! We have no hymn to the Virgin
Mother, no Ora pro Nobis for the beatified Madonna. Simple faith is better
than romantic tradition. To us heaven is fairer for possessing that Mother
and that Child.

_Christmas Day._




New Things.




NEW THINGS.


Measured by any human standard, how daring was the vision of the Christian
seer! From Patmos, his watchtower of rock in the Aegean Sea, midway between
the hemispheres of ancient civilization, he surveyed the ruling powers of
the world, declared their doom, and the rise of a new kingdom, even the
City of God. The predominant forces of the existing age took visible shape
before his inspired imagination. Jewish bigotry, Pagan idolatry, Roman
despotism, led on by the master spirit of evil, stood before him, as so
many fearful monsters. Equally vivid were the forms of divine agency by
which they were to be subdued. From Him who sat upon the throne revealed
in heaven, came the decree, "Behold, I make all things new." Our pen need
not lose its cheerfulness in writing of this opening year, with such
imagery in view.

How much of that vision has been proved true? Enough surely to save it
from the charge of presumption, enough to ascribe its daring rather to a
devotion mindful of divine guidance than to a wilfulness impatient of
delay. The former things have passed away. The old temple is remembered
only for the sake of its spiritual archetype. The despot's purple has
faded before the bloodstained robes of the martyrs. The idols to which
men bowed on both the Aegean shores, the European and the Asiatic, have
fallen. Even the crescent, that has for a time displaced the cross, and
which now in the city of Constantinople gleams from the dome of St.
Sophia, forms no exception to the statement, for it marks no idolatrous
shrine, but like the orb which it represents is but a partial reflection
of the great source of light, before which it must one day grow pale.

Gradually, but none the less mightily, the new power went on its way, and
ere long from beyond the Mediterranean on the Carthaginian shore, there
came a great response to the exile of the Aegean. When Augustine wrote his
"City of God," the philosopher of history confirmed the vision of the
seer, as he celebrated the triumphs of that word which planted the cross
above the throne of the Caesars. Tempting indeed is the historical survey
this presented, but we must not yield to the enticement. We must quit this
grand prospect of the nations, and speak of the Gospel, as sent chief of
all for the renewal of the soul and the redemption of the home.
World-regenerating power as it is, its first prerogative is its
life-renewing office.

This principle we are prepared to lay down at the outset, that in the
order of Providence Jesus Christ is the spiritual head of the human race,
and that men and nations find redemption and true life from God through
Him. What was said of old, needs to be said now "Behold I make all things
new"--now in the ears alike of those who have never heard Christian
truth, and of those who have lulled themselves to slumber beneath its
familiar sound. Nay, the most sincere Christians need constant renewing in
the light of first principles and by the spirit of true life. Their piety
is apt to harden into formalism--their charity to narrow into some kind of
clanship--their industry to sink into a low worldly prudence apart from
all divine aims.

It is not easy for any of us to begin the New-Year without a pleasant
sense of freshness or renovation, as if some former burdens had passed
away and many things had become new. This is well, and needs only to be
made better. As we renew our friendships, we should not fail to renew our
relation with the Great Friend, and invoke his blessing upon the opening
months.

       *       *       *       *       *

We need first of all to review our principles. These we regard as
constituting the essentials of our faith. However right they may have
been, we are very apt to lose sight of them, or gradually, perhaps almost
unconsciously, allow others to creep into their place. The word of Christ
to us now is as of old, "Believe." What do we believe? What to us is the
greatest reality? Many things are true--what to us is the truth? Many
words are important--what to us is _the_ word? Answer not in the language
of decent custom or technical phrase, but from the heart. We have all said
at some time more or less definitely, "We believe in God, the Creator of
the world, in Jesus Christ his Son and express image, in the Holy Spirit,
the witness within the soul." When we believe thus truly, then we have
the true principles of living. We own the Divine government, acknowledge
its representative, honor its form of life. But our belief becomes an
empty word, unless with enlarged knowledge and experience, it is
constantly renewed; and as we pass into new fields of thought, action,
observation, we subdue this added territory to the rightful sovereignty,
and interpret all things in the light of Divine truth. Have we done
this--are we doing it? Or have we left our faith behind us, and in our
world of business or pleasure, do we find ourselves either utterly without
God, or with Him only in the most vague and distant idea? True faith is
not overcome by the world, but overcomes the world.

We learn a great many things as our years pass, and there is a
knowledge--do we not know it? that increaseth sorrow. Such is all the
knowledge that shuts out the light of God; and leads man away from a
filial faith in the Eternal Parent and the heavenly home. Such stores
indeed increase our nominal domain, but only as he would enlarge his
estate who were to conquer Sahara and pitch his tent among desert sands
where no living water is.

Faith--the faith that God is Father of men--that he is in Christ, and
through Him will visit us in the soul and the life, makes all things
new--constantly leads us into new experience of Divine truth, and makes
old things appear in a new light. This is no narrow creed for the recluse
or the mystic. It is for men of all tempers and conditions. Nay, they need
it most, whose pursuits are most likely to chain them down to the earth.
For them indeed occasional leisure and recreation has no small solace.
But, the best solace for world-weariness is the rest of the soul in God;
the mind's trust in the greatest of realities, the Being of beings. All
pleasure that deadens this trust but adds to the weariness which it would
charm away and is the serpent's whisper, that promises the peace which
comes only from the heavenly dove. Above all our prudence, all our labors
and expedients, we are compelled to look for the true light. Revive,
increase our faith, and straightway all things are new. God reveals new
features of his Providence, and things familiar have a new expression, and
speak no longer only of the earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Who can recur thus to first principles and find from them better light and
peace, without carrying the renewing influence into the sphere of the
affections? Here the Divine Word has a voice for us--a voice too much
neglected because identified either with a perplexing theological system
or a shallow sentimentalism. God is love, and he that loveth not knoweth
not God. This truth came from Him who made the soul, and knows well its
wants. Bring it near to us and feel its renovating power. There seems
always indeed to be a peculiar peril in moralizing upon the affections,
and they are very apt to be chilled by the precepts that most insist upon
their vitality and warmth. But the Christian Gospel is little disposed to
waive its imperious claims from fear of the metaphysician or the
sentimentalist. It says Love God and the brethren, and bids us make this
truth practical. As the years pass, instead of having less affection, we
ought to have more. A true life always has more, as it enlarges its
experience and its faculty--not indeed more of that superficial
sensibility which is the burden of so many moon-struck rhymesters and the
great staple of the common romancers, but more of that divine charity,
that vital good-will, which holds filial communion with the Father, and,
striving to be perfect even as he is perfect, carries the light and warmth
of its presence into every sphere of life. In fact, the highest human
wisdom is affectionate as it is mature. The novice in thought may be sharp
and crabbed, but the sage is tolerant and kind. He who sees the truth in
its reality, sees that it is the form which contains and expresses
goodness. If there be a kind of intellectual power that is bitter and
malicious, it is sure to be only some shape of low cunning or some
perversion of the better reason--some perversion that shows Lucifer's
fall, if it shine with something of his light. The Master and they who
learned of him were full of love as of wisdom. Such is the plan of God's
moral government based upon the nature of his own being.

The Father calls us to be followers of him as dear children, and in the
sober thought of mature years to cherish more than the impulsive affection
of childhood. He demands that our whole life-plan should be guided, nay,
pervaded with good-will. If there be less sensitiveness upon the surface
of the character, there should be a deeper sentiment within. He is ready
to help us win the grace, which he commends. Through devout thought,
whether of meditation or prayer--through every act which brings us near to
himself, whether of self-denying humanity or of common neighborly
kindness, he is ready to impart to the soul something of the fulness of
his Spirit, and renew our being in its central spring.

We need this influence in our near affinities and remoter relations. The
ice gathers about us, and should be melted away. The most intimate ties
become dull and indifferent through custom, and the nearest friends,
because of their nearness, lose interest as if estranged. In the same
Divine fountain we refresh every home feeling and social sympathy.
Realizing anew our relation to God, we are ready to see more of his
goodness in all things around, and regard every aspect of humanity, as a
call upon us to appreciate his love for us by our own for his creatures.
The point of view is at once changed, and we look upon our fellow-beings
no longer in the spirit of harsh critics, exacting all things and owing
nothing, but as ourselves dependants upon Divine favor, and owing mercy
even as we have received. Every human tie is in peril, when this sentiment
is forgotten. When its force is felt, every sphere of life has a blessing.
Home wears a new smile, and its mutual deference repeats the great law of
Heaven. Strifes among kindred and acquaintances cease. The sternest censor
of the follies and vices of mankind mingles mercy with his judgment, and
considers with thoughtful compassion the infirmities at which the cynic
scoffs. Because he opens his heart, he does not shut his eyes, but with
judgment keen, yet tender and forbearing, in a spirit wise and benign,
nay, Christlike, he looks upon the strange drama of human life, and whilst
he cannot wholly solve its problem, sees enough of God in the universe and
among men to submit the ultimate solution to the Divine Power, and finds a
very sure way of helping on the Divine plans by a life of justice, energy
and good-will. Who of us does not need more of this spirit, more sense of
God's love to us, as the great source of kind affection to one another?

       *       *       *       *       *

For want of it, and of the filial faith in which it has its root, we
wither up, and our best strength is lost. Nay, our very work
languishes--our labor, whatever it may be, loses its zest. There is no man
of generous mind, who has not at some time accepted his life-work in a
spirit truly religious, feeling that its burdens are to be borne in a
Christian temper, and its duties done with reference to exalted aims. But
how often the better purpose languishes, and we pursue our toil away from
the fountains of true life, separating the spheres which God has joined
together, robbing our daily life of the freshness and power, which our
youthful zeal possessed without care, and which need only to be truly
cared for to be preserved, nay, to grow in vigor. It is not always so with
us, but too often; and there are none who do not need renovation in
respect to their life-plan and work. Some things we should do, that we
have not done--some things, that we have done, should have been left
undone. There is much efficacy in a sober and honest review of our
personal career, of what we have achieved, suffered, gained, lost, and of
what has been our use alike of our successes and disappointments. God has
given to us something of his own power of judgment, and we are the better
either by the rebuke or the encouragement of the "Ill-done" or the
"Well-done," pronounced by ourselves upon ourselves. More power still
comes from bringing all the higher resources of our being upon our labor,
refusing to become the serfs of a slavish routine of task-work, and
keeping our hours and weeks fresh alike by the faculties that we exert,
and the aims to which we look. Happy, indeed, the man, whatever be the
sphere of his action, whose being is renewed rather than exhausted by his
toil. Only a filial faith and love can insure this blessing. A cheerful
temper is much, but not all; and no merely animal spirits can suffice to
renovate the mind under so many vicissitudes and disappointments as most
lives present. A man's _spirit_ is the chief fact in determining his
_spirits_, and the spirit can be kept fresh and strong only by communion
with the God who gave it. They who take the work of life as given by God
in kindness, and as to be done faithfully and cheerfully, filially, keep
and enlarge their power. Whatever their sphere, they wait upon the Lord,
and they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength--they shall
mount up with wings as eagles--they shall run and not be weary--they shall
walk and not faint.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus following the leadings of Divine Providence, we find the true
fountain of life. All things are ever new, and in our faint human
experience we are able to know something of the bliss of that Infinite
and Omniscient, to whom all things are known--to whom there is no past or
future, yet whose is the fulness of an ever-renewing life, the great I Am,
from everlasting to everlasting. Existence becomes more serene, yet more
earnest; less impassioned, not less affectionate; less impulsive, but far
more interesting. There are two kinds of renewal, distant as are earth and
heaven. The one comes from the novelty of a constant variety, the other
from the freshness of an ever truer life. Just across the sea the exile of
Patmos could have found an excellent example to place in contrast with the
spirit of renewal which he urged. The Athenian--and he is in this respect
more favored with followers than in his Attic refinement--spent his time
in seeking for some new thing. Common life was stupid, its business was
contemptible and fit only for slaves. Different the spirit, as the lot of
this novelty hunter from that of the Christian with his ever renewed mind.
The one finds what is new by skimming over surfaces, the other by drawing
from inexhaustible depths. The one scatters his forces as he seeks to
refresh them, the other concentrates his powers in the very process of
renovation. The one yields to a passion for mental dissipation that burns
and wastes like a fever, the other follows a law of life, whose pulses
beat in ever serener health--nay, beat in ever-renewing vigor, and sound
no funeral marches to the grave. In short, the one indulges in a mental
distraction that has in itself the principle of exhaustion; the other is
nurtured by the Divine aliment which gives a life that is eternal.

Are not our own experience and observation full of illustrations of the
truth that has been presented. Are not history and biography constant
witnesses of the ever-renovating power of a genuine faith, and love, and
work, and also of the fate of worldly passion to exhaust its own springs
of enjoyment. How signal an illustration we may take from the destiny of
two men of the last century, who, more than any others, moved France and
England--the nations to which they spoke. Mirabeau, a man of robust frame
and singular native eloquence, was cut down in the very meridian of his
day by a disease which was an expressive close and consequence of the
fitful fever of his life of passion. His last words, in their gorgeous
rhetoric, showed with what opiates he had drugged his soul: "Sprinkle me
with perfumes, crown me with flowers, and thus let me sink into the
eternal sleep." Within that very month, a far different death-scene was
presented across the British Channel. An old man of nearly four-score
years and ten, rests peacefully upon his bed, surrounded by a company of
friends, who feel quite as much joy as grief, as they look upon his face
and hear his words. Although of frame naturally delicate, and of gifts by
no means brilliant, he has moved the hearts of myriads by his appeals, and
won a name better than that of founders of empires. The very week previous
he had continued his round of labors, and his strength was not abated as
he pleaded his Master's cause. He sank to his rest in God with the words
of the anthem,

  "I'll praise my Maker with my breath,"

on his lips, and the strain which was broken by the touch of death seemed
to his companions to be finished by a voice from the spiritual world,
saying:

  "Praise shall employ my nobler powers;
  My days of praise shall ne'er be past,
  While life, and thought, and being last,
  Or immortality endures."

Mirabeau and Wesley! Thus different are the ends of wilful passion and
unswerving fidelity. All lives, according as they are true or false, renew
this contrast.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Behold, I create all things new," saith the Lord. For good or for ill,
this decree must be applied to us. In some way we are all changing as the
years pass. Our lives are wasting away, unless they are renovated by a
truer spirit, and thus winning ever more than they lose. What do we most
need that time may be ever newer and happier, and the hours move on
neither with lagging weariness nor drunken haste, but in the Divine order
marked out for them by their Lord?

Are there not some things to be put off, as well as some things to be put
on? Answer honestly as we look the New Year in the face--answer as to a
messenger from God. What weight are we carrying, that we need to lay
aside? What evil habit is fixing itself upon us, shutting out the light of
God, chilling the better affections, deadening the nobler powers, and
threatening, perhaps, beneath its insidious smile to take from existence
more of its beauty and joy and strength? Let each consider well his own
besetting sin, and put it off. With the falling burden, scales fall from
his eyes--he sees God anew. For him the former things have passed
away--all things are become new. What makes our being fresher and happier
than the conviction that the coming years are better than the past!

Off with the old burdens, and put on the new armor. There is something for
each of us to do--something for each one of us specific and peculiar as
our own individuality--something for all of us as universal as our common
humanity. The specific thing and the universal good pursue as if for life
itself. God bless us in the striving, and crown us in the work. Each year
in its sober experience give us new hopes for ourselves and the future of
our race.

_New Year._




Solicitude of Parents




SOLICITUDE OF PARENTS.


Our thoughts turn now more particularly to the circle of home relations,
and we propose to give some plain views of them with an especial eye to
the temptations of city life. The duty of parents is the topic first in
order.

Few if any words are given in the Scriptures to persuading parents to love
their children, or to wish to provide for them. The affection is taken for
granted, and they who have it not are set aside by themselves as monsters.
If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house,
he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel.

It is not upon the parental sentiment itself, but upon its due direction,
that Christianity rests its emphasis; as well it may, for what sentiment
has gone more astray from the true mark, and in mistaken kindness hurt
those whom it would most bless. "What man," asks our Saviour, "would give
his son a stone instead of bread, or a serpent instead of a fish?" Not
one, if he really knew it or saw it. Yet what is more frequent than such
wrong indirectly done?

       *       *       *       *       *

Take the first and most obvious form of parental solicitude, the form
literally connected with the question just cited--we mean the physical
maintenance of children. It would be wasting words in this or any
respectable assembly, to try to prove that parents should provide food and
clothing for their offspring. Yet here, and every where, in our mode of
making this provision, many very grave questions may arise. Kind feeling
is not enough. Without knowledge and forethought, we may hurt where we
wish to help--we may kill where we wish to cure. At every step we need
better counsel than any instinctive fondness, or childish caprice, or
worldly fashion. The Creator has a lesson for us in the use of all his
gifts, and if we do not heed it, what we give as bread may turn out a
stone, and what seems to us a fish may sting like a serpent.

In providing food, clothing, air, exercise, for our children, we are to
study those solemn and inexorable laws which God has enacted for the rule
of the body. In this lower court of creation there is no pardoning power,
and the wrong done to the constitution in childhood is a wrong for a
lifetime. We apprehend that in no one point is our American society more
in error and more at variance, not only with natural laws, but even with
the best European standard, than in the physical education of children.
They are fed often on the trash of the confectioner, instead of the simple
aliments nearest the hints of nature, and by improper dress and hours they
are forced into a precocious maturity of mind and body, equally hurtful to
both.

Does any one doubt the importance or dignity of such caution? The doubt
vanishes the moment we see the connection between physical education, and
the whole tone of thought and feeling--nay, the entire aim of life. The
tastes for food, and dress, and amusement, cherished in children of tender
years, may be committing them to a judicious or a corrupt method of
life--may be their initiation into a school of self-control and wisdom, or
passion and extravagance. The drunkard, the sot, nay, the debauchee, may
date their wretchedness from childhood. Many a family has been ruined by
habits of extravagance that began in the finery and feasting of the
nursery. They that dwell in cities should take close heed to the prevalent
danger, and not think themselves safe merely because they do as other
people do. Consider how common the error is to mistake precocity for
promise--to disturb the sacred reserve of nature--to tear open the
curtained bud of childhood, and boast of the forced growth so ruinous to
the tender plant, and then let us learn anew to respect the bidding of the
Creator and follow his appointed way. Here we should be willing to take a
stand as nonconformists, and have it appear in the beginning, that we are
not educating our children to be the apes of the world's fashions, or
slaves of its caprices, but to be rational and moral creatures, a blessing
to their home and community, a light in the kingdom of God. Let them learn
early to find happiness in common things--to enjoy simple pleasures--to
love the glow of healthful action above the fever of artificial
excitements, the constant bounties of nature beyond the costly gifts of
luxury.

What we have said applies more directly to providing for children during
their tender years. In rude communities here the care mostly stops, and
the boy at least, as soon as he is strong enough to be master of his
limbs, is left pretty much to take care of himself. But as society becomes
more refined and luxurious, it is very obvious that the solicitude of
parents looks more towards providing for the maturer years than for the
minority of their children. It becomes, perhaps, the absorbing question,
how shall we establish them properly in life--what effort or self-denial
must we use to secure their future success?--a great question, and one
which troubles many an earnest mind, and heaves society itself with
misgivings.

It often presents itself in a very tangible form, and by some is confined
to one point--to concern for property. I will not disparage the desire of
parents to secure a comfortable living to their children. But it is safe
to say that this desire is strong enough when compared with matters more
essential even in their bearing on a comfortable living. Surely the chief
assurance of a sufficient livelihood is a good practical education. A
reasonable man will not think it important to leave more than a frugal
competence to his children, yet he ought to think himself unkind, nay
cruel, if he spare any labor or sacrifice needed to educate them to do
their part effectively and happily in the world. A large inheritance is
easily lost, and may be retained without adding any happiness or dignity
to its owner or the community, but a good education stands by its
possessor; the strength of his trials and the ornament of his joys.

We need to look well to this at a time when, under the very name of
education, foul wrong is done to the active energies, and a systematic
imbecility of mind and body has the stamp of elegance. That only is a good
education which so stores the mind and brings out the powers as to fit one
to take an honest place in life, and do well the work given us to do. Such
a culture will have an eye upon the uncertainties of fortune, and prepare
the pupil to provide for himself, and all who are reasonably dependent
upon him. Such a culture it is the duty of every parent to give, and the
right of every child to receive. It is clear, however, that it cannot be
given without going in the face of many dainty prejudices, which are so
ready to pamper unreasonable wants and slight the plain utilities. The
Hebrew laws required, that children, even those of nobles should be taught
some useful art, and the Saviour of men and the chief of his apostles were
bred in accordance with this law. There is no security against shameful
servitude short of this, that a youth shall have enough in himself, know
enough, and can do enough, to take and keep an honorable place in the
world. Too often this great truth is slighted, and men toil in such a way
as to procure for their children a dainty training that enlarges the
surface of their wants, whilst it lessens the domain of their energies,
and so puts a mill-stone upon a son's back, whilst thinking to give him
bread.

Yet more sternly we must carry out the doctrine of the need of an
education essentially self-relying. The father has and should have more
tender solicitude for the daughter than the son, and there is no
affection that the blessed God has breathed into the human heart more
beautiful and holy than this, giving as it does such grace to the rudest
and the most refined homes, teaching gentle speech to many a rough
peasant, and imbuing the most cultivated man with a delicacy and
tenderness beyond any of the charms of courts or chivalry. Yet this
sentiment needs to be wise as well as kind; nay, wise in order to be kind;
and a just father will strive to train his daughter to be equal to either
fortune. However large or small his fortune, he will remember its
uncertainties, and beware of sanctioning the too prevalent folly which
regards woman as born to be petted and dependent, and brands a rational
and self-relying education as masculine and ungraceful. If we have our
eyes open, we must see the wretchedness of this system, and regard every
daughter as cruelly treated who is not enabled without loss of
self-respect, in case of need, to take a stand for herself, and prefer to
an uncongenial marriage or a degrading dependence, reliance upon her own
arts of accomplishment or utility. The same preparation that fits her to
meet the time of trial, fits her to adorn prosperity, and to be that noble
creature, the woman who guides an affluent household with energy and love,
and who adds to the graces most prized in the social circle the grace that
is born of God and radiates the light of Heaven.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course it is utterly idle to urge the need of such an education for
sons and daughters, by limiting its uses solely to worldly advantage. We
go up to the true basis of life for firm ground to build upon. Take that
ground decidedly, and then we view all true culture as part of the
training of souls under the Kingdom of God. We are not to live by bread
alone, but by every Divine word, by all of God's gifts to us. They are
cruel parents who slight the moral and spiritual wants of their children
and train them in worldly passions. This is, in the saddest sense, giving
them a stone instead of the Bread of Life. So we all think and are ready
to say. Take care lest our conduct belies our words. Whatever its position
or professions may be, that is a wretched household, whose polity is not
based upon a Divine standard--which does not acknowledge a rectitude above
the world's ways and breathe faith in God and things eternal. The very
discipline of a true home will be modelled after the heavenly order, and
will try to win the spirit of the benignant Father of all, who tempers
firmness with kindness so wonderfully in the government of his creatures.

Firmness is not enough--kindness is not enough, but the two must go
together. Firmness without kindness becomes the stony austerity that
crushes the will into servile conformity instead of training it to filial
obedience; kindness without firmness readily becomes a feeble expediency
that changes with the hour in a facility serpentine in more senses than
one. Firmness with kindness gives a discipline authoritative and flexible,
applying just principles in a mild prudence suited to all times and needs.
Of old perhaps the rigid temper most abounded, and austerity made
parental rule a rod of iron; but now the other extreme most prevails, and
a feeble indulgence allows self-will to be the law of childhood, and
fosters in many a dwelling a juvenile jacobinism, which needs only time
and chance to ripen into utter anarchy. This error does cruel wrong to
parent and child--to the child by fostering an ungovernable temper, a
perverse caprice that scoffs at all restraint and chafes even at the
limitations which God has imposed; to the parent by bringing upon him the
contempt of those who owe him respect, and by the painful conviction that
the indulgence begun in apparent kindness has been as fatal as wilful
severity. Away with the folly and the puny sentimentalism from which it
springs! Let us look at the law of God founded in the written Word and in
the very nature of things. The family is the safeguard of society--a
government founded by Heaven itself. Parents are to rule, children are to
obey. This principle, if carried out with energy and discretion, will
adapt itself to the various ages and circumstances of life. The element of
authority will be imbued with the attractive power of the truth and love
upon which it rests, and as the child grows into youth or maturity, the
authority that trained him, without losing its dignity, will appear less
and less an arbitrary will--nay, authority itself will seem but the
sterner aspect of persuasion.

For all this we need an unworldly faith and a spiritual mind. They that
would nurture others in the true life must themselves be nurtured upon its
true element. For themselves they must breathe the prayer for daily bread
in a true sense of its meaning--a true sense of dependence on God for
moral power as for bodily strength. Nothing short of a temper and purpose
truly religious will make the household a school of faith and a home of
wisdom and peace. We are apt to be too negligent, indeed, of modes of
instruction and forms of worship. Too often a parent neglects to tell his
children what is deepest in his own heart, and with many not wholly
worldly persons, the years pass away without any regular habits of
Christian teaching and worship in the family. The remedy cannot come from
mere formalism, but it must spring from a truer heart--more of the right
spirit showing itself in the right way--in all wisdom and prudence,
charity and devotion.

Speaking thus, who of us does not see a startling thought staring us in
the face--the thought that our own personal character is the measure of
our influence, and that we cannot expect to teach or impress what we have
not taken to our own hearts. We cannot cheat our children into the virtue
which we affect, for they will find us out, and distinguish what we do and
are, from what we say. Influence cannot rise above the level of character,
nor the fountain above the fountain-head. What motive to a truer
life--what warning against vice and godlessness--what encouragement in all
good--that the chief patrimony of children is the character of their
parents, and with this treasure small gifts are wealth, and without this
treasure rich gifts are poor indeed. Unhappy is the man who leaves to his
children the influence of a heart hard as stone and a worldliness wily as
a serpent! Precious the influence--blessed the memory of a parent, whose
life has made the ways of wisdom pleasant and peaceful, secured to his
offspring a childhood pure and happy, given a sacred and cheerful
remembrance to be the handmaid of an immortal hope.

The affections, it has been said, press downward more strongly than they
rise upward, and parents love their children more than children can love
them in return. If this were so, it would but the more illustrate the
fact, that life is not utterly selfish, and men live not for themselves
alone. It is true, that we do not live for ourselves alone. The merchant
at his counting-houses has thoughts beyond his gold and
merchandize--visions more fair and kindly than these; and the hard-handed
workman who does his ruder labor, spares of his earnings for his children
at school. But the love is not all on one side, although time may be
needed to adjust the balance, and teach childhood to appreciate a true
parental care. God holds the balance, and will make it true. In the motive
and in the result, he secures the reward of fidelity. Time and eternity
will show, that the love which he has inspired shall win harvests of
blessings that cannot perish.




Reverence in Children.




REVERENCE IN CHILDREN.


The Ten Commandments, the foundations of all law, both religious and
civil, among civilized nations, are divided, all are aware, into two
tables: the first treating of duties relating directly to God--the second
treating of duties relating to man--the two covering the essential grounds
of religion and morals. The command to honor father and mother begins the
second table of the Law. Why should it not? for what so fitly stands at
the head of the moral code, as the law that puts order into the household?
The family is the form of government, first in time and first in
importance. Home is older than church or court; a parent's authority prior
to that of priest or judge. With the family, social order began--without
family union, social order must end.

There is something striking in the transition from the first to the second
table--the transition from Jehovah's assertion of his own sovereignty to
his tender regard for the welfare of men. We seem to be looking down from
the awful mountain with its barren crags into the peaceful valley with its
pleasant homes and grassy lawns, rejoicing that the summits pealing with
thunder send down refreshing breezes and fruitful showers into those
plains below.

Looking up to God, who claims of us supreme homage as his due, and then in
his own sovereign right urges upon us to fulfil our dues to each other, we
speak now of the duties of children or the honor to be rendered by them to
parents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Do any ask what are the grounds of the Commandments? The grounds are
obvious, and the law, which God enacts, instead of being an arbitrary
decree, is in entire harmony with the nature of things. It would perhaps
be needless to dwell on these grounds, were there not something in the
temper of our times, that calls them in question--in fact, certain notions
of intellectual liberty among theorists, that combine with the passions
and caprices of youth to unsettle many a household, and threaten the peace
of society itself. Against the sentimentalist, who makes light of all
natural ties to glorify the individual's own intuitions or affinities, and
against the little rebel, who comes to the same conclusion by a much
shorter process, we urge the Divine law, "Honor thy father and thy
mother."

Honor them, because God bids it, and bids it not merely in the written
code, but by the whole order of his providence, by the very constitution
of society. However we may dispute about the best form or true foundation
of government--maintain monarchy, aristocracy, or democracy, to be the
best form--declare Divine law, social compact, or popular will, to be the
true foundation, all must agree in the Divine origin of the family and
the Divine right of parental government. The instincts of nature, the
words of revelation, the dictates of experience and expediency, all agree
in this, and all illustrate the mind of God, the Creator of the family.
The mind of God himself speaks or should speak through the parent to the
child, so, that filial obedience is fitly another name for piety; so, that
prayer itself borrows its most hallowed word from the reverence nurtured
at home.

Trace out the law of dependence, and see how fully it urges the
commandment--the law of dependence that rests with parents so much of the
welfare of the child. Not merely food, clothing, and home, but all the
higher goods of life, experience, wisdom, virtue, are to be looked for
thus. As a general rule, benignant Providence itself has its chosen
almoner in father and mother, and the gifts are blessed as they are
received in reverence. We may indeed suppose monstrous cases, in which
unnatural parents exact such folly or wrong, that obedience ceases to be a
virtue. Such cases are not frequent enough to alter the general law, and
even in these, a true child, in refusing to conform to what is evil in the
sight of God, will do it in such a way as still to keep the commandment,
and treat tenderly even a perverse father, and expostulate with his
tyranny in a temper fitted more to subdue than irritate its violence. Such
monstrous cases need little notice in any Christian community, where
parents are generally ready enough to do the best, and give the most in
their power for their children. In fact, for them, the Decalogue has no
law, as if nature needed no decree to enforce parental love, and the
affections of themselves pressed heavily enough downwards. The great need
was and is of enforcing the obligation, that looks upward from child to
parent. Our modern culture, with all its scope and refinement, has no
substitute for this obligation; nay, needs it more than ever to check the
wilfulness and laxity so likely to come from precocious fancy and
unbridled temper. Experience is constantly showing, that even the external
promise connected with the commandment meets the wants of our own times
also, and now, as of old, filial obedience secures an efficient life and
peaceful civilization,--"that it may be well with thee, and that thy days
may be long in the land which the Lord thy God shall give." How many
bright and dark chapters of recent history show how close is the
connection between stability of society and filial respect--between
allegiance to every worthy institution and the discipline that learns to
regard a superior authority at home. This outward sanction the Gospel
accepts, and carries it into the spiritual kingdom. By many a precept the
apostles enforce the command, and by word and example, by the beatitudes
of the mount, and the obedience of the cross, our Saviour imparts new
blessing and worth to its observance.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have a foundation then to build upon, and filial respect rests upon the
Word of God, the welfare of the home, the good of society, and the peace
of the soul. Let the sentiment be worthy of the Divine foundation. If
worthy it will appear first of all as a feeling of affectionate reverence.
It will not be worship as with the Chinese absolutist, nor mere
friendship, as in the code of many a radical. The parent is of the same
nature with the child, and is not to be adored; he is superior in age,
experience and authority, and should have more than the friendly courtesy
of an equal. Superior in degree, though not in kind, he is to be regarded
with affectionate respect and deference. Any subjection more or less than
this comes of wrong, and leads to wrong. To exact utter servitude is
tyranny--to lower reasonable authority into flattery, entreaty, or
apology, is an imbecile indulgence which a child should be as unwilling to
ask as a parent to give.

If any hearers are ready to quarrel with us for presuming to define the
quality and conditions of one of the great social sentiments, and to say
that all the affections are best let alone without any forcing process, we
are not troubled for a reply. No modern folly has been more thoroughly put
down by analysis and experience, than the sentimentalist's notion, that
the affections are wholly their own law, and are not to be trained under
reason, conscience and religion. Even in those sentiments which have most
of the spontaneous play of genius--those which rejoice in poetry, music,
and all the beautiful arts, the perceptions must first be trained to the
nicest sense of the truth of things, and the rigid discipline of every
true artist shames the folly of the dreamers who would make it appear,
that the great art of life, as a school of the affections, is to be left
to itself. No--our principles have vast power over our feelings, and they
who from the beginning are trained to accept the great loyalties of a
divine kingdom, will be loyal in their affections as in their creed, and
their affections will come forth and grow up as the vine does by help of
the very trellis which overlooks it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The filial sentiment thus accepted and nurtured will not be idle, but will
show itself in the tone of manners, the rule of conduct, the law of life.

Manners are but lesser morals, and closely connected with the greater
morals. Good manners begin at home, and if they do not begin there, the
desire for them is apt to end in poor affectation. The soul of politeness
is mutual deference, and where should this have its origin but in the
respect most directly sanctioned by God? Too often the true filial honor
is forgotten, and, perhaps, from thoughtlessness more than disrespect,
children are sometimes seen usurping the prerogatives of age, speaking in
tones of petulant authority, and crowding themselves into the places of
elders. The best place for them is their own place. Their own dignity, as
well as that of their parents, is best furthered by the deference, that
gives the household its best order and makes it the school of the graces,
that adorn society with its pleasing gradations, and cheer the way to its
best virtues. Full enough is the temptation, especially in cities, to fall
short of this true deference and to rob childhood and youth of their best
character. Manners, instead of being nurtured on the Christian root, are
left too much to the dancing-master, and there are hosts of boys and
girls adept in postures and airs proper for the ballet, and strangers to
the reverence and simplicity that most honor them in honoring their
elders. Precocious passion for dress and society is the bane of the one,
and ridiculous affectation of manhood, especially of its follies, is the
shame of the other. The girl, instead of being calmly at rest in a child's
healthful slumber, is aping the belle in the ball-room; and the boy is
walking the street with his cigar, perhaps boasting of his powers at the
bottle, instead of being where he should be, in his bed, getting strength
for true manliness, not fevering himself into a ludicrous manikin. "Learn
to show piety at home," is thus another form of the ancient law, "Honor
thy father and thy mother."

The sentiment so essential to good manners will show itself as a rule of
conduct, and filial honor will take the form of obedience. During the
years of dependence this obedience is to be entire, for the parent must
think and act for the child. No matter what precocity of memory or
imagination, what privileges of education or amount of attainments, may
seem sometimes to reverse the order of precedence, the child is to follow
the parent's counsels, and in so doing will gain alike in wisdom and
discipline, for the experience of age is wiser than the pert wit of youth,
and submission to a superior will is essential to a true schooling for the
vicissitudes of life. It is not well to overstrain prerogative, and to
insist on obedience as a sacrifice, where it might be made an attraction,
if the reasons of the case are fully set forth. Nor is it well to make
obedience wholly dependent upon a statement of reasons, for many things
must be done for reasons that youth cannot appreciate, and kindness is
never so decided as when the impatient shortsightedness of childhood is
overruled by the far-seeing wisdom of maturity. Reason there should be in
every request; but if the request were allowed to wait until the reasons
could be understood, parental care would cease with the first restraint,
and childhood would be left to itself at the first task or pain. God
himself is our helper here, for he, who calls us in so many things to walk
by faith without sight, has fitted youth for the same discipline, and made
mild authority in the end more attractive and efficient than premature
argument or feeble flattery.

Obedience, thus considered, will not be servile but filial, and will find
its own honor in doing honor to its guardians. It will lead children to
ask constantly what they can do for the happiness of the family and the
welfare of its members. This duty is too little thought of, especially
where there is none of that pressure of want which compels children to
help in the maintenance of the family. No matter how great the wealth of
parents or the retinue of servants on the watch for every care, there is
still place for the earnest co-operation of each member of the family, and
no refinements of living have abolished the duty of mutual help, and the
grace of mutual deference. In most families the services of the children
are needed for many friendly offices of greater or less importance, and
none will deny that the comfort of every household is closely connected
with what the children do or fail to do for its welfare. So early does the
work, the responsible work of life begin, and so early may its springs of
beneficence be opened.

Let any true household illustrate what we mean. What beauty in the filial
confidence that reveals its troubles and needs, and asks counsel of
superior wisdom! What comfort in the countless little services that
lighten a father or mother's care, or soothe their troubles! What grace in
the unbought courtesies that youth may throw around the home, the refined
deference, the kind remembrances too often left to the parade of
drawing-rooms, but the proper ornament of the family circle! What power
over the pains of sickness, or the languor of convalescence, in the
solicitude and consideration which children may show, and showing, may
bring to the weary pillow a balm more healing than medical art! And if
stinted means require frugal expenditures, or even the active labor of the
young, what worth in the filial thoughtfulness that anticipates the
necessary economy, instead of repining encourages frugality, and asks to
be useful instead of insisting on being indulged.

And when fortune, station, or intellectual eminence reward youthful
aspiration, the aspirant never wins more respect than when he makes his
parents his confidants and companions. Here our common nature is not at
fault, for whenever in any public exercise or examination a young person
does remarkably well, we all think at once of the parents, and the
pleasure of the assembly is not complete until the people have confirmed
their own enjoyment by sympathy with the father and mother. There is great
power in this fact, and what it implies--great power in the fact that
children honor parents by being truly honorable, and repay best the
sacrifices of so many anxious years by making their own lives a credit and
comfort to father and mother. This benefit lasts as long as life itself,
and the integrity and efficiency of mature years carries out to the limit
of existence the affectionate reverence of childhood.

Here the whole world is one, and the human heart is the same in all ages,
and history and experience meet. What state of society can be blind to the
meaning of the imprecation which was pronounced at the entrance into the
promised land, and joined in the same doom the idolator and him who should
"set light by his father and mother?" What philosophy can gainsay the sage
of the Book of Proverbs, whose sententious moralizing rises into prophetic
grandeur as he speaks of the unnatural son: "The eye that mocketh at his
father or refuseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick
it out, and the young eagles shall eat it." Who needs any interpretation
of the feelings of David, or Joseph, or Solomon, in their joy or trial?
How heartrending was the grief of the Psalmist over his recreant
son--"Would to God, I had died for thee, my son, my son!" What beauty, as
well as simplicity in the inquiry of Joseph for his father, when the prime
minister of Egypt dismissed his courtly train, and weeping aloud, could
only ask "Doth my father yet live?" What grandeur far above its gold and
gems surrounded the throne of Solomon, when he rose to meet his mother,
and called her to a seat at his right hand. "And the king said unto her,
Ask on, my mother, for I will not say thee nay." What pathos and sublimity
in the Saviour of men, when, embracing home and heaven in his parting
words on the Cross, he commended his spirit to the Eternal Father, and
intrusted his mother to the beloved disciple's care. We need no more than
this to show how the gospel glorifies the law, and crowns its morality and
piety alike in its perfect love--"Woman, behold thy son"--"Disciple,
behold thy mother."

Hear the amen that goes from Calvary to Sinai--and Honor thy father and
thy mother!




Brothers and Sisters.




BROTHERS AND SISTERS.


When Cain asked "Am I my brother's keeper?" it seemed a very strange
question to come from a man who had just murdered his brother and held him
so cruelly in his keeping. Fear led Cain to disguise his guilt by
repudiating his obligation, through an interrogation more negative than a
flat denial. What he said in guilty fear, many are now ready to say in
pretended humanity, and it is one of the conceits of our time to make
light of ties of kindred in the name of a world-wide philanthropy. A
melo-dramatic patriotism not particularly famous for domestic attachment
has been ready to swear brotherhood to the whole nation, perhaps the whole
race, and many a scape-grace who has been a sad plague to his own kindred,
has been heard shouting at the top of his voice the three noble watchwords
of which fraternity is a climax. Philanthropists sometimes labor under a
similar error, and people who have had no especial solicitude or felicity
in helping their own families and neighbors, presume to despise such near
at hand interests as trivial, and seek to reform the world in a wholesale
way. Professed Christians are not wholly free from the error. Some
certainly there are who are ready to _brother_ and _sister_ all
Christendom with most profuse generosity of tongue, who show their little
sense of the meaning of the term by pinching selfishness towards those of
their own blood, that seems to say, "Am I my brother's keeper?"

It is well, that large views of social obligation are making headway, and
that Christianity has so mightily rebuked the narrowness of exclusive
cliques and clanships. But if humanity is to be true in its progress, it
must be true in its source; and if a man love not his brother whom he hath
seen, how can he love not merely God whom he hath not seen, but the
brother whom he hath not seen? In fact what is regard for our brother but
the first and most obvious application of the second of the two great
commandments? Our brother is our next neighbor, and even our humanity must
begin with him, that it may be really worth any thing. We turn now to the
collateral relations of the household, or the duties of brothers and
sisters. Sacred and suggestive subject, speaking to each of us in the
tones of our own peculiar experience. Let it speak to the conscience as
well as to the sensibilities and the memory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Where shall we begin but at the beginning, that is with the will of God,
which is the ground of every duty? The family, as we have seen and
believe, is the first form of society, a government founded by the
Creator. All that can be said in favor of its peace and order, goes to set
forth its collateral as well as its ascending and descending ties--to urge
the obligations of brothers and sisters as well as parents and children.
Co-operation between the former is as essential to the home, as are
protection and dependence between the latter.

But to come more closely to the point, is it not true that proper respect
for parents urges the duty now under consideration and just filial love
must needs be fraternal? Children cannot be true to their parents without
being true to each other, and the welfare and charm of the household
depends in no small degree upon the mutual help and moral harmony of its
younger members. Children are not regarded as so many separate units, but
as an organic whole, as members one of another; and when they are
considerate and harmonious, they have new grace and worth in the parent's
eye, more so to his heart, than the features of the fairest landscape
where the particulars combine in the whole, and light, shade, grove and
river, hill and valley--fair in themselves, are fairer together, can
possibly have to the eye of the lover of nature. What under the heavens is
more pleasant and lovely than brethren who with all their differences of
taste and temperament still agree in aim and spirit? It is indeed like the
dew of Hermon, that threw its silver veil over mountain and valley, and
refreshed and beautified each tree and flower with a baptism from heaven.

But this relation of fraternal love to filial is but one of its aspects.
Brothers and sisters are related by what they owe directly to each other,
as well as by what they owe to parents. The will of God, that bids them
agree for their parents' sake, bids them also agree for their own sake.
Mutual educators of each other they must be, and by means far more
powerful than school-books or lessons. They are constantly together, and
this intercourse must be a selfish collision, if it be not a friendly
reciprocity. In childhood, they must needs be frequent rivals for the
favors and duties of the home, subjects of indulgences or sacrifices, that
must awaken strife, unless they are shared in mutual deference. With
childhood, however, the relation does not end, but may have in mature
years its gravest importance, for in the order of nature parents are
likely to be first taken from the world, and to all human view they may be
beyond the reach of kindness or unkindness. But the relation of children
to each other promises to last far longer, may create between the elder
and younger a relation parental as well as filial, and for good or ill it
must in some way continue as long as life itself. How essential, then,
that a tie so enduring should be rightly regarded, and that in childhood,
youth and maturity, it should keep its benignant hold over the family!

Nor does its importance end here. The method of God is, that the
affections shall grow outward from within, and that being trained in
kindness at home, men should be prepared to show good will to each other
in all the concerns of life. As the patriarchal dispensation, in the grand
course of ages, widened into the universality of the gospel, so in every
true life, a just family culture is to expand into a generous humanity,
that learns at home how to speak of a broader brotherhood, and a higher
fatherhood. Whether God's method is not wiser than man's let experience
show by contracting the windy declamation, that mistakes rhetorical
generalities for comprehensive benevolence, and the judicious,
unostentatious beneficence that carries out in all its relations the sober
good will cherished in a wholesome household discipline, and so on a true
pattern strives to build up the larger household of faith. The one begins
at the root, and so branches out in blessing--the other would begin with
the branches, which wither away when parted from the root.

       *       *       *       *       *

So then in the will of God, revealed in the constitution of the family,
the welfare of its members, the spirit of humanity, we find the foundation
of the duties of brothers and sisters. The fraternal sentiment must be in
accordance. In all our affections, there must needs be some lights and
shades that depend upon the individual's gifts and experience, for no man
is a rule for all, and we must differ in our likings as in our looks. Yet
all primal obligations have essential features in common; and the
fraternal sentiment, although less instructive than the parental, and more
complex than the filial, has quite as decidedly a character of its own.
The phrenologist may not locate it in a special organ of the brain, and
the metaphysician may not make of it an instinct by itself, but it has its
root none the less in nature, and loses no interest from expanding so
generously under true associations and culture. When true, the fraternal
sentiment unites congeniality with consanguinity, and developes friendship
from kindred blood, as the parted branches open into leaves, and
blossoms, and fruits, kindred in their aims as their source. Its nature is
better shown by tracing out its just influence than by attempting to
arrest its flitting shades of hue, or to analyze its constituent elements.
Here, too, is the practical bearing of the subject, a bearing which many
slight far more from thoughtlessness than from indifference. In what light
are brothers or sisters called to regard each other?

Their first obvious duty is that of due consideration for each other. They
are to consider each other's circumstances, needs, trials, dispositions,
opportunities, and never allow selfishness or indifference to blind them
to what belongs to them in common. Does this need to be said of persons
who are so near, as of necessity to be always in each other's thoughts?
Ah, what is more frequent and obvious, than that familiarity tempts
indifference, and that our very primal duties, like the stars which are
their emblems, are easily forgotten because they may at any time be seen?
The things most significant are likely to be near at hand, and religion,
like philosophy, finds its chief triumphs in opening the meaning of what
God has brought to our very door. A part of the power of absence from home
lies in breaking the spell of familiarity, and leading the absent one to
look impartially upon the familiar circle, and upon his own place and
conduct there. Many a youth or maiden has returned from a journey or
voyage wiser far in sense of home duties than proud of the accomplishments
of travel. True consideration will not need absence to teach this lesson,
but from its calm point of view the absent one will survey the common
spheres of life, and try to live for others as under the eye of God.

In each family there will be decided need for mutual consideration, and
there must be strife, unless there is mutual deference. All cannot have
all the favors, and the division of them may embroil a household as
bitterly as the division of an empire has embroiled rival heirs of
thrones. Where means are limited, mutual sacrifices not always easy must
be made, and few families pass many years without feeling the power of
consideration, or of selfishness in meeting the privations that must go
round their circle. When means are abundant, and every wish has ready
wealth at its command, the form of forbearance may change, but its
essential spirit is none the less needed. There will still be differences
of talent, looks, manners, opportunities, health, experience, that require
in the most prosperous household the same virtues, that give the humblest
cottage its dignity and peace. In every family, there will be some call
for peculiar consideration or regard to some member of it, according as
sickness, infirmity, youth, age, deficient or extraordinary ability, may
call upon the stronger to serve the weaker. What wretchedness when the
call is slighted, even by one! Who can calculate the mischief wrought by a
sensual or reckless brother, who makes every thing secondary to his own
passions and pleasures, or by a frivolous and heartless sister, who makes
a god of fashion and enslaves the whole house to her monstrous vanity!
Who, too, can calculate the influence of a high-minded brother in guiding
and cheering the younger members of the family, or of a devoted and
judicious sister in soothing every impatient humor with a face in which
shines, perhaps, the light of the sainted mother's countenance? When all
unite in some common solicitude, God gives their daily bread and cup a
sacramental grace, and from some sufferer whom they watch over together, a
mighty blessing, uniting, exalting them all, comes forth, and seems to say
in the sacred name, "Ye have done it unto me."

Consideration will lead to confidence, and will banish deceit, that viper
of society, from the hearth-stone, which too often warms it into life. Let
confidence begin early, move the lips first lisping for utterance, and
continue in maturity, when the world's folly that sometimes names itself
experience shall try to teach disguise as prudence, and artifice as
wisdom. Whatever we may think of the confessor, as an official person,
confession is founded in the nature of things, and God bids us confess our
faults one to another. Who ought to be confidential, if not those whose
experience and destiny so unite their lives? I cannot even glance at the
chief forms of this confidential relation. One aspect may be specified
which is too often forgotten--that between brother and sister. If these
were more candid advisers, each would be better for it--each imparting to
each the counsel that each can give. With feminine insight and purity,
what a kind and gentle, yet strict and earnest censor of youthful excess,
the one may be. With manly judgment and honor, what a firm and scrupulous,
yet tender and considerate adviser in reference to many follies and
dangers may the other be. Giddy as young people often are in their
pleasures and caprices, it has sometimes seemed to me, that if a plan of
life were to be drawn up by the youth of a family for each other, few
treatises of morals would surpass it in purity of spirit or rectitude of
principle. Some follies would be sure to fall. Where would intemperance
and its kindred vices be, if sisters were taken as counsellors? Where
would indecent costumes, immodest dances, equivocal friendships be, if
brothers were more frequent advisers? This negative influence is not a
tithe of the worth of the relation, which God in his infinite tenderness
and wisdom has decreed--a relation so able to enrich ties of nature by
every grace of mind and heart, and from likeness and unlikeness of
constitution to develope one of the finest harmonies of our being. Its
beauty cheers many a dark age of ancient rudeness, and adorns many of the
brightest chapters of our modern culture. Would we know what brother and
sister have been to each other, listen to the triumphal song of Miriam, as
she braced anew the great heart of the law-giver with timbrel and psalm;
or look to the grave of Lazarus, where Mary and Martha stood with Him who
was the Resurrection and the Life. Do we ask more modern instances, stand
under the open heavens and remember how Caroline Herschel shared the
vigils of their illustrious explorer--open the pages of Neander, and think
of her whose devotedness made a pleasant home of his otherwise solitary
study, and encouraged him in his noble work of tracing out the progress of
the divine life throughout all the mazes of theological controversy, and
making church history a book of the heart, instead of the disputatious
understanding. Do we need more--only conjecture the number of cases nearer
at hand in which youth have been counselled and helped on through years of
preparation to their calling or profession by a sacrifice that looked not
to the world for motive, and asked not of the world reward for its
success.

I need only name the crowning duty of brothers and sisters--the duty of
being mutual helpers, for this is implied in what we have said of
consideration and confidence. They whom God has so united should stand by
each other in every worthy way--not selfishly exacting favors, but earnest
to do good. Too often the contrary has indeed been the case, and history
in most conspicuous passages, from the death of Abel and the exposure of
Joseph to the wars of the Plantagenets and the feuds of the Bourbons,
shows that strifes are bitterest when nearest home, and "a brother
offended is indeed harder to be won than a strong city, and their
contentions are like the bars of a castle." Less conspicuous, because less
monstrous, are the opposite cases, and Christianity itself leads the noble
list of fraternal worthies, by presenting in its first disciples so many
who carried ties of blood into bonds of faith, and strove together to the
last for the kingdom that would make all brothers in God. The various
forms of fraternal aid need not be specified, nor the cases described in
which the death of parents or peculiar circumstances enhance the
obligation, and the responsibility of parents devolves upon the elder
children. Whatever the age, the welfare of children is closely connected
with their mutual conduct, and its power reaches not merely to the
division of time and cares, but to the highest interests of mind and
heart. Firm principle, spiritual faith, devoted purposes, act and react
collaterally with great power, and in the social as in the natural world,
it is the side light and warmth that most applies the cheering rays from
above. Happy the home where true peace dwells between kindred, and all
various gifts are held in unity of spirit! While the circle remains
unbroken, it is strong against the world. When broken it is still not
desolate, and the orphan is not without a helper. There is love enough on
earth to join with the love that has gone heavenward to make life
cheerful, and keep hope firm.

Let all apply these thoughts. Children, apply them, and be kind in all you
do and say. Youth, apply them, and be thoughtful where you are often
tempted to be reckless. Elders, apply them, and never allow care or
worldliness to chill the better affections of early days. Deep in the
heart let the old home live, and its pleasant memories, brightened by
kindly offices, open ever into immortal hopes. Old things must pass away,
but from the Christian they can only pass away by being all made new--new
in a spirit, that remembers best when progressing most, and crowns all
friendships with charity divine.




Marriage.




MARRIAGE.


It is a remarkable fact, that He who came to be the Saviour from sin,
whose name is coupled with the sorrow that he would alleviate, began his
public ministry at a marriage, and gave the first proof of his powers
amidst its festivities. Yet why wonder at it--for where should the Gospel
begin its work if not with the union that founds the family and should
secure every social and moral good? How, moreover, could the genius of
Christianity better show itself than by such a practical rebuke of the
asceticism that scorned the social affections, and would make of life a
ghostly austerity, just as if man were heavenly by being unearthly? It
needs no great ingenuity to imagine our Lord's feelings, as with his
kindly and majestic thought he looked upon that scene, and gave his
blessing to the youth and maiden who were probably of his own kin. He saw
all the serious and trying aspects of human life even in its best estate,
yet none the less gave them joy upon their union.

It is well that he was at that feast. The ages since have remembered his
presence, and his sacred name, heard still at the marriage, deepens its
memory, and consecrates its joy. The two ideas thus connected in fact are
connected in principle, and the moralist need not in any enlightened
community fear to speak of the Christian view of marriage, or care at all
either for the giggling levity that sees nothing solemn in the subject, or
for the sanctimonious gravity, that considers religion profaned by being
made practical. There are some difficulties in the way of a frank
treatment of the subject; I know our customs do not favor the homely
simplicity of the language of the Bible in the discussion of marriage, and
he must be very adventurous who undertakes to use the plain speech of the
old divines, whether in the quaint aphorisms of Thomas Fuller or the
jewelled periods of Jeremy Taylor. Yet it is not well to be very
fastidious or mystify any subject by ingenious circumlocution, and we
propose to say some plain words on the relation of husbands and wives in
continuation of these thoughts upon home duties.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not much need be said upon the foundation of this relation. It rests
clearly upon the will of God, the best good of the parties, and the
welfare of society.

As the Creator and Preserver of mankind, as the Lord of Nature and the
Father of Spirits, God has made us social beings, and decreed that the
most important association should be a lasting one. The natural law, which
in lower creatures establishes a transient union, enacts the permanence of
the higher relation, and when profoundly studied agrees with the precepts
of Revelation and the results of the best experience.

God's will is clearly shown in the effect of marriage upon the moral
condition of the parties themselves. It is generally essential to their
true life--to the proper development of their affections and faculties.
Under good Providence, it is the school of the heart, the motive to the
most laudable exertion and sacrifice. There are persons indeed whose
peculiar duties may exempt them from its cares,--scholars, devotees,
philanthropists, who may give their whole heart to their chosen
speciality, and make of science, religion or humanity their family and
home. Yet these are not the general rule, and even these generally prove
that the peculiar power acquired by concentrating their whole mind upon a
single pursuit gives them force at the expense of breadth of culture, and
may be morbid because preternatural. The monk and nun, in the convent or
out of it, have done noble things, and every faithful memory must bless
them for it--but not the noblest things. They have shown much mercy, yet
quite as much spiritual pride. If they have fed the poor, they have framed
the Mass Book and the Confessional. If they have cared for the orphan,
they have also invented infant damnation and the Inquisition, insisting on
hell hereafter for all not baptized by their priesthood, and devising a
hell here below for all heretics against their creed. Unmarried people
ruled Christendom for a thousand years, and that they did not rule in
wisdom, the Bible, history, and our best modern culture all declare. Nay,
the very sage of modern celibacy, Swedenborg, gave years of his life and
the chief labors of his pen to prove, that the best wisdom comes from
minds united conjugially, imbuing thought with affection, and informing
affection with thought, and so best interpreting the God in Christ. They
who may be puzzled by his mystical lore will have no difficulty with the
more practical argument, or refuse to allow that the most healthy thought
and feeling, the most comprehensive culture, frequents the home which a
true marriage makes.

"Marriage," says Jeremy Taylor, "is the mother of the world, and preserves
kingdoms and fills cities and churches and heaven itself. Celibate, like
the fly in the heart of an apple, dwells in a perpetual sweetness, but
sits alone, and is confined and dies in singularity; but marriage, like
the useful bee, builds a house, and gathers sweetness from every flower,
and labors, and unites into societies and republics, and sends out
colonies, and keeps order, and exercises many virtues, and promotes the
interest of mankind, and is that state of good things to which God hath
designed the present constitution of the world."

To carry out the argument and show the necessity of this relation to due
provision for children, to the peace and purity of society at large, would
but lead us into common-places that can as well be spared. Better pass on
and speak of the nature and duties of the relation in question.

       *       *       *       *       *

It differs from the other relations that we have thus far considered,
first of all in the fact, that it is elective or voluntary. The tie is one
of choice, not of blood, and of course this fact of itself speaks to
reason and conscience to stir themselves in the choice, instead of leaving
it to a giddy eye or a silly ear. The relation, moreover, is exclusive,
and in this fact it is distinguished from all ties of blood and all other
ties of choice. Again it is entire--extending to all the interests of
human life. Elective, exclusive, entire, marriage is thus the most
momentous of human relations. Decalogue, Gospel, Providence, experience,
all declare it such, and rest upon an act of choice the only obligation
that brooks no rival and allows no limitation.

In accordance with the tenderness and dignity of the relation, the ruling
sentiment and correspondent duties must be. Of the sentiment, more than
filial or parental love, more than brotherhood, for which friendship is an
inadequate name, and which at once fascinates by natural affinities and
binds with the sacredness of religion, I have no elaborate analysis to
give. We escape at once the peril of maudlin sentimentality and
metaphysical abstraction, by speaking of the sentiment in the practical
fruits, which best show its nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

We say first of all, that husband and wife should be true to each
other--true first and last. Wo to them, if they begin their relation with
a lie, either spoken or acted. They promise to love, honor and cherish
each other, and they lie abominably in the sight of God and their own
consciences, if they nullify the solemn promise by capricious levity or
sordid selfishness. Full liberty of conscience must be allowed for the
action of various minds, temperaments, circumstances, and not all
dispositions are to be judged by the same degree of the moral thermometer.
Yet of all diversities of gifts, this statement holds good, that marriage
begins in an impious falsehood, if the parties do not regard each other
with affection and respect, and do not mean to be mutual helpers. An
earth-born impulse should not steal a sacred name, nor a mercenary bargain
intrude its traffic into precincts more sacred than the temple courts. The
sale of a human creature under the marriage ring is more degrading because
more voluntary than under the auctioneer's hammer, and God will not
withhold his verdict against the profanation of his altars by such outrage
against nature and the Gospel.

The beginning is true, when the bond is sincerely assumed, and spirit and
truth go fully together when the whole mind and heart agree in a
congeniality without alloy and without misgiving.

True in the beginning, husband and wife are to be true in their progress
together. Of that gross falsity against which God launches an express law
of the Decalogue, and of whose curse on the offender and the victim, so
many wretched lives and homes are the providential commentary, I need not
speak with minuteness. Fidelity demands more than any negative
policy--demands truthfulness throughout the whole relation, the confidence
that will not mask its face or thought in reserve, and will deem it a
fraud to confer with any third party upon any matter belonging in its
nature to the two. It is the beginning of bitter sorrow, when this limit
is overstepped, and that enamel of mutual confidence is broken, which kind
Heaven has given for the protection of so delicate a nerve.

Nor does truthfulness end here. It must be positive in word and in
action--prompting the parties to share their thoughts and plans together,
and to prove by devotion to each other's welfare the truth of what they
say. We spare the digression to many satirists so attractive, and saying
nothing of the cheats of married life, whether the frauds of selfishness
or the wiles of overfondness, we are better pleased to leave the other
aspect of the picture uppermost, and speak of God's blessing upon all who
keep their truth by being true as well as kind.

       *       *       *       *       *

We add now a second duty of married persons--one that has a very prosaic
sound, touching a matter so near the springs of feeling. We say that
husband and wife should be reasonable--reasonable that they may be true in
fact as well as in purpose. Feeling of itself, even when healthy, is a
poor guide, sadly blind without reason. Whether it go with love or
indifference, folly carries misery into the home. The proverb is true
enough--

  "A stone is heavy and the sand weighty,
  But a fool's wrath is heavier than both;"

and we might add, a fool's love is quite as heavy as his wrath. We speak
not of the folly, which is a natural misfortune, but that of minds
befooling themselves by levity, or dissipation, or idleness. Nothing
wears better than good sense, and nothing is more essential to permanent
congeniality and usefulness. It is sometimes a stern censor, but only
because it wishes to be an honest friend. Let married persons take it for
their counsellor and it will settle for them many questions, which inflame
self-will and disturb love itself. They need above all others to be
reasonable, to look to reason with all its revealed lights as the
interpreter of God's will to them, and of their own relation to each
other. It is a great thing for them to start in life with reasonable views
of the most common-place arrangements of the household. How much
disappointment, and bitterness, and sin, come from unreasonable views of
expense, and who will undertake to estimate the amount of domestic misery
resulting from household extravagance? The dress of many a wife, and the
wine account of many a husband has been the ruin of the family. Let every
couple start with a fair understanding as to what they can afford to
spend, and keep sacredly within the limit. If the world laughs at their
simplicity, they can well afford to laugh at the world's folly, and time
will be very likely to put the laugh upon the right side. Much might be
said of the deplorable influence of the extravagant notions of most young
women in preventing thoughtful men from taking the risks of marriage, and
we hazard nothing in saying that the worst vices of cities are closely
connected with the growth of feminine extravagance. America will lose her
birthright and have no trace of the old domestic order, if the folly runs
through the land, and most girls are brought up to exact more expense
than the average returns of industry and talent can earn.

Good sense, that honest counsellor, will save the parties from all
controversy about prerogative, will interpret their peculiar jurisdictions
duly; teaching the man to take the lead without magisterial assumption, to
be the guardian without playing the tyrant; teaching the woman to follow
his fortunes without being his slave, and to accept his deference without
becoming his imbecile toy; exhibiting both in their likeness and
difference, equals and not equals, so that the twain are made one by a due
balance of gifts and harmony of contrasts.

Is there not need of urging with some emphasis the worth of reasonable
relations between husband and wife? Are they not too ready to make a
compromise of follies--the one annoyed by having her tastes and habits
reviewed in the strong light of a masculine understanding--the other
irritated at having his hard worldliness criticised by feminine refinement
or sensibility--the two sometimes settling the difficulty by
non-interference--the one left to extravagance and frivolity, if she will
consent not to insist upon having her husband's time or thought--the other
allowed to drudge as he will, if he will not intrude his utilitarianism
into her sphere, or apply common sense to the charming follies that devour
the dollars and the days. It is all wrong, and no gifts of fortune can
make up for the want of thoroughly rational companionship between parties
so allied, and so apt to belittle each other by triviality. Both are
gainers by it, and intellectually as well as morally--the more gainers as
in generous studies of nature, art, history, society, they take a common
interest in the enlarging and ennobling fields of thought, and their
habitual confidence makes them educators of each other. Without being
alarmed by the valiant Minervas who brandish their flashing spears from
reform platforms, and declare an independence at which the old
Revolutionary signers would have stood aghast, we believe that the most
thorough practical discipline is to be found in this home school, and the
enlargement of feminine perception and the refining of masculine vigor,
would advance vastly under such a culture. There would be a better mutual
understanding of the two great domains of life, and a holy alliance
between the two great families of minds. In plain language, if husband and
wife would advise with each other fully on all important subjects, the
robust understanding would be much helped by the quick wit, and fewer
foolish things, far fewer evil things would be done in the world. In
phrase more ideal, yet equally true, if insight were better allied with
argument--ready sensibility with executive strength--nice perception with
comprehensive judgment, reason would have a new avatar on earth, and the
light of God would shine as never before in its beauty and its power into
each household, and over the great globe.

       *       *       *       *       *

One more aspect of the class of duties before us now, we have to state,
and one that comprises and carries out every other. They who marry are to
live united in all the interests and purposes of existence.

The most obvious ground of union is the maintenance of the home and the
welfare of the family. The order of Providence seems to require the one to
provide by his labor or enterprise the means of livelihood, and the other
to see that they are properly used. As manners are simple, and fortunes
limited, the union of interests here is a very grave matter, and
inefficiency or self-will on either side brings discomfort, perhaps
wretchedness. As manners are refined, and luxuries abound, the same unity
of minds is equally essential to give grace and true worth to the home.
Let each respect the other in the several spheres, and combine to make
both what they should be. Let not a man's laborious gains be squandered in
folly, nor a wife's faithful care be disparaged as trivial. To use a
homely word with a sacred meaning, who will not ask a blessing on good
housekeeping? Is it not one of the fine as well as the useful arts--do not
its very utilities like the fountain of living water sparkle into beauty?
Happy they who know more of it than the tender mercies of hotels and
boarding-houses reveal. They do _not_ learn it well, unless they mingle
faith with their economies, and keep the home in divine peace, as well as
in worldly thrift. A home divided against itself cannot stand. Who shall
keep it one save He in whom alone all souls can have the unity of the
spirit and the bond of peace, and whose blessing is needed quite as much
in a ducal palace as in the plainest farm-house?

How shall we urge at length this point of union, or illustrate its bearing
upon all interests, plans, and hopes? It is a great thing for two frail
natures to live as one for life long. Two harps are not easily kept always
in tune, and what shall we expect of two harps each of a thousand strings?
What human will or wisdom cannot do, God can do, and His Providence is
uniting ever more intimately, those who devoutly try to do the work of
life and enjoy its goods together. For them there is in store a respect
and affection--a peace and power, all unknown in the heyday of young
romance. Experience intertwines their remembrances and hopes in stronger
cords, and as they stand at the loom of time, one with the strong warp,
the other with the finer woof, the hand of Providence weaves for them a
tissue of unfading beauty and imperishable worth. A blessing on the brave
and gentle spirit of the elect poet of our time, Alfred Tennyson, for
speaking in his exquisite verse a truth that might too much task our
prosaic analysis:--

    "For woman is not undeveloped man,
  But diverse; could we make her as the man,
  Sweet love were slain, whose dearest bond is this
  Not like to thee, but like in difference;
  Yet in the long years liker must they grow;
  The man be more of woman, she of man;
  He gain in sweetness and in moral height,
  Nor lose the wrestling thews that throw the world;
  She mental breath, nor fail in childward care:
  More as the double-natured Poet each:
  Till at the last she set herself to man,
  Like perfect music unto noble words;
  And so these twain, upon the skirts of Time,
  Sit side by