n nothing; and
after due consideration, I have determined, therefore, to abstain from
presenting any précis of the learned Doctor’s reasoning, or extract
from his statement on a subject which he describes as “involving, not
improbably, some of the profoundest arcana of our dual existence, and
its intermediates.”

I was anxious on discovering this paper, to reopen the correspondence
commenced by Doctor Hesselius, so many years before, with a person so
clever and careful as his informant seems to have been. Much to my
regret, however, I found that she had died in the interval.

She, probably, could have added little to the Narrative which she
communicates in the following pages, with, so far as I can pronounce,
such conscientious particularity.




I.
An Early Fright


In Styria, we, though by no means magnificent people, inhabit a castle,
or schloss. A small income, in that part of the world, goes a great
way. Eight or nine hundred a year does wonders. Scantily enough ours
would have answered among wealthy people at home. My father is English,
and I bear an English name, although I never saw England. But here, in
this lonely and primitive place, where everything is so marvelously
cheap, I really don’t see how ever so much more money would at all
materially add to our comforts, or even luxuries.

My father was in the Austrian service, and retired upon a pension and
his patrimony, and purchased this feudal residence, and the small
estate on which it stands, a bargain.

Nothing can be more picturesque or solitary. It stands on a slight
eminence in a forest. The road, very old and narrow, passes in front of
its drawbridge, never raised in my time, and its moat, stocked with
perch, and sailed over by many swans, and floating on its surface white
fleets of water lilies.

Over all this the schloss shows its many-windowed front; its towers,
and its Gothic chapel.

The forest opens in an irregular and very picturesque glade before its
gate, and at the right a steep Gothic bridge carries the road over a
stream that winds in deep shadow through the wood. I have said that
this is a very lonely place. Judge whether I say truth. Looking from
the hall door towards the road, the forest in which our castle stands
extends fifteen miles to the right, and twelve to the left. The nearest
inhabited village is about seven of your English miles to the left. The
nearest inhabited schloss of any historic associations, is that of old
General Spielsdorf, nearly twenty miles away to the right.

I have said “the nearest _inhabited_ village,” because there is, only
three miles westward, that is to say in the direction of General
Spielsdorf’s schloss, a ruined village, with its quaint little church,
now roofless, in the aisle of which are the moldering tombs of the
proud family of Karnstein, now extinct, who once owned the equally
desolate chateau which, in the thick of the forest, overlooks the
silent ruins of the town.

Respecting the cause of the desertion of this striking and melancholy
spot, there is a legend which I shall relate to you another time.

I must tell you now, how very small is the party who constitute the
inhabitants of our castle. I don’t include servants, or those
dependents who occupy rooms in the buildings attached to the schloss.
Listen, and wonder! My father, who is the kindest man on earth, but
growing old; and I, at the date of my story, only nineteen. Eight years
have passed since then.

I and my father constituted the family at the schloss. My mother, a
Styrian lady, died in my infancy, but I had a good-natured governess,
who had been with me from, I might almost say, my infancy. I could not
remember the time when her fat, benignant face was not a familiar
picture in my memory.

This was Madame Perrodon, a native of Berne, whose care and good nature
now in part supplied to me the loss of my mother, whom I do not even
remember, so early I lost her. She made a third at our little dinner
party. There was a fourth, Mademoiselle De Lafontaine, a lady such as
you term, I believe, a “finishing governess.” She spoke French and
German, Madame Perrodon French and broken English, to which my father
and I added English, which, partly to prevent its becoming a lost
language among us, and partly from patriotic motives, we spoke every
day. The consequence was a Babel, at which strangers used to laugh, and
which I shall make no attempt to reproduce in this narrative. And there
were two or three young lady friends besides, pretty nearly of my own
age, who were occasional visitors, for longer or shorter terms; and
these visits I sometimes returned.

These were our regular social resources; but of course there were
chance visits from “neighbors” of only five or six leagues distance. My
life was, notwithstanding, rather a solitary one, I can assure you.

My gouvernantes had just so much control over me as you might
conjecture such sage persons would have in the case of a rather spoiled
girl, whose only parent allowed her pretty nearly her own way in
everything.

The first occurrence in my existence, which produced a terrible
impression upon my mind, which, in fact, never has been effaced, was
one of the very earliest incidents of my life which I can recollect.
Some people will think it so trifling that it should not be recorded
here. You will see, however, by-and-by, why I mention it. The nursery,
as it was called, though I had it all to myself, was a large room in
the upper story of the castle, with a steep oak roof. I can’t have been
more than six years old, when one night I awoke, and looking round the
room from my bed, failed to see the nursery maid. Neither was my nurse
there; and I thought myself alone. I was not frightened, for I was one
of those happy children who are studiously kept in ignorance of ghost
stories, of fairy tales, and of all such lore as makes us cover up our
heads when the door cracks suddenly, or the flicker of an expiring
candle makes the shadow of a bedpost dance upon the wall, nearer to our
faces. I was vexed and insulted at finding myself, as I conceived,
neglected, and I began to whimper, preparatory to a hearty bout of
roaring; when to my surprise, I saw a solemn, but very pretty face
looking at me from the side of the bed. It was that of a young lady who
was kneeling, with her hands under the coverlet. I looked at her with a
kind of pleased wonder, and ceased whimpering. She caressed me with her
hands, and lay down beside me on the bed, and drew me towards her,
smiling; I felt immediately delightfully soothed, and fell asleep
again. I was wakened by a sensation as if two needles ran into my
breast very deep at the same moment, and I cried loudly. The lady
started back, with her eyes fixed on me, and then slipped down upon the
floor, and, as I thought, hid herself under the bed.

I was now for the first time frightened, and I yelled with all my might
and main. Nurse, nursery maid, housekeeper, all came running in, and
hearing my story, they made light of it, soothing me all they could
meanwhile. But, child as I was, I could perceive that their faces were
pale with an unwonted look of anxiety, and I saw them look under the
bed, and about the room, and peep under tables and pluck open
cupboards; and the housekeeper whispered to the nurse: “Lay your hand
along that hollow in the bed; someone _did_ lie there, so sure as you
did not; the place is still warm.”

I remember the nursery maid petting me, and all three examining my
chest, where I told them I felt the puncture, and pronouncing that
there was no sign visible that any such thing had happened to me.

The housekeeper and the two other servants who were in charge of the
nursery, remained sitting up all night; and from that time a servant
always sat up in the nursery until I was about fourteen.

I was very nervous for a long time after this. A doctor was called in,
he was pallid and elderly. How well I remember his long saturnine face,
slightly pitted with smallpox, and his chestnut wig. For a good while,
every second day, he came and gave me medicine, which of course I
hated.

The morning after I saw this apparition I was in a state of terror, and
could not bear to be left alone, daylight though it was, for a moment.

I remember my father coming up and standing at the bedside, and talking
cheerfully, and asking the nurse a number of questions, and laughing
very heartily at one of the answers; and patting me on the shoulder,
and kissing me, and telling me not to be frightened, that it was
nothing but a dream and could not hurt me.

But I was not comforted, for I knew the visit of the strange woman was
_not_ a dream; and I was _awfully_ frightened.

I was a little consoled by the nursery maid’s assuring me that it was
she who had come and looked at me, and lain down beside me in the bed,
and that I must have been half-dreaming not to have known her face. But
this, though supported by the nurse, did not quite satisfy me.

I remembered, in the course of that day, a venerable old man, in a
black cassock, coming into the room with the nurse and housekeeper, and
talking a little to them, and very kindly to me; his face was very
sweet and gentle, and he told me they were going to pray, and joined my
hands together, and desired me to say, softly, while they were praying,
“Lord hear all good prayers for us, for Jesus’ sake.” I think these
were the very words, for I often repeated them to myself, and my nurse
used for years to make me say them in my prayers.

I remembered so well the thoughtful sweet face of that white-haired old
man, in his black cassock, as he stood in that rude, lofty, brown room,
with the clumsy furniture of a fashion three hundred years old about
him, and the scanty light entering its shadowy atmosphere through the
small lattice. He kneeled, and the three women with him, and he prayed
aloud with an earnest quavering voice for, what appeared to me, a long
time. I forget all my life preceding that event, and for some time
after it is all obscure also, but the scenes I have just described
stand out vivid as the isolated pictures of the phantasmagoria
surrounded by darkness.




II.
A Guest


I am now going to tell you something so strange that it will require
all your faith in my veracity to believe my story. It is not only true,
nevertheless, but truth of which I have been an eyewitness.

It was a sweet summer evening, and my father asked me, as he sometimes
did, to take a little ramble with him along that beautiful forest vista
which I have mentioned as lying in front of the schloss.

“General Spielsdorf cannot come to us so soon as I had hoped,” said my
father, as we pursued our walk.

He was to have paid us a visit of some weeks, and we had expected his
arrival next day. He was to have brought with him a young lady, his
niece and ward, Mademoiselle Rheinfeldt, whom I had never seen, but
whom I had heard described as a very charming girl, and in whose
society I had promised myself many happy days. I was more disappointed
than a young lady living in a town, or a bustling neighborhood can
possibly imagine. This visit, and the new acquaintance it promised, had
furnished my day dream for many weeks.

“And how soon does he come?” I asked.

“Not till autumn. Not for two months, I dare say,” he answered. “And I
am very glad now, dear, that you never knew Mademoiselle Rheinfeldt.”

“And why?” I asked, both mortified and curious.

“Because the poor young lady is dead,” he replied. “I quite forgot I
had not told you, but you were not in the room when I received the
General’s letter this evening.”

I was very much shocked. General Spielsdorf had mentioned in his first
letter, six or seven weeks before, that she was not so well as he would
wish her, but there was nothing to suggest the remotest suspicion of
danger.

“Here is the General’s letter,” he said, handing it to me. “I am afraid
he is in great affliction; the letter appears to me to have been
written very nearly in distraction.”

We sat down on a rude bench, under a group of magnificent lime trees.
The sun was setting with all its melancholy splendor behind the sylvan
horizon, and the stream that flows beside our home, and passes under
the steep old bridge I have mentioned, wound through many a group of
noble trees, almost at our feet, reflecting in its current the fading
crimson of the sky. General Spielsdorf’s letter was so extraordinary,
so vehement, and in some places so self-contradictory, that I read it
twice over—the second time aloud to my father—and was still unable to
account for it, except by supposing that grief had unsettled his mind.

It said “I have lost my darling daughter, for as such I loved her.
During the last days of dear Bertha’s illness I was not able to write
to you.

Before then I had no idea of her danger. I have lost her, and now learn
_all_, too late. She died in the peace of innocence, and in the
glorious hope of a blessed futurity. The fiend who betrayed our
infatuated hospitality has done it all. I thought I was receiving into
my house innocence, gaiety, a charming companion for my lost Bertha.
Heavens! what a fool have I been!

I thank God my child died without a suspicion of the cause of her
sufferings. She is gone without so much as conjecturing the nature of
her illness, and the accursed passion of the agent of all this misery.
I devote my remaining days to tracking and extinguishing a monster. I
am told I may hope to accomplish my righteous and merciful purpose. At
present there is scarcely a gleam of light to guide me. I curse my
conceited incredulity, my despicable affectation of superiority, my
blindness, my obstinacy—all—too late. I cannot write or talk
collectedly now. I am distracted. So soon as I shall have a little
recovered, I mean to devote myself for a time to enquiry, which may
possibly lead me as far as Vienna. Some time in the autumn, two months
hence, or earlier if I live, I will see you—that is, if you permit me;
I will then tell you all that I scarce dare put upon paper now.
Farewell. Pray for me, dear friend.”

In these terms ended this strange letter. Though I had never seen
Bertha Rheinfeldt my eyes filled with tears at the sudden intelligence;
I was startled, as well as profoundly disappointed.

The sun had now set, and it was twilight by the time I had returned the
General’s letter to my father.

It was a soft clear evening, and we loitered, speculating upon the
possible meanings of the violent and incoherent sentences which I had
just been reading. We had nearly a mile to walk before reaching the
road that passes the schloss in front, and by that time the moon was
shining brilliantly. At the drawbridge we met Madame Perrodon and
Mademoiselle De Lafontaine, who had come out, without their bonnets, to
enjoy the exquisite moonlight.

We heard their voices gabbling in animated dialogue as we approached.
We joined them at the drawbridge, and turned about to admire with them
the beautiful scene.

The glade through which we had just walked lay before us. At our left
the narrow road wound away under clumps of lordly trees, and was lost
to sight amid the thickening forest. At the right the same road crosses
the steep and picturesque bridge, near which stands a ruined tower
which once guarded that pass; and beyond the bridge an abrupt eminence
rises, covered with trees, and showing in the shadows some grey
ivy-clustered rocks.

Over the sward and low grounds a thin film of mist was stealing like
smoke, marking the distances with a transparent veil; and here and
there we could see the river faintly flashing in the moonlight.

No softer, sweeter scene could be imagined. The news I had just heard
made it melancholy; but nothing could disturb its character of profound
serenity, and the enchanted glory and vagueness of the prospect.

My father, who enjoyed the picturesque, and I, stood looking in silence
over the expanse beneath us. The two good governesses, standing a
little way behind us, discoursed upon the scene, and were eloquent upon
the moon.

Madame Perrodon was fat, middle-aged, and romantic, and talked and
sighed poetically. Mademoiselle De Lafontaine—in right of her father
who was a German, assumed to be psychological, metaphysical, and
something of a mystic—now declared that when the moon shone with a
light so intense it was well known that it indicated a special
spiritual activity. The effect of the full moon in such a state of
brilliancy was manifold. It acted on dreams, it acted on lunacy, it
acted on nervous people, it had marvelous physical influences connected
with life. Mademoiselle related that her cousin, who was mate of a
merchant ship, having taken a nap on deck on such a night, lying on his
back, with his face full in the light on the moon, had wakened, after a
dream of an old woman clawing him by the cheek, with his features
horribly drawn to one side; and his countenance had never quite
recovered its equilibrium.

“The moon, this night,” she said, “is full of idyllic and magnetic
influence—and see, when you look behind you at the front of the schloss
how all its windows flash and twinkle with that silvery splendor, as if
unseen hands had lighted up the rooms to receive fairy guests.”

There are indolent styles of the spirits in which, indisposed to talk
ourselves, the talk of others is pleasant to our listless ears; and I
gazed on, pleased with the tinkle of the ladies’ conversation.

“I have got into one of my moping moods tonight,” said my father, after
a silence, and quoting Shakespeare, whom, by way of keeping up our
English, he used to read aloud, he said:

“‘In truth I know not why I am so sad.
It wearies me: you say it wearies you;
But how I got it—came by it.’


“I forget the rest. But I feel as if some great misfortune were hanging
over us. I suppose the poor General’s afflicted letter has had
something to do with it.”

At this moment the unwonted sound of carriage wheels and many hoofs
upon the road, arrested our attention.

They seemed to be approaching from the high ground overlooking the
bridge, and very soon the equipage emerged from that point. Two
horsemen first crossed the bridge, then came a carriage drawn by four
horses, and two men rode behind.

It seemed to be the traveling carriage of a person of rank; and we were
all immediately absorbed in watching that very unusual spectacle. It
became, in a few moments, greatly more interesting, for just as the
carriage had passed the summit of the steep bridge, one of the leaders,
taking fright, communicated his panic to the rest, and after a plunge
or two, the whole team broke into a wild gallop together, and dashing
between the horsemen who rode in front, came thundering along the road
towards us with the speed of a hurricane.

The excitement of the scene was made more painful by the clear,
long-drawn screams of a female voice from the carriage window.

We all advanced in curiosity and horror; me rather in silence, the rest
with various ejaculations of terror.

Our suspense did not last long. Just before you reach the castle
drawbridge, on the route they were coming, there stands by the roadside
a magnificent lime tree, on the other stands an ancient stone cross, at
sight of which the horses, now going at a pace that was perfectly
frightful, swerved so as to bring the wheel over the projecting roots
of the tree.

I knew what was coming. I covered my eyes, unable to see it out, and
turned my head away; at the same moment I heard a cry from my lady
friends, who had gone on a little.

Curiosity opened my eyes, and I saw a scene of utter confusion. Two of
the horses were on the ground, the carriage lay upon its side with two
wheels in the air; the men were busy removing the traces, and a lady
with a commanding air and figure had got out, and stood with clasped
hands, raising the handkerchief that was in them every now and then to
her eyes.

Through the carriage door was now lifted a young lady, who appeared to
be lifeless. My dear old father was already beside the elder lady, with
his hat in his hand, evidently tendering his aid and the resources of
his schloss. The lady did not appear to hear him, or to have eyes for
anything but the slender girl who was being placed against the slope of
the bank.

I approached; the young lady was apparently stunned, but she was
certainly not dead. My father, who piqued himself on being something of
a physician, had just had his fingers on her wrist and assured the
lady, who declared herself her mother, that her pulse, though faint and
irregular, was undoubtedly still distinguishable. The lady clasped her
hands and looked upward, as if in a momentary transport of gratitude;
but immediately she broke out again in that theatrical way which is, I
believe, natural to some people.

She was what is called a fine looking woman for her time of life, and
must have been handsome; she was tall, but not thin, and dressed in
black velvet, and looked rather pale, but with a proud and commanding
countenance, though now agitated strangely.

“Who was ever being so born to calamity?” I heard her say, with clasped
hands, as I came up. “Here am I, on a journey of life and death, in
prosecuting which to lose an hour is possibly to lose all. My child
will not have recovered sufficiently to resume her route for who can
say how long. I must leave her: I cannot, dare not, delay. How far on,
sir, can you tell, is the nearest village? I must leave her there; and
shall not see my darling, or even hear of her till my return, three
months hence.”

I plucked my father by the coat, and whispered earnestly in his ear:
“Oh! papa, pray ask her to let her stay with us—it would be so
delightful. Do, pray.”

“If Madame will entrust her child to the care of my daughter, and of
her good gouvernante, Madame Perrodon, and permit her to remain as our
guest, under my charge, until her return, it will confer a distinction
and an obligation upon us, and we shall treat her with all the care and
devotion which so sacred a trust deserves.”

“I cannot do that, sir, it would be to task your kindness and chivalry
too cruelly,” said the lady, distractedly.

“It would, on the contrary, be to confer on us a very great kindness at
the moment when we most need it. My daughter has just been disappointed
by a cruel misfortune, in a visit from which she had long anticipated a
great deal of happiness. If you confide this young lady to our care it
will be her best consolation. The nearest village on your route is
distant, and affords no such inn as you could think of placing your
daughter at; you cannot allow her to continue her journey for any
considerable distance without danger. If, as you say, you cannot
suspend your journey, you must part with her tonight, and nowhere could
you do so with more honest assurances of care and tenderness than
here.”

There was something in this lady’s air and appearance so distinguished
and even imposing, and in her manner so engaging, as to impress one,
quite apart from the dignity of her equipage, with a conviction that
she was a person of consequence.

By this time the carriage was replaced in its upright position, and the
horses, quite tractable, in the traces again.

The lady threw on her daughter a glance which I fancied was not quite
so affectionate as one might have anticipated from the beginning of the
scene; then she beckoned slightly to my father, and withdrew two or
three steps with him out of hearing; and talked to him with a fixed and
stern countenance, not at all like that with which she had hitherto
spoken.

I was filled with wonder that my father did not seem to perceive the
change, and also unspeakably curious to learn what it could be that she
was speaking, almost in his ear, with so much earnestness and rapidity.

Two or three minutes at most I think she remained thus employed, then
she turned, and a few steps brought her to where her daughter lay,
supported by Madame Perrodon. She kneeled beside her for a moment and
whispered, as Madame supposed, a little benediction in her ear; then
hastily kissing her she stepped into her carriage, the door was closed,
the footmen in stately liveries jumped up behind, the outriders spurred
on, the postilions cracked their whips, the horses plunged and broke
suddenly into a furious canter that threatened soon again to become a
gallop, and the carriage whirled away, followed at the same rapid pace
by the two horsemen in the rear.




III.
We Compare Notes


We followed the _cortege_ with our eyes until it was swiftly lost to
sight in the misty wood; and the very sound of the hoofs and the wheels
died away in the silent night air.

Nothing remained to assure us that the adventure had not been an
illusion of a moment but the young lady, who just at that moment opened
her eyes. I could not see, for her face was turned from me, but she
raised her head, evidently looking about her, and I heard a very sweet
voice ask complainingly, “Where is mamma?”

Our good Madame Perrodon answered tenderly, and added some comfortable
assurances.

I then heard her ask:

“Where am I? What is this place?” and after that she said, “I don’t see
the carriage; and Matska, where is she?”

Madame answered all her questions in so far as she understood them; and
gradually the young lady remembered how the misadventure came about,
and was glad to hear that no one in, or in attendance on, the carriage
was hurt; and on learning that her mamma had left her here, till her
return in about three months, she wept.

I was going to add my consolations to those of Madame Perrodon when
Mademoiselle De Lafontaine placed her hand upon my arm, saying:

“Don’t approach, one at a time is as much as she can at present
converse with; a very little excitement would possibly overpower her
now.”

As soon as she is comfortably in bed, I thought, I will run up to her
room and see her.

My father in the meantime had sent a servant on horseback for the
physician, who lived about two leagues away; and a bedroom was being
prepared for the young lady’s reception.

The stranger now rose, and leaning on Madame’s arm, walked slowly over
the drawbridge and into the castle gate.

In the hall, servants waited to receive her, and she was conducted
forthwith to her room. The room we usually sat in as our drawing room
is long, having four windows, that looked over the moat and drawbridge,
upon the forest scene I have just described.

It is furnished in old carved oak, with large carved cabinets, and the
chairs are cushioned with crimson Utrecht velvet. The walls are covered
with tapestry, and surrounded with great gold frames, the figures being
as large as life, in ancient and very curious costume, and the subjects
represented are hunting, hawking, and generally festive. It is not too
stately to be extremely comfortable; and here we had our tea, for with
his usual patriotic leanings he insisted that the national beverage
should make its appearance regularly with our coffee and chocolate.

We sat here this night, and with candles lighted, were talking over the
adventure of the evening.

Madame Perrodon and Mademoiselle De Lafontaine were both of our party.
The young stranger had hardly lain down in her bed when she sank into a
deep sleep; and those ladies had left her in the care of a servant.

“How do you like our guest?” I asked, as soon as Madame entered. “Tell
me all about her?”

“I like her extremely,” answered Madame, “she is, I almost think, the
prettiest creature I ever saw; about your age, and so gentle and nice.”

“She is absolutely beautiful,” threw in Mademoiselle, who had peeped
for a moment into the stranger’s room.

“And such a sweet voice!” added Madame Perrodon.

“Did you remark a woman in the carriage, after it was set up again, who
did not get out,” inquired Mademoiselle, “but only looked from the
window?”

“No, we had not seen her.”

Then she described a hideous black woman, with a sort of colored turban
on her head, and who was gazing all the time from the carriage window,
nodding and grinning derisively towards the ladies, with gleaming eyes
and large white eyeballs, and her teeth set as if in fury.

“Did you remark what an ill-looking pack of men the servants were?”
asked Madame.

“Yes,” said my father, who had just come in, “ugly, hang-dog looking
fellows as ever I beheld in my life. I hope they mayn’t rob the poor
lady in the forest. They are clever rogues, however; they got
everything to rights in a minute.”

“I dare say they are worn out with too long traveling,” said Madame.

“Besides looking wicked, their faces were so strangely lean, and dark,
and sullen. I am very curious, I own; but I dare say the young lady
will tell you all about it tomorrow, if she is sufficiently recovered.”

“I don’t think she will,” said my father, with a mysterious smile, and
a little nod of his head, as if he knew more about it than he cared to
tell us.

This made us all the more inquisitive as to what had passed between him
and the lady in the black velvet, in the brief but earnest interview
that had immediately preceded her departure.

We were scarcely alone, when I entreated him to tell me. He did not
need much pressing.

“There is no particular reason why I should not tell you. She expressed
a reluctance to trouble us with the care of her daughter, saying she
was in delicate health, and nervous, but not subject to any kind of
seizure—she volunteered that—nor to any illusion; being, in fact,
perfectly sane.”

“How very odd to say all that!” I interpolated. “It was so
unnecessary.”

“At all events it _was_ said,” he laughed, “and as you wish to know all
that passed, which was indeed very little, I tell you. She then said,
‘I am making a long journey of _vital_ importance—she emphasized the
word—rapid and secret; I shall return for my child in three months; in
the meantime, she will be silent as to who we are, whence we come, and
whither we are traveling.’ That is all she said. She spoke very pure
French. When she said the word ‘secret,’ she paused for a few seconds,
looking sternly, her eyes fixed on mine. I fancy she makes a great
point of that. You saw how quickly she was gone. I hope I have not done
a very foolish thing, in taking charge of the young lady.”

For my part, I was delighted. I was longing to see and talk to her; and
only waiting till the doctor should give me leave. You, who live in
towns, can have no idea how great an event the introduction of a new
friend is, in such a solitude as surrounded us.

The doctor did not arrive till nearly one o’clock; but I could no more
have gone to my bed and slept, than I could have overtaken, on foot,
the carriage in which the princess in black velvet had driven away.

When the physician came down to the drawing room, it was to report very
favorably upon his patient. She was now sitting up, her pulse quite
regular, apparently perfectly well. She had sustained no injury, and
the little shock to her nerves had passed away quite harmlessly. There
could be no harm certainly in my seeing her, if we both wished it; and,
with this permission I sent, forthwith, to know whether she would allow
me to visit her for a few minutes in her room.

The servant returned immediately to say that she desired nothing more.

You may be sure I was not long in availing myself of this permission.

Our visitor lay in one of the handsomest rooms in the schloss. It was,
perhaps, a little stately. There was a somber piece of tapestry
opposite the foot of the bed, representing Cleopatra with the asps to
her bosom; and other solemn classic scenes were displayed, a little
faded, upon the other walls. But there was gold carving, and rich and
varied color enough in the other decorations of the room, to more than
redeem the gloom of the old tapestry.

There were candles at the bedside. She was sitting up; her slender
pretty figure enveloped in the soft silk dressing gown, embroidered
with flowers, and lined with thick quilted silk, which her mother had
thrown over her feet as she lay upon the ground.

What was it that, as I reached the bedside and had just begun my little
greeting, struck me dumb in a moment, and made me recoil a step or two
from before her? I will tell you.

I saw the very face which had visited me in my childhood at night,
which remained so fixed in my memory, and on which I had for so many
years so often ruminated with horror, when no one suspected of what I
was thinking.

It was pretty, even beautiful; and when I first beheld it, wore the
same melancholy expression.

But this almost instantly lighted into a strange fixed smile of
recognition.

There was a silence of fully a minute, and then at length she spoke; I
could not.

“How wonderful!” she exclaimed. “Twelve years ago, I saw your face in a
dream, and it has haunted me ever since.”

“Wonderful indeed!” I repeated, overcoming with an effort the horror
that had for a time suspended my utterances. “Twelve years ago, in
vision or reality, I certainly saw you. I could not forget your face.
It has remained before my eyes ever since.”

Her smile had softened. Whatever I had fancied strange in it, was gone,
and it and her dimpling cheeks were now delightfully pretty and
intelligent.

I felt reassured, and continued more in the vein which hospitality
indicated, to bid her welcome, and to tell her how much pleasure her
accidental arrival had given us all, and especially what a happiness it
was to me.

I took her hand as I spoke. I was a little shy, as lonely people are,
but the situation made me eloquent, and even bold. She pressed my hand,
she laid hers upon it, and her eyes glowed, as, looking hastily into
mine, she smiled again, and blushed.

She answered my welcome very prettily. I sat down beside her, still
wondering; and she said:

“I must tell you my vision about you; it is so very strange that you
and I should have had, each of the other so vivid a dream, that each
should have seen, I you and you me, looking as we do now, when of
course we both were mere children. I was a child, about six years old,
and I awoke from a confused and troubled dream, and found myself in a
room, unlike my nursery, wainscoted clumsily in some dark wood, and
with cupboards and bedsteads, and chairs, and benches placed about it.
The beds were, I thought, all empty, and the room itself without anyone
but myself in it; and I, after looking about me for some time, and
admiring especially an iron candlestick with two branches, which I
should certainly know again, crept under one of the beds to reach the
window; but as I got from under the bed, I heard someone crying; and
looking up, while I was still upon my knees, I saw you—most assuredly
you—as I see you now; a beautiful young lady, with golden hair and
large blue eyes, and lips—your lips—you as you are here.

“Your looks won me; I climbed on the bed and put my arms about you, and
I think we both fell asleep. I was aroused by a scream; you were
sitting up screaming. I was frightened, and slipped down upon the
ground, and, it seemed to me, lost consciousness for a moment; and when
I came to myself, I was again in my nursery at home. Your face I have
never forgotten since. I could not be misled by mere resemblance. _You
are_ the lady whom I saw then.”

It was now my turn to relate my corresponding vision, which I did, to
the undisguised wonder of my new acquaintance.

“I don’t know which should be most afraid of the other,” she said,
again smiling—“If you were less pretty I think I should be very much
afraid of you, but being as you are, and you and I both so young, I
feel only that I have made your acquaintance twelve years ago, and have
already a right to your intimacy; at all events it does seem as if we
were destined, from our earliest childhood, to be friends. I wonder
whether you feel as strangely drawn towards me as I do to you; I have
never had a friend—shall I find one now?” She sighed, and her fine dark
eyes gazed passionately on me.

Now the truth is, I felt rather unaccountably towards the beautiful
stranger. I did feel, as she said, “drawn towards her,” but there was
also something of repulsion. In this ambiguous feeling, however, the
sense of attraction immensely prevailed. She interested and won me; she
was so beautiful and so indescribably engaging.

I perceived now something of languor and exhaustion stealing over her,
and hastened to bid her good night.

“The doctor thinks,” I added, “that you ought to have a maid to sit up
with you tonight; one of ours is waiting, and you will find her a very
useful and quiet creature.”

“How kind of you, but I could not sleep, I never could with an
attendant in the room. I shan’t require any assistance—and, shall I
confess my weakness, I am haunted with a terror of robbers. Our house
was robbed once, and two servants murdered, so I always lock my door.
It has become a habit—and you look so kind I know you will forgive me.
I see there is a key in the lock.”

She held me close in her pretty arms for a moment and whispered in my
ear, “Good night, darling, it is very hard to part with you, but good
night; tomorrow, but not early, I shall see you again.”

She sank back on the pillow with a sigh, and her fine eyes followed me
with a fond and melancholy gaze, and she murmured again “Good night,
dear friend.”

Young people like, and even love, on impulse. I was flattered by the
evident, though as yet undeserved, fondness she showed me. I liked the
confidence with which she at once received me. She was determined that
we should be very near friends.

Next day came and we met again. I was delighted with my companion; that
is to say, in many respects.

Her looks lost nothing in daylight—she was certainly the most beautiful
creature I had ever seen, and the unpleasant remembrance of the face
presented in my early dream, had lost the effect of the first
unexpected recognition.

She confessed that she had experienced a similar shock on seeing me,
and precisely the same faint antipathy that had mingled with my
admiration of her. We now laughed together over our momentary horrors.




IV.
Her Habits—A Saunter


I told you that I was charmed with her in most particulars.

There were some that did not please me so well.

She was above the middle height of women. I shall begin by describing
her.

She was slender, and wonderfully graceful. Except that her movements
were languid—very languid—indeed, there was nothing in her appearance
to indicate an invalid. Her complexion was rich and brilliant; her
features were small and beautifully formed; her eyes large, dark, and
lustrous; her hair was quite wonderful, I never saw hair so
magnificently thick and long when it was down about her shoulders; I
have often placed my hands under it, and laughed with wonder at its
weight. It was exquisitely fine and soft, and in color a rich very dark
brown, with something of gold. I loved to let it down, tumbling with
its own weight, as, in her room, she lay back in her chair talking in
her sweet low voice, I used to fold and braid it, and spread it out and
play with it. Heavens! If I had but known all!

I said there were particulars which did not please me. I have told you
that her confidence won me the first night I saw her; but I found that
she exercised with respect to herself, her mother, her history,
everything in fact connected with her life, plans, and people, an ever
wakeful reserve. I dare say I was unreasonable, perhaps I was wrong; I
dare say I ought to have respected the solemn injunction laid upon my
father by the stately lady in black velvet. But curiosity is a restless
and unscrupulous passion, and no one girl can endure, with patience,
that hers should be baffled by another. What harm could it do anyone to
tell me what I so ardently desired to know? Had she no trust in my good
sense or honor? Why would she not believe me when I assured her, so
solemnly, that I would not divulge one syllable of what she told me to
any mortal breathing.

There was a coldness, it seemed to me, beyond her years, in her smiling
melancholy persistent refusal to afford me the least ray of light.

I cannot say we quarreled upon this point, for she would not quarrel
upon any. It was, of course, very unfair of me to press her, very
ill-bred, but I really could not help it; and I might just as well have
let it alone.

What she did tell me amounted, in my unconscionable estimation—to
nothing.

It was all summed up in three very vague disclosures:

First—Her name was Carmilla.

Second—Her family was very ancient and noble.

Third—Her home lay in the direction of the west.

She would not tell me the name of her family, nor their armorial
bearings, nor the name of their estate, nor even that of the country
they lived in.

You are not to suppose that I worried her incessantly on these
subjects. I watched opportunity, and rather insinuated than urged my
inquiries. Once or twice, indeed, I did attack her more directly. But
no matter what my tactics, utter failure was invariably the result.
Reproaches and caresses were all lost upon her. But I must add this,
that her evasion was conducted with so pretty a melancholy and
deprecation, with so many, and even passionate declarations of her
liking for me, and trust in my honor, and with so many promises that I
should at last know all, that I could not find it in my heart long to
be offended with her.

She used to place her pretty arms about my neck, draw me to her, and
laying her cheek to mine, murmur with her lips near my ear, “Dearest,
your little heart is wounded; think me not cruel because I obey the
irresistible law of my strength and weakness; if your dear heart is
wounded, my wild heart bleeds with yours. In the rapture of my enormous
humiliation I live in your warm life, and you shall die—die, sweetly
die—into mine. I cannot help it; as I draw near to you, you, in your
turn, will draw near to others, and learn the rapture of that cruelty,
which yet is love; so, for a while, seek to know no more of me and
mine, but trust me with all your loving spirit.”

And when she had spoken such a rhapsody, she would press me more
closely in her trembling embrace, and her lips in soft kisses gently
glow upon my cheek.

Her agitations and her language were unintelligible to me.

From these foolish embraces, which were not of very frequent
occurrence, I must allow, I used to wish to extricate myself; but my
energies seemed to fail me. Her murmured words sounded like a lullaby
in my ear, and soothed my resistance into a trance, from which I only
seemed to recover myself when she withdrew her arms.

In these mysterious moods I did not like her. I experienced a strange
tumultuous excitement that was pleasurable, ever and anon, mingled with
a vague sense of fear and disgust. I had no distinct thoughts about her
while such scenes lasted, but I was conscious of a love growing into
adoration, and also of abhorrence. This I know is paradox, but I can
make no other attempt to explain the feeling.

I now write, after an interval of more than ten years, with a trembling
hand, with a confused and horrible recollection of certain occurrences
and situations, in the ordeal through which I was unconsciously
passing; though with a vivid and very sharp remembrance of the main
current of my story.

But, I suspect, in all lives there are certain emotional scenes, those
in which our passions have been most wildly and terribly roused, that
are of all others the most vaguely and dimly remembered.

Sometimes after an hour of apathy, my strange and beautiful companion
would take my hand and hold it with a fond pressure, renewed again and
again; blushing softly, gazing in my face with languid and burning
eyes, and breathing so fast that her dress rose and fell with the
tumultuous respiration. It was like the ardor of a lover; it
embarrassed me; it was hateful and yet over-powering; and with gloating
eyes she drew me to her, and her hot lips traveled along my cheek in
kisses; and she would whisper, almost in sobs, “You are mine, you
_shall_ be mine, you and I are one for ever.” Then she had thrown
herself back in her chair, with her small hands over her eyes, leaving
me trembling.

“Are we related,” I used to ask; “what can you mean by all this? I
remind you perhaps of someone whom you love; but you must not, I hate
it; I don’t know you—I don’t know myself when you look so and talk so.”

She used to sigh at my vehemence, then turn away and drop my hand.

Respecting these very extraordinary manifestations I strove in vain to
form any satisfactory theory—I could not refer them to affectation or
trick. It was unmistakably the momentary breaking out of suppressed
instinct and emotion. Was she, notwithstanding her mother’s volunteered
denial, subject to brief visitations of insanity; or was there here a
disguise and a romance? I had read in old storybooks of such things.
What if a boyish lover had found his way into the house, and sought to
prosecute his suit in masquerade, with the assistance of a clever old
adventuress. But there were many things against this hypothesis, highly
interesting as it was to my vanity.

I could boast of no little attentions such as masculine gallantry
delights to offer. Between these passionate moments there were long
intervals of commonplace, of gaiety, of brooding melancholy, during
which, except that I detected her eyes so full of melancholy fire,
following me, at times I might have been as nothing to her. Except in
these brief periods of mysterious excitement her ways were girlish; and
there was always a languor about her, quite incompatible with a
masculine system in a state of health.

In some respects her habits were odd. Perhaps not so singular in the
opinion of a town lady like you, as they appeared to us rustic people.
She used to come down very late, generally not till one o’clock, she
would then take a cup of chocolate, but eat nothing; we then went out
for a walk, which was a mere saunter, and she seemed, almost
immediately, exhausted, and either returned to the schloss or sat on
one of the benches that were placed, here and there, among the trees.
This was a bodily languor in which her mind did not sympathize. She was
always an animated talker, and very intelligent.

She sometimes alluded for a moment to her own home, or mentioned an
adventure or situation, or an early recollection, which indicated a
people of strange manners, and described customs of which we knew
nothing. I gathered from these chance hints that her native country was
much more remote than I had at first fancied.

As we sat thus one afternoon under the trees a funeral passed us by. It
was that of a pretty young girl, whom I had often seen, the daughter of
one of the rangers of the forest. The poor man was walking behind the
coffin of his darling; she was his only child, and he looked quite
heartbroken.

Peasants walking two-and-two came behind, they were singing a funeral
hymn.

I rose to mark my respect as they passed, and joined in the hymn they
were very sweetly singing.

My companion shook me a little roughly, and I turned surprised.

She said brusquely, “Don’t you perceive how discordant that is?”

“I think it very sweet, on the contrary,” I answered, vexed at the
interruption, and very uncomfortable, lest the people who composed the
little procession should observe and resent what was passing.

I resumed, therefore, instantly, and was again interrupted. “You pierce
my ears,” said Carmilla, almost angrily, and stopping her ears with her
tiny fingers. “Besides, how can you tell that your religion and mine
are the same; your forms wound me, and I hate funerals. What a fuss!
Why you must die—_everyone_ must die; and all are happier when they do.
Come home.”

“My father has gone on with the clergyman to the churchyard. I thought
you knew she was to be buried today.”

“She? I don’t trouble my head about peasants. I don’t know who she is,”
answered Carmilla, with a flash from her fine eyes.

“She is the poor girl who fancied she saw a ghost a fortnight ago, and
has been dying ever since, till yesterday, when she expired.”

“Tell me nothing about ghosts. I shan’t sleep tonight if you do.”

“I hope there is no plague or fever coming; all this looks very like
it,” I continued. “The swineherd’s young wife died only a week ago, and
she thought something seized her by the throat as she lay in her bed,
and nearly strangled her. Papa says such horrible fancies do accompany
some forms of fever. She was quite well the day before. She sank
afterwards, and died before a week.”

“Well, _her_ funeral is over, I hope, and _her_ hymn sung; and our ears
shan’t be tortured with that discord and jargon. It has made me
nervous. Sit down here, beside me; sit close; hold my hand; press it
hard-hard-harder.”

We had moved a little back, and had come to another seat.

She sat down. Her face underwent a change that alarmed and even
terrified me for a moment. It darkened, and became horribly livid; her
teeth and hands were clenched, and she frowned and compressed her lips,
while she stared down upon the ground at her feet, and trembled all
over with a continued shudder as irrepressible as ague. All her
energies seemed strained to suppress a fit, with which she was then
breathlessly tugging; and at length a low convulsive cry of suffering
broke from her, and gradually the hysteria subsided. “There! That comes
of strangling people with hymns!” she said at last. “Hold me, hold me
still. It is passing away.”

And so gradually it did; and perhaps to dissipate the somber impression
which the spectacle had left upon me, she became unusually animated and
chatty; and so we got home.

This was the first time I had seen her exhibit any definable symptoms
of that delicacy of health which her mother had spoken of. It was the
first time, also, I had seen her exhibit anything like temper.

Both passed away like a summer cloud; and never but once afterwards did
I witness on her part a momentary sign of anger. I will tell you how it
happened.

She and I were looking out of one of the long drawing room windows,
when there entered the courtyard, over the drawbridge, a figure of a
wanderer whom I knew very well. He used to visit the schloss generally
twice a year.

It was the figure of a hunchback, with the sharp lean features that
generally accompany deformity. He wore a pointed black beard, and he
was smiling from ear to ear, showing his white fangs. He was dressed in
buff, black, and scarlet, and crossed with more straps and belts than I
could count, from which hung all manner of things. Behind, he carried a
magic lantern, and two boxes, which I well knew, in one of which was a
salamander, and in the other a mandrake. These monsters used to make my
father laugh. They were compounded of parts of monkeys, parrots,
squirrels, fish, and hedgehogs, dried and stitched together with great
neatness and startling effect. He had a fiddle, a box of conjuring
apparatus, a pair of foils and masks attached to his belt, several
other mysterious cases dangling about him, and a black staff with
copper ferrules in his hand. His companion was a rough spare dog, that
followed at his heels, but stopped short, suspiciously at the
drawbridge, and in a little while began to howl dismally.

In the meantime, the mountebank, standing in the midst of the
courtyard, raised his grotesque hat, and made us a very ceremonious
bow, paying his compliments very volubly in execrable French, and
German not much better.

Then, disengaging his fiddle, he began to scrape a lively air to which
he sang with a merry discord, dancing with ludicrous airs and activity,
that made me laugh, in spite of the dog’s howling.

Then he advanced to the window with many smiles and salutations, and
his hat in his left hand, his fiddle under his arm, and with a fluency
that never took breath, he gabbled a long advertisement of all his
accomplishments, and the resources of the various arts which he placed
at our service, and the curiosities and entertainments which it was in
his power, at our bidding, to display.

“Will your ladyships be pleased to buy an amulet against the oupire,
which is going like the wolf, I hear, through these woods,” he said
dropping his hat on the pavement. “They are dying of it right and left
and here is a charm that never fails; only pinned to the pillow, and
you may laugh in his face.”

These charms consisted of oblong slips of vellum, with cabalistic
ciphers and diagrams upon them.

Carmilla instantly purchased one, and so did I.

He was looking up, and we were smiling down upon him, amused; at least,
I can answer for myself. His piercing black eye, as he looked up in our
faces, seemed to detect something that fixed for a moment his
curiosity,

In an instant he unrolled a leather case, full of all manner of odd
little steel instruments.

“See here, my lady,” he said, displaying it, and addressing me, “I
profess, among other things less useful, the art of dentistry. Plague
take the dog!” he interpolated. “Silence, beast! He howls so that your
ladyships can scarcely hear a word. Your noble friend, the young lady
at your right, has the sharpest tooth,—long, thin, pointed, like an
awl, like a needle; ha, ha! With my sharp and long sight, as I look up,
I have seen it distinctly; now if it happens to hurt the young lady,
and I think it must, here am I, here are my file, my punch, my nippers;
I will make it round and blunt, if her ladyship pleases; no longer the
tooth of a fish, but of a beautiful young lady as she is. Hey? Is the
young lady displeased? Have I been too bold? Have I offended her?”

The young lady, indeed, looked very angry as she drew back from the
window.

“How dares that mountebank insult us so? Where is your father? I shall
demand redress from him. My father would have had the wretch tied up to
the pump, and flogged with a cart whip, and burnt to the bones with the
cattle brand!”

She retired from the window a step or two, and sat down, and had hardly
lost sight of the offender, when her wrath subsided as suddenly as it
had risen, and she gradually recovered her usual tone, and seemed to
forget the little hunchback and his follies.

My father was out of spirits that evening. On coming in he told us that
there had been another case very similar to the two fatal ones which
had lately occurred. The sister of a young peasant on his estate, only
a mile away, was very ill, had been, as she described it, attacked very
nearly in the same way, and was now slowly but steadily sinking.

“All this,” said my father, “is strictly referable to natural causes.
These poor people infect one another with their superstitions, and so
repeat in imagination the images of terror that have infested their
neighbors.”

“But that very circumstance frightens one horribly,” said Carmilla.

“How so?” inquired my father.

“I am so afraid of fancying I see such things; I think it would be as
bad as reality.”

“We are in God’s hands: nothing can happen without his permission, and
all will end well for those who love him. He is our faithful creator;
He has made us all, and will take care of us.”

“Creator! _Nature!_” said the young lady in answer to my gentle father.
“And this disease that invades the country is natural. Nature. All
things proceed from Nature—don’t they? All things in the heaven, in the
earth, and under the earth, act and live as Nature ordains? I think
so.”

“The doctor said he would come here today,” said my father, after a
silence. “I want to know what he thinks about it, and what he thinks we
had better do.”

“Doctors never did me any good,” said Carmilla.

“Then you have been ill?” I asked.

“More ill than ever you were,” she answered.

“Long ago?”

“Yes, a long time. I suffered from this very illness; but I forget all
but my pain and weakness, and they were not so bad as are suffered in
other diseases.”

“You were very young then?”

“I dare say, let us talk no more of it. You would not wound a friend?”

She looked languidly in my eyes, and passed her arm round my waist
lovingly, and led me out of the room. My father was busy over some
papers near the window.

“Why does your papa like to frighten us?” said the pretty girl with a
sigh and a little shudder.

“He doesn’t, dear Carmilla, it is the very furthest thing from his
mind.”

“Are you afraid, dearest?”

“I should be very much if I fancied there was any real danger of my
being attacked as those poor people were.”

“You are afraid to die?”

“Yes, every one is.”

“But to die as lovers may—to die together, so that they may live
together.

Girls are caterpillars while they live in the world, to be finally
butterflies when the summer comes; but in the meantime there are grubs
and larvae, don’t you see—each with their peculiar propensities,
necessities and structure. So says Monsieur Buffon, in his big book, in
the next room.”

Later in the day the doctor came, and was closeted with papa for some
time.

He was a skilful man, of sixty and upwards, he wore powder, and shaved
his pale face as smooth as a pumpkin. He and papa emerged from the room
together, and I heard papa laugh, and say as they came out:

“Well, I do wonder at a wise man like you. What do you say to
hippogriffs and dragons?”

The doctor was smiling, and made answer, shaking his head—

“Nevertheless life and death are mysterious states, and we know little
of the resources of either.”

And so they walked on, and I heard no more. I did not then know what
the doctor had been broaching, but I think I guess it now.




V.
A Wonderful Likeness


This evening there arrived from Gratz the grave, dark-faced son of the
picture cleaner, with a horse and cart laden with two large packing
cases, having many pictures in each. It was a journey of ten leagues,
and whenever a messenger arrived at the schloss from our little capital
of Gratz, we used to crowd about him in the hall, to hear the news.

This arrival created in our secluded quarters quite a sensation. The
cases remained in the hall, and the messenger was taken charge of by
the servants till he had eaten his supper. Then with assistants, and
armed with hammer, ripping chisel, and turnscrew, he met us in the
hall, where we had assembled to witness the unpacking of the cases.

Carmilla sat looking listlessly on, while one after the other the old
pictures, nearly all portraits, which had undergone the process of
renovation, were brought to light. My mother was of an old Hungarian
family, and most of these pictures, which were about to be restored to
their places, had come to us through her.

My father had a list in his hand, from which he read, as the artist
rummaged out the corresponding numbers. I don’t know that the pictures
were very good, but they were, undoubtedly, very old, and some of them
very curious also. They had, for the most part, the merit of being now
seen by me, I may say, for the first time; for the smoke and dust of
time had all but obliterated them.

“There is a picture that I have not seen yet,” said my father. “In one
corner, at the top of it, is the name, as well as I could read, ‘Marcia
Karnstein,’ and the date ‘1698’; and I am curious to see how it has
turned out.”

I remembered it; it was a small picture, about a foot and a half high,
and nearly square, without a frame; but it was so blackened by age that
I could not make it out.

The artist now produced it, with evident pride. It was quite beautiful;
it was startling; it seemed to live. It was the effigy of Carmilla!

“Carmilla, dear, here is an absolute miracle. Here you are, living,
smiling, ready to speak, in this picture. Isn’t it beautiful, Papa? And
see, even the little mole on her throat.”

My father laughed, and said “Certainly it is a wonderful likeness,” but
he looked away, and to my surprise seemed but little struck by it, and
went on talking to the picture cleaner, who was also something of an
artist, and discoursed with intelligence about the portraits or other
works, which his art had just brought into light and color, while I was
more and more lost in wonder the more I looked at the picture.

“Will you let me hang this picture in my room, papa?” I asked.

“Certainly, dear,” said he, smiling, “I’m very glad you think it so
like.

It must be prettier even than I thought it, if it is.”

The young lady did not acknowledge this pretty speech, did not seem to
hear it. She was leaning back in her seat, her fine eyes under their
long lashes gazing on me in contemplation, and she smiled in a kind of
rapture.

“And now you can read quite plainly the name that is written in the
corner.

It is not Marcia; it looks as if it was done in gold. The name is
Mircalla, Countess Karnstein, and this is a little coronet over and
underneath A.D.

1698. I am descended from the Karnsteins; that is, mamma was.”

“Ah!” said the lady, languidly, “so am I, I think, a very long descent,
very ancient. Are there any Karnsteins living now?”

“None who bear the name, I believe. The family were ruined, I believe,
in some civil wars, long ago, but the ruins of the castle are only
about three miles away.”

“How interesting!” she said, languidly. “But see what beautiful
moonlight!” She glanced through the hall door, which stood a little
open. “Suppose you take a little ramble round the court, and look down
at the road and river.”

“It is so like the night you came to us,” I said.

She sighed; smiling.

She rose, and each with her arm about the other’s waist, we walked out
upon the pavement.

In silence, slowly we walked down to the drawbridge, where the
beautiful landscape opened before us.

“And so you were thinking of the night I came here?” she almost
whispered.

“Are you glad I came?”

“Delighted, dear Carmilla,” I answered.

“And you asked for the picture you think like me, to hang in your
room,” she murmured with a sigh, as she drew her arm closer about my
waist, and let her pretty head sink upon my shoulder. “How romantic you
are, Carmilla,” I said. “Whenever you tell me your story, it will be
made up chiefly of some one great romance.”

She kissed me silently.

“I am sure, Carmilla, you have been in love; that there is, at this
moment, an affair of the heart going on.”

“I have been in love with no one, and never shall,” she whispered,
“unless it should be with you.”

How beautiful she looked in the moonlight!

Shy and strange was the look with which she quickly hid her face in my
neck and hair, with tumultuous sighs, that seemed almost to sob, and
pressed in mine a hand that trembled.

Her soft cheek was glowing against mine. “Darling, darling,” she
murmured, “I live in you; and you would die for me, I love you so.”

I started from her.

She was gazing on me with eyes from which all fire, all meaning had
flown, and a face colorless and apathetic.

“Is there a chill in the air, dear?” she said drowsily. “I almost
shiver; have I been dreaming? Let us come in. Come; come; come in.”

“You look ill, Carmilla; a little faint. You certainly must take some
wine,” I said.

“Yes. I will. I’m better now. I shall be quite well in a few minutes.
Yes, do give me a little wine,” answered Carmilla, as we approached the
door.

“Let us look again for a moment; it is the last time, perhaps, I shall
see the moonlight with you.”

“How do you feel now, dear Carmilla? Are you really better?” I asked.

I was beginning to take alarm, lest she should have been stricken with
the strange epidemic that they said had invaded the country about us.

“Papa would be grieved beyond measure,” I added, “if he thought you
were ever so little ill, without immediately letting us know. We have a
very skilful doctor near us, the physician who was with papa today.”

“I’m sure he is. I know how kind you all are; but, dear child, I am
quite well again. There is nothing ever wrong with me, but a little
weakness.

People say I am languid; I am incapable of exertion; I can scarcely
walk as far as a child of three years old: and every now and then the
little strength I have falters, and I become as you have just seen me.
But after all I am very easily set up again; in a moment I am perfectly
myself. See how I have recovered.”

So, indeed, she had; and she and I talked a great deal, and very
animated she was; and the remainder of that evening passed without any
recurrence of what I called her infatuations. I mean her crazy talk and
looks, which embarrassed, and even frightened me.

But there occurred that night an event which gave my thoughts quite a
new turn, and seemed to startle even Carmilla’s languid nature into
momentary energy.




VI.
A Very Strange Agony


When we got into the drawing room, and had sat down to our coffee and
chocolate, although Carmilla did not take any, she seemed quite herself
again, and Madame, and Mademoiselle De Lafontaine, joined us, and made
a little card party, in the course of which papa came in for what he
called his “dish of tea.”

When the game was over he sat down beside Carmilla on the sofa, and
asked her, a little anxiously, whether she had heard from her mother
since her arrival.

She answered “No.”

He then asked whether she knew where a letter would reach her at
present.

“I cannot tell,” she answered ambiguously, “but I have been thinking of
leaving you; you have been already too hospitable and too kind to me. I
have given you an infinity of trouble, and I should wish to take a
carriage tomorrow, and post in pursuit of her; I know where I shall
ultimately find her, although I dare not yet tell you.”

“But you must not dream of any such thing,” exclaimed my father, to my
great relief. “We can’t afford to lose you so, and I won’t consent to
your leaving us, except under the care of your mother, who was so good
as to consent to your remaining with us till she should herself return.
I should be quite happy if I knew that you heard from her: but this
evening the accounts of the progress of the mysterious disease that has
invaded our neighborhood, grow even more alarming; and my beautiful
guest, I do feel the responsibility, unaided by advice from your
mother, very much. But I shall do my best; and one thing is certain,
that you must not think of leaving us without her distinct direction to
that effect. We should suffer too much in parting from you to consent
to it easily.”

“Thank you, sir, a thousand times for your hospitality,” she answered,
smiling bashfully. “You have all been too kind to me; I have seldom
been so happy in all my life before, as in your beautiful chateau,
under your care, and in the society of your dear daughter.”

So he gallantly, in his old-fashioned way, kissed her hand, smiling and
pleased at her little speech.

I accompanied Carmilla as usual to her room, and sat and chatted with
her while she was preparing for bed.

“Do you think,” I said at length, “that you will ever confide fully in
me?”

She turned round smiling, but made no answer, only continued to smile
on me.

“You won’t answer that?” I said. “You can’t answer pleasantly; I ought
not to have asked you.”

“You were quite right to ask me that, or anything. You do not know how
dear you are to me, or you could not think any confidence too great to
look for.

But I am under vows, no nun half so awfully, and I dare not tell my
story yet, even to you. The time is very near when you shall know
everything. You will think me cruel, very selfish, but love is always
selfish; the more ardent the more selfish. How jealous I am you cannot
know. You must come with me, loving me, to death; or else hate me and
still come with me. and _hating_ me through death and after. There is
no such word as indifference in my apathetic nature.”

“Now, Carmilla, you are going to talk your wild nonsense again,” I said
hastily.

“Not I, silly little fool as I am, and full of whims and fancies; for
your sake I’ll talk like a sage. Were you ever at a ball?”

“No; how you do run on. What is it like? How charming it must be.”

“I almost forget, it is years ago.”

I laughed.

“You are not so old. Your first ball can hardly be forgotten yet.”

“I remember everything about it—with an effort. I see it all, as divers
see what is going on above them, through a medium, dense, rippling, but
transparent. There occurred that night what has confused the picture,
and made its colours faint. I was all but assassinated in my bed,
wounded here,” she touched her breast, “and never was the same since.”

“Were you near dying?”

“Yes, very—a cruel love—strange love, that would have taken my life.
Love will have its sacrifices. No sacrifice without blood. Let us go to
sleep now; I feel so lazy. How can I get up just now and lock my door?”

She was lying with her tiny hands buried in her rich wavy hair, under
her cheek, her little head upon the pillow, and her glittering eyes
followed me wherever I moved, with a kind of shy smile that I could not
decipher.

I bid her good night, and crept from the room with an uncomfortable
sensation.

I often wondered whether our pretty guest ever said her prayers. I
certainly had never seen her upon her knees. In the morning she never
came down until long after our family prayers were over, and at night
she never left the drawing room to attend our brief evening prayers in
the hall.

If it had not been that it had casually come out in one of our careless
talks that she had been baptised, I should have doubted her being a
Christian. Religion was a subject on which I had never heard her speak
a word. If I had known the world better, this particular neglect or
antipathy would not have so much surprised me.

The precautions of nervous people are infectious, and persons of a like
temperament are pretty sure, after a time, to imitate them. I had
adopted Carmilla’s habit of locking her bedroom door, having taken into
my head all her whimsical alarms about midnight invaders and prowling
assassins. I had also adopted her precaution of making a brief search
through her room, to satisfy herself that no lurking assassin or robber
was “ensconced.”

These wise measures taken, I got into my bed and fell asleep. A light
was burning in my room. This was an old habit, of very early date, and
which nothing could have tempted me to dispense with.

Thus fortifed I might take my rest in peace. But dreams come through
stone walls, light up dark rooms, or darken light ones, and their
persons make their exits and their entrances as they please, and laugh
at locksmiths.

I had a dream that night that was the beginning of a very strange
agony.

I cannot call it a nightmare, for I was quite conscious of being
asleep.

But I was equally conscious of being in my room, and lying in bed,
precisely as I actually was. I saw, or fancied I saw, the room and its
furniture just as I had seen it last, except that it was very dark, and
I saw something moving round the foot of the bed, which at first I
could not accurately distinguish. But I soon saw that it was a
sooty-black animal that resembled a monstrous cat. It appeared to me
about four or five feet long for it measured fully the length of the
hearthrug as it passed over it; and it continued to-ing and fro-ing
with the lithe, sinister restlessness of a beast in a cage. I could not
cry out, although as you may suppose, I was terrified. Its pace was
growing faster, and the room rapidly darker and darker, and at length
so dark that I could no longer see anything of it but its eyes. I felt
it spring lightly on the bed. The two broad eyes approached my face,
and suddenly I felt a stinging pain as if two large needles darted, an
inch or two apart, deep into my breast. I waked with a scream. The room
was lighted by the candle that burnt there all through the night, and I
saw a female figure standing at the foot of the bed, a little at the
right side. It was in a dark loose dress, and its hair was down and
covered its shoulders. A block of stone could not have been more still.
There was not the slightest stir of respiration. As I stared at it, the
figure appeared to have changed its place, and was now nearer the door;
then, close to it, the door opened, and it passed out.

I was now relieved, and able to breathe and move. My first thought was
that Carmilla had been playing me a trick, and that I had forgotten to
secure my door. I hastened to it, and found it locked as usual on the
inside. I was afraid to open it—I was horrified. I sprang into my bed
and covered my head up in the bedclothes, and lay there more dead than
alive till morning.




VII.
Descending


It would be vain my attempting to tell you the horror with which, even
now, I recall the occurrence of that night. It was no such transitory
terror as a dream leaves behind it. It seemed to deepen by time, and
communicated itself to the room and the very furniture that had
encompassed the apparition.

I could not bear next day to be alone for a moment. I should have told
papa, but for two opposite reasons. At one time I thought he would
laugh at my story, and I could not bear its being treated as a jest;
and at another I thought he might fancy that I had been attacked by the
mysterious complaint which had invaded our neighborhood. I had myself
no misgiving of the kind, and as he had been rather an invalid for some
time, I was afraid of alarming him.

I was comfortable enough with my good-natured companions, Madame
Perrodon, and the vivacious Mademoiselle Lafontaine. They both
perceived that I was out of spirits and nervous, and at length I told
them what lay so heavy at my heart.

Mademoiselle laughed, but I fancied that Madame Perrodon looked
anxious.

“By-the-by,” said Mademoiselle, laughing, “the long lime tree walk,
behind Carmilla’s bedroom window, is haunted!”

“Nonsense!” exclaimed Madame, who probably thought the theme rather
inopportune, “and who tells that story, my dear?”

“Martin says that he came up twice, when the old yard gate was being
repaired, before sunrise, and twice saw the same female figure walking
down the lime tree avenue.”

“So he well might, as long as there are cows to milk in the river
fields,” said Madame.

“I daresay; but Martin chooses to be frightened, and never did I see
fool more frightened.”

“You must not say a word about it to Carmilla, because she can see down
that walk from her room window,” I interposed, “and she is, if
possible, a greater coward than I.”

Carmilla came down rather later than usual that day.

“I was so frightened last night,” she said, so soon as were together,
“and I am sure I should have seen something dreadful if it had not been
for that charm I bought from the poor little hunchback whom I called
such hard names. I had a dream of something black coming round my bed,
and I awoke in a perfect horror, and I really thought, for some
seconds, I saw a dark figure near the chimneypiece, but I felt under my
pillow for my charm, and the moment my fingers touched it, the figure
disappeared, and I felt quite certain, only that I had it by me, that
something frightful would have made its appearance, and, perhaps,
throttled me, as it did those poor people we heard of.

“Well, listen to me,” I began, and recounted my adventure, at the
recital of which she appeared horrified.

“And had you the charm near you?” she asked, earnestly.

“No, I had dropped it into a china vase in the drawing room, but I
shall certainly take it with me tonight, as you have so much faith in
it.”

At this distance of time I cannot tell you, or even understand, how I
overcame my horror so effectually as to lie alone in my room that
night. I remember distinctly that I pinned the charm to my pillow. I
fell asleep almost immediately, and slept even more soundly than usual
all night.

Next night I passed as well. My sleep was delightfully deep and
dreamless.

But I wakened with a sense of lassitude and melancholy, which, however,
did not exceed a degree that was almost luxurious.

“Well, I told you so,” said Carmilla, when I described my quiet sleep,
“I had such delightful sleep myself last night; I pinned the charm to
the breast of my nightdress. It was too far away the night before. I am
quite sure it was all fancy, except the dreams. I used to think that
evil spirits made dreams, but our doctor told me it is no such thing.
Only a fever passing by, or some other malady, as they often do, he
said, knocks at the door, and not being able to get in, passes on, with
that alarm.”

“And what do you think the charm is?” said I.

“It has been fumigated or immersed in some drug, and is an antidote
against the malaria,” she answered.

“Then it acts only on the body?”

“Certainly; you don’t suppose that evil spirits are frightened by bits
of ribbon, or the perfumes of a druggist’s shop? No, these complaints,
wandering in the air, begin by trying the nerves, and so infect the
brain, but before they can seize upon you, the antidote repels them.
That I am sure is what the charm has done for us. It is nothing
magical, it is simply natural.

I should have been happier if I could have quite agreed with Carmilla,
but I did my best, and the impression was a little losing its force.

For some nights I slept profoundly; but still every morning I felt the
same lassitude, and a languor weighed upon me all day. I felt myself a
changed girl. A strange melancholy was stealing over me, a melancholy
that I would not have interrupted. Dim thoughts of death began to open,
and an idea that I was slowly sinking took gentle, and, somehow, not
unwelcome, possession of me. If it was sad, the tone of mind which this
induced was also sweet.

Whatever it might be, my soul acquiesced in it.

I would not admit that I was ill, I would not consent to tell my papa,
or to have the doctor sent for.

Carmilla became more devoted to me than ever, and her strange paroxysms
of languid adoration more frequent. She used to gloat on me with
increasing ardor the more my strength and spirits waned. This always
shocked me like a momentary glare of insanity.

Without knowing it, I was now in a pretty advanced stage of the
strangest illness under which mortal ever suffered. There was an
unaccountable fascination in its earlier symptoms that more than
reconciled me to the incapacitating effect of that stage of the malady.
This fascination increased for a time, until it reached a certain
point, when gradually a sense of the horrible mingled itself with it,
deepening, as you shall hear, until it discolored and perverted the
whole state of my life.

The first change I experienced was rather agreeable. It was very near
the turning point from which began the descent of Avernus.

Certain vague and strange sensations visited me in my sleep. The
prevailing one was of that pleasant, peculiar cold thrill which we feel
in bathing, when we move against the current of a river. This was soon
accompanied by dreams that seemed interminable, and were so vague that
I could never recollect their scenery and persons, or any one connected
portion of their action. But they left an awful impression, and a sense
of exhaustion, as if I had passed through a long period of great mental
exertion and danger.

After all these dreams there remained on waking a remembrance of having
been in a place very nearly dark, and of having spoken to people whom I
could not see; and especially of one clear voice, of a female’s, very
deep, that spoke as if at a distance, slowly, and producing always the
same sensation of indescribable solemnity and fear. Sometimes there
came a sensation as if a hand was drawn softly along my cheek and neck.
Sometimes it was as if warm lips kissed me, and longer and longer and
more lovingly as they reached my throat, but there the caress fixed
itself. My heart beat faster, my breathing rose and fell rapidly and
full drawn; a sobbing, that rose into a sense of strangulation,
supervened, and turned into a dreadful convulsion, in which my senses
left me and I became unconscious.

It was now three weeks since the commencement of this unaccountable
state.

My sufferings had, during the last week, told upon my appearance. I had
grown pale, my eyes were dilated and darkened underneath, and the
languor which I had long felt began to display itself in my
countenance.

My father asked me often whether I was ill; but, with an obstinacy
which now seems to me unaccountable, I persisted in assuring him that I
was quite well.

In a sense this was true. I had no pain, I could complain of no bodily
derangement. My complaint seemed to be one of the imagination, or the
nerves, and, horrible as my sufferings were, I kept them, with a morbid
reserve, very nearly to myself.

It could not be that terrible complaint which the peasants called the
oupire, for I had now been suffering for three weeks, and they were
seldom ill for much more than three days, when death put an end to
their miseries.

Carmilla complained of dreams and feverish sensations, but by no means
of so alarming a kind as mine. I say that mine were extremely alarming.
Had I been capable of comprehending my condition, I would have invoked
aid and advice on my knees. The narcotic of an unsuspected influence
was acting upon me, and my perceptions were benumbed.

I am going to tell you now of a dream that led immediately to an odd
discovery.

One night, instead of the voice I was accustomed to hear in the dark, I
heard one, sweet and tender, and at the same time terrible, which said,

“Your mother warns you to beware of the assassin.” At the same time a
light unexpectedly sprang up, and I saw Carmilla, standing, near the
foot of my bed, in her white nightdress, bathed, from her chin to her
feet, in one great stain of blood.

I wakened with a shriek, possessed with the one idea that Carmilla was
being murdered. I remember springing from my bed, and my next
recollection is that of standing on the lobby, crying for help.

Madame and Mademoiselle came scurrying out of their rooms in alarm; a
lamp burned always on the lobby, and seeing me, they soon learned the
cause of my terror.

I insisted on our knocking at Carmilla’s door. Our knocking was
unanswered.

It soon became a pounding and an uproar. We shrieked her name, but all
was vain.

We all grew frightened, for the door was locked. We hurried back, in
panic, to my room. There we rang the bell long and furiously. If my
father’s room had been at that side of the house, we would have called
him up at once to our aid. But, alas! he was quite out of hearing, and
to reach him involved an excursion for which we none of us had courage.

Servants, however, soon came running up the stairs; I had got on my
dressing gown and slippers meanwhile, and my companions were already
similarly furnished. Recognizing the voices of the servants on the
lobby, we sallied out together; and having renewed, as fruitlessly, our
summons at Carmilla’s door, I ordered the men to force the lock. They
did so, and we stood, holding our lights aloft, in the doorway, and so
stared into the room.

We called her by name; but there was still no reply. We looked round
the room. Everything was undisturbed. It was exactly in the state in
which I had left it on bidding her good night. But Carmilla was gone.




VIII.
Search


At sight of the room, perfectly undisturbed except for our violent
entrance, we began to cool a little, and soon recovered our senses
sufficiently to dismiss the men. It had struck Mademoiselle that
possibly Carmilla had been wakened by the uproar at her door, and in
her first panic had jumped from her bed, and hid herself in a press, or
behind a curtain, from which she could not, of course, emerge until the
majordomo and his myrmidons had withdrawn. We now recommenced our
search, and began to call her name again.

It was all to no purpose. Our perplexity and agitation increased. We
examined the windows, but they were secured. I implored of Carmilla, if
she had concealed herself, to play this cruel trick no longer—to come
out and to end our anxieties. It was all useless. I was by this time
convinced that she was not in the room, nor in the dressing room, the
door of which was still locked on this side. She could not have passed
it. I was utterly puzzled. Had Carmilla discovered one of those secret
passages which the old housekeeper said were known to exist in the
schloss, although the tradition of their exact situation had been lost?
A little time would, no doubt, explain all—utterly perplexed as, for
the present, we were.

It was past four o’clock, and I preferred passing the remaining hours
of darkness in Madame’s room. Daylight brought no solution of the
difficulty.

The whole household, with my father at its head, was in a state of
agitation next morning. Every part of the chateau was searched. The
grounds were explored. No trace of the missing lady could be
discovered. The stream was about to be dragged; my father was in
distraction; what a tale to have to tell the poor girl’s mother on her
return. I, too, was almost beside myself, though my grief was quite of
a different kind.

The morning was passed in alarm and excitement. It was now one o’clock,
and still no tidings. I ran up to Carmilla’s room, and found her
standing at her dressing table. I was astounded. I could not believe my
eyes. She beckoned me to her with her pretty finger, in silence. Her
face expressed extreme fear.

I ran to her in an ecstasy of joy; I kissed and embraced her again and
again. I ran to the bell and rang it vehemently, to bring others to the
spot who might at once relieve my father’s anxiety.

“Dear Carmilla, what has become of you all this time? We have been in
agonies of anxiety about you,” I exclaimed. “Where have you been? How
did you come back?”

“Last night has been a night of wonders,” she said.

“For mercy’s sake, explain all you can.”

“It was past two last night,” she said, “when I went to sleep as usual
in my bed, with my doors locked, that of the dressing room, and that
opening upon the gallery. My sleep was uninterrupted, and, so far as I
know, dreamless; but I woke just now on the sofa in the dressing room
there, and I found the door between the rooms open, and the other door
forced. How could all this have happened without my being wakened? It
must have been accompanied with a great deal of noise, and I am
particularly easily wakened; and how could I have been carried out of
my bed without my sleep having been interrupted, I whom the slightest
stir startles?”

By this time, Madame, Mademoiselle, my father, and a number of the
servants were in the room. Carmilla was, of course, overwhelmed with
inquiries, congratulations, and welcomes. She had but one story to
tell, and seemed the least able of all the party to suggest any way of
accounting for what had happened.

My father took a turn up and down the room, thinking. I saw Carmilla’s
eye follow him for a moment with a sly, dark glance.

When my father had sent the servants away, Mademoiselle having gone in
search of a little bottle of valerian and salvolatile, and there being
no one now in the room with Carmilla, except my father, Madame, and
myself, he came to her thoughtfully, took her hand very kindly, led her
to the sofa, and sat down beside her.

“Will you forgive me, my dear, if I risk a conjecture, and ask a
question?”

“Who can have a better right?” she said. “Ask what you please, and I
will tell you everything. But my story is simply one of bewilderment
and darkness. I know absolutely nothing. Put any question you please,
but you know, of course, the limitations mamma has placed me under.”

“Perfectly, my dear child. I need not approach the topics on which she
desires our silence. Now, the marvel of last night consists in your
having been removed from your bed and your room, without being wakened,
and this removal having occurred apparently while the windows were
still secured, and the two doors locked upon the inside. I will tell
you my theory and ask you a question.”

Carmilla was leaning on her hand dejectedly; Madame and I were
listening breathlessly.

“Now, my question is this. Have you ever been suspected of walking in
your sleep?”

“Never, since I was very young indeed.”

“But you did walk in your sleep when you were young?”

“Yes; I know I did. I have been told so often by my old nurse.”

My father smiled and nodded.

“Well, what has happened is this. You got up in your sleep, unlocked
the door, not leaving the key, as usual, in the lock, but taking it out
and locking it on the outside; you again took the key out, and carried
it away with you to some one of the five-and-twenty rooms on this
floor, or perhaps upstairs or downstairs. There are so many rooms and
closets, so much heavy furniture, and such accumulations of lumber,
that it would require a week to search this old house thoroughly. Do
you see, now, what I mean?”

“I do, but not all,” she answered.

“And how, papa, do you account for her finding herself on the sofa in
the dressing room, which we had searched so carefully?”

“She came there after you had searched it, still in her sleep, and at
last awoke spontaneously, and was as much surprised to find herself
where she was as any one else. I wish all mysteries were as easily and
innocently explained as yours, Carmilla,” he said, laughing. “And so we
may congratulate ourselves on the certainty that the most natural
explanation of the occurrence is one that involves no drugging, no
tampering with locks, no burglars, or poisoners, or witches—nothing
that need alarm Carmilla, or anyone else, for our safety.”

Carmilla was looking charmingly. Nothing could be more beautiful than
her tints. Her beauty was, I think, enhanced by that graceful languor
that was peculiar to her. I think my father was silently contrasting
her looks with mine, for he said:

“I wish my poor Laura was looking more like herself”; and he sighed.

So our alarms were happily ended, and Carmilla restored to her friends.




IX.
The Doctor

As Carmilla would not hear of an attendant sleeping in her room, my
father arranged that a servant should sleep outside her door, so that
she would not attempt to make another such excursion without being
arrested at her own door.

That night passed quietly; and next morning early, the doctor, whom my
father had sent for without telling me a word about it, arrived to see
me.

Madame accompanied me to the library; and there the grave little
doctor, with white hair and spectacles, whom I mentioned before, was
waiting to receive me.

I told him my story, and as I proceeded he grew graver and graver.

We were standing, he and I, in the recess of one of the windows, facing
one another. When my statement was over, he leaned with his shoulders
against the wall, and with his eyes fixed on me earnestly, with an
interest in which was a dash of horror.

After a minute’s reflection, he asked Madame if he could see my father.

He was sent for accordingly, and as he entered, smiling, he said:

“I dare say, doctor, you are going to tell me that I am an old fool for
having brought you here; I hope I am.”

But his smile faded into shadow as the doctor, with a very grave face,
beckoned him to him.

He and the doctor talked for some time in the same recess where I had
just conferred with the physician. It seemed an earnest and
argumentative conversation. The room is very large, and I and Madame
stood together, burning with curiosity, at the farther end. Not a word
could we hear, however, for they spoke in a very low tone, and the deep
recess of the window quite concealed the doctor from view, and very
nearly my father, whose foot, arm, and shoulder only could we see; and
the voices were, I suppose, all the less audible for the sort of closet
which the thick wall and window formed.

After a time my father’s face looked into the room; it was pale,
thoughtful, and, I fancied, agitated.

“Laura, dear, come here for a moment. Madame, we shan’t trouble you,
the doctor says, at present.”

Accordingly I approached, for the first time a little alarmed; for,
although I felt very weak, I did not feel ill; and strength, one always
fancies, is a thing that may be picked up when we please.

My father held out his hand to me, as I drew near, but he was looking
at the doctor, and he said:

“It certainly is very odd; I don’t understand it quite. Laura, come
here, dear; now attend to Doctor Spielsberg, and recollect yourself.”

“You mentioned a sensation like that of two needles piercing the skin,
somewhere about your neck, on the night when you experienced your first
horrible dream. Is there still any soreness?”

“None at all,” I answered.

“Can you indicate with your finger about the point at which you think
this occurred?”

“Very little below my throat—here,” I answered.

I wore a morning dress, which covered the place I pointed to.

“Now you can satisfy yourself,” said the doctor. “You won’t mind your
papa’s lowering your dress a very little. It is necessary, to detect a
symptom of the complaint under which you have been suffering.”

I acquiesced. It was only an inch or two below the edge of my collar.

“God bless me!—so it is,” exclaimed my father, growing pale.

“You see it now with your own eyes,” said the doctor, with a gloomy
triumph.

“What is it?” I exclaimed, beginning to be frightened.

“Nothing, my dear young lady, but a small blue spot, about the size of
the tip of your little finger; and now,” he continued, turning to papa,
“the question is what is best to be done?”

Is there any danger?”I urged, in great trepidation.

“I trust not, my dear,” answered the doctor. “I don’t see why you
should not recover. I don’t see why you should not begin immediately to
get better. That is the point at which the sense of strangulation
begins?”

“Yes,” I answered.

“And—recollect as well as you can—the same point was a kind of center
of that thrill which you described just now, like the current of a cold
stream running against you?”

“It may have been; I think it was.”

“Ay, you see?” he added, turning to my father. “Shall I say a word to
Madame?”

“Certainly,” said my father.

He called Madame to him, and said:

“I find my young friend here far from well. It won’t be of any great
consequence, I hope; but it will be necessary that some steps be taken,
which I will explain by-and-by; but in the meantime, Madame, you will
be so good as not to let Miss Laura be alone for one moment. That is
the only direction I need give for the present. It is indispensable.”

“We may rely upon your kindness, Madame, I know,” added my father.

Madame satisfied him eagerly.

“And you, dear Laura, I know you will observe the doctor’s direction.”

“I shall have to ask your opinion upon another patient, whose symptoms
slightly resemble those of my daughter, that have just been detailed to
you—very much milder in degree, but I believe quite of the same sort.
She is a young lady—our guest; but as you say you will be passing this
way again this evening, you can’t do better than take your supper here,
and you can then see her. She does not come down till the afternoon.”

“I thank you,” said the doctor. “I shall be with you, then, at about
seven this evening.”

And then they repeated their directions to me and to Madame, and with
this parting charge my father left us, and walked out with the doctor;
and I saw them pacing together up and down between the road and the
moat, on the grassy platform in front of the castle, evidently absorbed
in earnest conversation.

The doctor did not return. I saw him mount his horse there, take his
leave, and ride away eastward through the forest.

Nearly at the same time I saw the man arrive from Dranfield with the
letters, and dismount and hand the bag to my father.

In the meantime, Madame and I were both busy, lost in conjecture as to
the reasons of the singular and earnest direction which the doctor and
my father had concurred in imposing. Madame, as she afterwards told me,
was afraid the doctor apprehended a sudden seizure, and that, without
prompt assistance, I might either lose my life in a fit, or at least be
seriously hurt.

The interpretation did not strike me; and I fancied, perhaps luckily
for my nerves, that the arrangement was prescribed simply to secure a
companion, who would prevent my taking too much exercise, or eating
unripe fruit, or doing any of the fifty foolish things to which young
people are supposed to be prone.

About half an hour after my father came in—he had a letter in his
hand—and said:

“This letter had been delayed; it is from General Spielsdorf. He might
have been here yesterday, he may not come till tomorrow or he may be
here today.”

He put the open letter into my hand; but he did not look pleased, as he
used when a guest, especially one so much loved as the General, was
coming.

On the contrary, he looked as if he wished him at the bottom of the Red
Sea. There was plainly something on his mind which he did not choose to
divulge.

“Papa, darling, will you tell me this?” said I, suddenly laying my hand
on his arm, and looking, I am sure, imploringly in his face.

“Perhaps,” he answered, smoothing my hair caressingly over my eyes.

“Does the doctor think me very ill?”

“No, dear; he thinks, if right steps are taken, you will be quite well
again, at least, on the high road to a complete recovery, in a day or
two,” he answered, a little dryly. “I wish our good friend, the
General, had chosen any other time; that is, I wish you had been
perfectly well to receive him.”

“But do tell me, papa,” I insisted, “what does he think is the matter
with me?”

“Nothing; you must not plague me with questions,” he answered, with
more irritation than I ever remember him to have displayed before; and
seeing that I looked wounded, I suppose, he kissed me, and added, “You
shall know all about it in a day or two; that is, all that I know. In
the meantime you are not to trouble your head about it.”

He turned and left the room, but came back before I had done wondering
and puzzling over the oddity of all this; it was merely to say that he
was going to Karnstein, and had ordered the carriage to be ready at
twelve, and that I and Madame should accompany him; he was going to see
the priest who lived near those picturesque grounds, upon business, and
as Carmilla had never seen them, she could follow, when she came down,
with Mademoiselle, who would bring materials for what you call a
picnic, which might be laid for us in the ruined castle.

At twelve o’clock, accordingly, I was ready, and not long after, my
father, Madame and I set out upon our projected drive.

Passing the drawbridge we turn to the right, and follow the road over
the steep Gothic bridge, westward, to reach the deserted village and
ruined castle of Karnstein.

No sylvan drive can be fancied prettier. The ground breaks into gentle
hills and hollows, all clothed with beautiful wood, totally destitute
of the comparative formality which artificial planting and early
culture and pruning impart.

The irregularities of the ground often lead the road out of its course,
and cause it to wind beautifully round the sides of broken hollows and
the steeper sides of the hills, among varieties of ground almost
inexhaustible.

Turning one of these points, we suddenly encountered our old friend,
the General, riding towards us, attended by a mounted servant. His
portmanteaus were following in a hired wagon, such as we term a cart.

The General dismounted as we pulled up, and, after the usual greetings,
was easily persuaded to accept the vacant seat in the carriage and send
his horse on with his servant to the schloss.




X.
Bereaved


It was about ten months since we had last seen him: but that time had
sufficed to make an alteration of years in his appearance. He had grown
thinner; something of gloom and anxiety had taken the place of that
cordial serenity which used to characterize his features. His dark blue
eyes, always penetrating, now gleamed with a sterner light from under
his shaggy grey eyebrows. It was not such a change as grief alone
usually induces, and angrier passions seemed to have had their share in
bringing it about.

We had not long resumed our drive, when the General began to talk, with
his usual soldierly directness, of the bereavement, as he termed it,
which he had sustained in the death of his beloved niece and ward; and
he then broke out in a tone of intense bitterness and fury, inveighing
against the “hellish arts” to which she had fallen a victim, and
expressing, with more exasperation than piety, his wonder that Heaven
should tolerate so monstrous an indulgence of the lusts and malignity
of hell.

My father, who saw at once that something very extraordinary had
befallen, asked him, if not too painful to him, to detail the
circumstances which he thought justified the strong terms in which he
expressed himself.

“I should tell you all with pleasure,” said the General, “but you would
not believe me.”

“Why should I not?” he asked.

“Because,” he answered testily, “you believe in nothing but what
consists with your own prejudices and illusions. I remember when I was
like you, but I have learned better.”

“Try me,” said my father; “I am not such a dogmatist as you suppose.

Besides which, I very well know that you generally require proof for
what you believe, and am, therefore, very strongly predisposed to
respect your conclusions.”

“You are right in supposing that I have not been led lightly into a
belief in the marvelous—for what I have experienced is marvelous—and I
have been forced by extraordinary evidence to credit that which ran
counter, diametrically, to all my theories. I have been made the dupe
of a preternatural conspiracy.”

Notwithstanding his professions of confidence in the General’s
penetration, I saw my father, at this point, glance at the General,
with, as I thought, a marked suspicion of his sanity.

The General did not see it, luckily. He was looking gloomily and
curiously into the glades and vistas of the woods that were opening
before us.

“You are going to the Ruins of Karnstein?” he said. “Yes, it is a lucky
coincidence; do you know I was going to ask you to bring me there to
inspect them. I have a special object in exploring. There is a ruined
chapel, ain’t there, with a great many tombs of that extinct family?”

“So there are—highly interesting,” said my father. “I hope you are
thinking of claiming the title and estates?”

My father said this gaily, but the General did not recollect the laugh,
or even the smile, which courtesy exacts for a friend’s joke; on the
contrary, he looked grave and even fierce, ruminating on a matter that
stirred his anger and horror.

“Something very different,” he said, gruffly. “I mean to unearth some
of those fine people. I hope, by God’s blessing, to accomplish a pious
sacrilege here, which will relieve our earth of certain monsters, and
enable honest people to sleep in their beds without being assailed by
murderers. I have strange things to tell you, my dear friend, such as I
myself would have scouted as incredible a few months since.”

My father looked at him again, but this time not with a glance of
suspicion—with an eye, rather, of keen intelligence and alarm.

“The house of Karnstein,” he said, “has been long extinct: a hundred
years at least. My dear wife was maternally descended from the
Karnsteins. But the name and title have long ceased to exist. The
castle is a ruin; the very village is deserted; it is fifty years since
the smoke of a chimney was seen there; not a roof left.”

“Quite true. I have heard a great deal about that since I last saw you;
a great deal that will astonish you. But I had better relate everything
in the order in which it occurred,” said the General. “You saw my dear
ward—my child, I may call her. No creature could have been more
beautiful, and only three months ago none more blooming.”

“Yes, poor thing! when I saw her last she certainly was quite lovely,”
said my father. “I was grieved and shocked more than I can tell you, my
dear friend; I knew what a blow it was to you.”

He took the General’s hand, and they exchanged a kind pressure. Tears
gathered in the old soldier’s eyes. He did not seek to conceal them. He
said:

“We have been very old friends; I knew you would feel for me, childless
as I am. She had become an object of very near interest to me, and
repaid my care by an affection that cheered my home and made my life
happy. That is all gone. The years that remain to me on earth may not
be very long; but by God’s mercy I hope to accomplish a service to
mankind before I die, and to subserve the vengeance of Heaven upon the
fiends who have murdered my poor child in the spring of her hopes and
beauty!”

“You said, just now, that you intended relating everything as it
occurred,” said my father. “Pray do; I assure you that it is not mere
curiosity that prompts me.”

By this time we had reached the point at which the Drunstall road, by
which the General had come, diverges from the road which we were
traveling to Karnstein.

“How far is it to the ruins?” inquired the General, looking anxiously
forward.

“About half a league,” answered my father. “Pray let us hear the story
you were so good as to promise.”




XI.
The Story


With all my heart,” said the General, with an effort; and after a short
pause in which to arrange his subject, he commenced one of the
strangest narratives I ever heard.

“My dear child was looking forward with great pleasure to the visit you
had been so good as to arrange for her to your charming daughter.” Here
he made me a gallant but melancholy bow. “In the meantime we had an
invitation to my old friend the Count Carlsfeld, whose schloss is about
six leagues to the other side of Karnstein. It was to attend the series
of fetes which, you remember, were given by him in honor of his
illustrious visitor, the Grand Duke Charles.”

“Yes; and very splendid, I believe, they were,” said my father.

“Princely! But then his hospitalities are quite regal. He has Aladdin’s
lamp. The night from which my sorrow dates was devoted to a magnificent
masquerade. The grounds were thrown open, the trees hung with colored
lamps. There was such a display of fireworks as Paris itself had never
witnessed. And such music—music, you know, is my weakness—such
ravishing music! The finest instrumental band, perhaps, in the world,
and the finest singers who could be collected from all the great operas
in Europe. As you wandered through these fantastically illuminated
grounds, the moon-lighted chateau throwing a rosy light from its long
rows of windows, you would suddenly hear these ravishing voices
stealing from the silence of some grove, or rising from boats upon the
lake. I felt myself, as I looked and listened, carried back into the
romance and poetry of my early youth.

“When the fireworks were ended, and the ball beginning, we returned to
the noble suite of rooms that were thrown open to the dancers. A masked
ball, you know, is a beautiful sight; but so brilliant a spectacle of
the kind I never saw before.

“It was a very aristocratic assembly. I was myself almost the only
‘nobody’ present.

“My dear child was looking quite beautiful. She wore no mask. Her
excitement and delight added an unspeakable charm to her features,
always lovely. I remarked a young lady, dressed magnificently, but
wearing a mask, who appeared to me to be observing my ward with
extraordinary interest. I had seen her, earlier in the evening, in the
great hall, and again, for a few minutes, walking near us, on the
terrace under the castle windows, similarly employed. A lady, also
masked, richly and gravely dressed, and with a stately air, like a
person of rank, accompanied her as a chaperon.

Had the young lady not worn a mask, I could, of course, have been much
more certain upon the question whether she was really watching my poor
darling.

I am now well assured that she was.

“We were now in one of the salons. My poor dear child had been dancing,
and was resting a little in one of the chairs near the door; I was
standing near. The two ladies I have mentioned had approached and the
younger took the chair next my ward; while her companion stood beside
me, and for a little time addressed herself, in a low tone, to her
charge.

“Availing herself of the privilege of her mask, she turned to me, and
in the tone of an old friend, and calling me by my name, opened a
conversation with me, which piqued my curiosity a good deal. She
referred to many scenes where she had met me—at Court, and at
distinguished houses. She alluded to little incidents which I had long
ceased to think of, but which, I found, had only lain in abeyance in my
memory, for they instantly started into life at her touch.

“I became more and more curious to ascertain who she was, every moment.
She parried my attempts to discover very adroitly and pleasantly. The
knowledge she showed of many passages in my life seemed to me all but
unaccountable; and she appeared to take a not unnatural pleasure in
foiling my curiosity, and in seeing me flounder in my eager perplexity,
from one conjecture to another.

“In the meantime the young lady, whom her mother called by the odd name
of Millarca, when she once or twice addressed her, had, with the same
ease and grace, got into conversation with my ward.

“She introduced herself by saying that her mother was a very old
acquaintance of mine. She spoke of the agreeable audacity which a mask
rendered practicable; she talked like a friend; she admired her dress,
and insinuated very prettily her admiration of her beauty. She amused
her with laughing criticisms upon the people who crowded the ballroom,
and laughed at my poor child’s fun. She was very witty and lively when
she pleased, and after a time they had grown very good friends, and the
young stranger lowered her mask, displaying a remarkably beautiful
face. I had never seen it before, neither had my dear child. But though
it was new to us, the features were so engaging, as well as lovely,
that it was impossible not to feel the attraction powerfully. My poor
girl did so. I never saw anyone more taken with another at first sight,
unless, indeed, it was the stranger herself, who seemed quite to have
lost her heart to her.

“In the meantime, availing myself of the license of a masquerade, I put
not a few questions to the elder lady.

“‘You have puzzled me utterly,’ I said, laughing. ‘Is that not enough?

Won’t you, now, consent to stand on equal terms, and do me the kindness
to remove your mask?’

“‘Can any request be more unreasonable?’ she replied. ‘Ask a lady to
yield an advantage! Beside, how do you know you should recognize me?
Years make changes.’

“‘As you see,’ I said, with a bow, and, I suppose, a rather melancholy
little laugh.

“‘As philosophers tell us,’ she said; ‘and how do you know that a sight
of my face would help you?’

“‘I should take chance for that,’ I answered. ‘It is vain trying to
make yourself out an old woman; your figure betrays you.’

“‘Years, nevertheless, have passed since I saw you, rather since you
saw me, for that is what I am considering. Millarca, there, is my
daughter; I cannot then be young, even in the opinion of people whom
time has taught to be indulgent, and I may not like to be compared with
what you remember me.

You have no mask to remove. You can offer me nothing in exchange.’

“‘My petition is to your pity, to remove it.’

“‘And mine to yours, to let it stay where it is,’ she replied.

“‘Well, then, at least you will tell me whether you are French or
German; you speak both languages so perfectly.’

“‘I don’t think I shall tell you that, General; you intend a surprise,
and are meditating the particular point of attack.’

“‘At all events, you won’t deny this,’ I said, ‘that being honored by
your permission to converse, I ought to know how to address you. Shall
I say Madame la Comtesse?’

“She laughed, and she would, no doubt, have met me with another
evasion—if, indeed, I can treat any occurrence in an interview every
circumstance of which was prearranged, as I now believe, with the
profoundest cunning, as liable to be modified by accident.

“‘As to that,’ she began; but she was interrupted, almost as she opened
her lips, by a gentleman, dressed in black, who looked particularly
elegant and distinguished, with this drawback, that his face was the
most deadly pale I ever saw, except in death. He was in no
masquerade—in the plain evening dress of a gentleman; and he said,
without a smile, but with a courtly and unusually low bow:—

“‘Will Madame la Comtesse permit me to say a very few words which may
interest her?’

“The lady turned quickly to him, and touched her lip in token of
silence; she then said to me, ‘Keep my place for me, General; I shall
return when I have said a few words.’

“And with this injunction, playfully given, she walked a little aside
with the gentleman in black, and talked for some minutes, apparently
very earnestly. They then walked away slowly together in the crowd, and
I lost them for some minutes.

“I spent the interval in cudgeling my brains for a conjecture as to the
identity of the lady who seemed to remember me so kindly, and I was
thinking of turning about and joining in the conversation between my
pretty ward and the Countess’s daughter, and trying whether, by the
time she returned, I might not have a surprise in store for her, by
having her name, title, chateau, and estates at my fingers’ ends. But
at this moment she returned, accompanied by the pale man in black, who
said:

“‘I shall return and inform Madame la Comtesse when her carriage is at
the door.’

“He withdrew with a bow.”




XII.
A Petition


“‘Then we are to lose Madame la Comtesse, but I hope only for a few
hours,’ I said, with a low bow.

“‘It may be that only, or it may be a few weeks. It was very unlucky
his speaking to me just now as he did. Do you now know me?’

“I assured her I did not.

“‘You shall know me,’ she said, ‘but not at present. We are older and
better friends than, perhaps, you suspect. I cannot yet declare myself.
I shall in three weeks pass your beautiful schloss, about which I have
been making enquiries. I shall then look in upon you for an hour or
two, and renew a friendship which I never think of without a thousand
pleasant recollections. This moment a piece of news has reached me like
a thunderbolt. I must set out now, and travel by a devious route,
nearly a hundred miles, with all the dispatch I can possibly make. My
perplexities multiply. I am only deterred by the compulsory reserve I
practice as to my name from making a very singular request of you. My
poor child has not quite recovered her strength. Her horse fell with
her, at a hunt which she had ridden out to witness, her nerves have not
yet recovered the shock, and our physician says that she must on no
account exert herself for some time to come. We came here, in
consequence, by very easy stages—hardly six leagues a day. I must now
travel day and night, on a mission of life and death—a mission the
critical and momentous nature of which I shall be able to explain to
you when we meet, as I hope we shall, in a few weeks, without the
necessity of any concealment.’

“She went on to make her petition, and it was in the tone of a person
from whom such a request amounted to conferring, rather than seeking a
favor.

This was only in manner, and, as it seemed, quite unconsciously. Than
the terms in which it was expressed, nothing could be more deprecatory.
It was simply that I would consent to take charge of her daughter
during her absence.

“This was, all things considered, a strange, not to say, an audacious
request. She in some sort disarmed me, by stating and admitting
everything that could be urged against it, and throwing herself
entirely upon my chivalry. At the same moment, by a fatality that seems
to have predetermined all that happened, my poor child came to my side,
and, in an undertone, besought me to invite her new friend, Millarca,
to pay us a visit. She had just been sounding her, and thought, if her
mamma would allow her, she would like it extremely.

“At another time I should have told her to wait a little, until, at
least, we knew who they were. But I had not a moment to think in. The
two ladies assailed me together, and I must confess the refined and
beautiful face of the young lady, about which there was something
extremely engaging, as well as the elegance and fire of high birth,
determined me; and, quite overpowered, I submitted, and undertook, too
easily, the care of the young lady, whom her mother called Millarca.

“The Countess beckoned to her daughter, who listened with grave
attention while she told her, in general terms, how suddenly and
peremptorily she had been summoned, and also of the arrangement she had
made for her under my care, adding that I was one of her earliest and
most valued friends.

“I made, of course, such speeches as the case seemed to call for, and
found myself, on reflection, in a position which I did not half like.

“The gentleman in black returned, and very ceremoniously conducted the
lady from the room.

“The demeanor of this gentleman was such as to impress me with the
conviction that the Countess was a lady of very much more importance
than her modest title alone might have led me to assume.

“Her last charge to me was that no attempt was to be made to learn more
about her than I might have already guessed, until her return. Our
distinguished host, whose guest she was, knew her reasons.

“‘But here,’ she said, ‘neither I nor my daughter could safely remain
for more than a day. I removed my mask imprudently for a moment, about
an hour ago, and, too late, I fancied you saw me. So I resolved to seek
an opportunity of talking a little to you. Had I found that you had
seen me, I would have thrown myself on your high sense of honor to keep
my secret some weeks. As it is, I am satisfied that you did not see me;
but if you now suspect, or, on reflection, should suspect, who I am, I
commit myself, in like manner, entirely to your honor. My daughter will
observe the same secrecy, and I well know that you will, from time to
time, remind her, lest she should thoughtlessly disclose it.’

“She whispered a few words to her daughter, kissed her hurriedly twice,
and went away, accompanied by the pale gentleman in black, and
disappeared in the crowd.

“‘In the next room,’ said Millarca, ‘there is a window that looks upon
the hall door. I should like to see the last of mamma, and to kiss my
hand to her.’

“We assented, of course, and accompanied her to the window. We looked
out, and saw a handsome old-fashioned carriage, with a troop of
couriers and footmen. We saw the slim figure of the pale gentleman in
black, as he held a thick velvet cloak, and placed it about her
shoulders and threw the hood over her head. She nodded to him, and just
touched his hand with hers. He bowed low repeatedly as the door closed,
and the carriage began to move.

“‘She is gone,’ said Millarca, with a sigh.

“‘She is gone,’ I repeated to myself, for the first time—in the hurried
moments that had elapsed since my consent—reflecting upon the folly of
my act.

“‘She did not look up,’ said the young lady, plaintively.

“‘The Countess had taken off her mask, perhaps, and did not care to
show her face,’ I said; ‘and she could not know that you were in the
window.’

“She sighed, and looked in my face. She was so beautiful that I
relented. I was sorry I had for a moment repented of my hospitality,
and I determined to make her amends for the unavowed churlishness of my
reception.

“The young lady, replacing her mask, joined my ward in persuading me to
return to the grounds, where the concert was soon to be renewed. We did
so, and walked up and down the terrace that lies under the castle
windows.

Millarca became very intimate with us, and amused us with lively
descriptions and stories of most of the great people whom we saw upon
the terrace. I liked her more and more every minute. Her gossip without
being ill-natured, was extremely diverting to me, who had been so long
out of the great world. I thought what life she would give to our
sometimes lonely evenings at home.

“This ball was not over until the morning sun had almost reached the
horizon. It pleased the Grand Duke to dance till then, so loyal people
could not go away, or think of bed.

“We had just got through a crowded saloon, when my ward asked me what
had become of Millarca. I thought she had been by her side, and she
fancied she was by mine. The fact was, we had lost her.

“All my efforts to find her were vain. I feared that she had mistaken,
in the confusion of a momentary separation from us, other people for
her new friends, and had, possibly, pursued and lost them in the
extensive grounds which were thrown open to us.

“Now, in its full force, I recognized a new folly in my having
undertaken the charge of a young lady without so much as knowing her
name; and fettered as I was by promises, of the reasons for imposing
which I knew nothing, I could not even point my inquiries by saying
that the missing young lady was the daughter of the Countess who had
taken her departure a few hours before.

“Morning broke. It was clear daylight before I gave up my search. It
was not till near two o’clock next day that we heard anything of my
missing charge.

“At about that time a servant knocked at my niece’s door, to say that
he had been earnestly requested by a young lady, who appeared to be in
great distress, to make out where she could find the General Baron
Spielsdorf and the young lady his daughter, in whose charge she had
been left by her mother.

“There could be no doubt, notwithstanding the slight inaccuracy, that
our young friend had turned up; and so she had. Would to heaven we had
lost her!

“She told my poor child a story to account for her having failed to
recover us for so long. Very late, she said, she had got to the
housekeeper’s bedroom in despair of finding us, and had then fallen
into a deep sleep which, long as it was, had hardly sufficed to recruit
her strength after the fatigues of the ball.

“That day Millarca came home with us. I was only too happy, after all,
to have secured so charming a companion for my dear girl.”




XIII.
The Woodman


“There soon, however, appeared some drawbacks. In the first place,
Millarca complained of extreme languor—the weakness that remained after
her late illness—and she never emerged from her room till the afternoon
was pretty far advanced. In the next place, it was accidentally
discovered, although she always locked her door on the inside, and
never disturbed the key from its place till she admitted the maid to
assist at her toilet, that she was undoubtedly sometimes absent from
her room in the very early morning, and at various times later in the
day, before she wished it to be understood that she was stirring. She
was repeatedly seen from the windows of the schloss, in the first faint
grey of the morning, walking through the trees, in an easterly
direction, and looking like a person in a trance. This convinced me
that she walked in her sleep. But this hypothesis did not solve the
puzzle. How did she pass out from her room, leaving the door locked on
the inside? How did she escape from the house without unbarring door or
window?

“In the midst of my perplexities, an anxiety of a far more urgent kind
presented itself.

“My dear child began to lose her looks and health, and that in a manner
so mysterious, and even horrible, that I became thoroughly frightened.

“She was at first visited by appalling dreams; then, as she fancied, by
a specter, sometimes resembling Millarca, sometimes in the shape of a
beast, indistinctly seen, walking round the foot of her bed, from side
to side.

Lastly came sensations. One, not unpleasant, but very peculiar, she
said, resembled the flow of an icy stream against her breast. At a
later time, she felt something like a pair of large needles pierce her,
a little below the throat, with a very sharp pain. A few nights after,
followed a gradual and convulsive sense of strangulation; then came
unconsciousness.”

I could hear distinctly every word the kind old General was saying,
because by this time we were driving upon the short grass that spreads
on either side of the road as you approach the roofless village which
had not shown the smoke of a chimney for more than half a century.

You may guess how strangely I felt as I heard my own symptoms so
exactly described in those which had been experienced by the poor girl
who, but for the catastrophe which followed, would have been at that
moment a visitor at my father’s chateau. You may suppose, also, how I
felt as I heard him detail habits and mysterious peculiarities which
were, in fact, those of our beautiful guest, Carmilla!

A vista opened in the forest; we were on a sudden under the chimneys
and gables of the ruined village, and the towers and battlements of the
dismantled castle, round which gigantic trees are grouped, overhung us
from a slight eminence.

In a frightened dream I got down from the carriage, and in silence, for
we had each abundant matter for thinking; we soon mounted the ascent,
and were among the spacious chambers, winding stairs, and dark
corridors of the castle.

“And this was once the palatial residence of the Karnsteins!” said the
old General at length, as from a great window he looked out across the
village, and saw the wide, undulating expanse of forest. “It was a bad
family, and here its bloodstained annals were written,” he continued.
“It is hard that they should, after death, continue to plague the human
race with their atrocious lusts. That is the chapel of the Karnsteins,
down there.”

He pointed down to the grey walls of the Gothic building partly visible
through the foliage, a little way down the steep. “And I hear the axe
of a woodman,” he added, “busy among the trees that surround it; he
possibly may give us the information of which I am in search, and point
out the grave of Mircalla, Countess of Karnstein. These rustics
preserve the local traditions of great families, whose stories die out
among the rich and titled so soon as the families themselves become
extinct.”

“We have a portrait, at home, of Mircalla, the Countess Karnstein;
should you like to see it?” asked my father.

“Time enough, dear friend,” replied the General. “I believe that I have
seen the original; and one motive which has led me to you earlier than
I at first intended, was to explore the chapel which we are now
approaching.”

“What! see the Countess Mircalla,” exclaimed my father; “why, she has
been dead more than a century!”

“Not so dead as you fancy, I am told,” answered the General.

“I confess, General, you puzzle me utterly,” replied my father, looking
at him, I fancied, for a moment with a return of the suspicion I
detected before. But although there was anger and detestation, at
times, in the old General’s manner, there was nothing flighty.

“There remains to me,” he said, as we passed under the heavy arch of
the Gothic church—for its dimensions would have justified its being so
styled—“but one object which can interest me during the few years that
remain to me on earth, and that is to wreak on her the vengeance which,
I thank God, may still be accomplished by a mortal arm.”

“What vengeance can you mean?” asked my father, in increasing
amazement.

“I mean, to decapitate the monster,” he answered, with a fierce flush,
and a stamp that echoed mournfully through the hollow ruin, and his
clenched hand was at the same moment raised, as if it grasped the
handle of an axe, while he shook it ferociously in the air.

“What?” exclaimed my father, more than ever bewildered.

“To strike her head off.”

“Cut her head off!”

“Aye, with a hatchet, with a spade, or with anything that can cleave
through her murderous throat. You shall hear,” he answered, trembling
with rage. And hurrying forward he said:

“That beam will answer for a seat; your dear child is fatigued; let her
be seated, and I will, in a few sentences, close my dreadful story.”

The squared block of wood, which lay on the grass-grown pavement of the
chapel, formed a bench on which I was very glad to seat myself, and in
the meantime the General called to the woodman, who had been removing
some boughs which leaned upon the old walls; and, axe in hand, the
hardy old fellow stood before us.

He could not tell us anything of these monuments; but there was an old
man, he said, a ranger of this forest, at present sojourning in the
house of the priest, about two miles away, who could point out every
monument of the old Karnstein family; and, for a trifle, he undertook
to bring him back with him, if we would lend him one of our horses, in
little more than half an hour.

“Have you been long employed about this forest?” asked my father of the
old man.

“I have been a woodman here,” he answered in his patois, “under the
forester, all my days; so has my father before me, and so on, as many
generations as I can count up. I could show you the very house in the
village here, in which my ancestors lived.”

“How came the village to be deserted?” asked the General.

“It was troubled by revenants, sir; several were tracked to their
graves, there detected by the usual tests, and extinguished in the
usual way, by decapitation, by the stake, and by burning; but not until
many of the villagers were killed.

“But after all these proceedings according to law,” he continued—“so
many graves opened, and so many vampires deprived of their horrible
animation—the village was not relieved. But a Moravian nobleman, who
happened to be traveling this way, heard how matters were, and being
skilled—as many people are in his country—in such affairs, he offered
to deliver the village from its tormentor. He did so thus: There being
a bright moon that night, he ascended, shortly after sunset, the towers
of the chapel here, from whence he could distinctly see the churchyard
beneath him; you can see it from that window. From this point he
watched until he saw the vampire come out of his grave, and place near
it the linen clothes in which he had been folded, and then glide away
towards the village to plague its inhabitants.

“The stranger, having seen all this, came down from the steeple, took
the linen wrappings of the vampire, and carried them up to the top of
the tower, which he again mounted. When the vampire returned from his
prowlings and missed his clothes, he cried furiously to the Moravian,
whom he saw at the summit of the tower, and who, in reply, beckoned him
to ascend and take them. Whereupon the vampire, accepting his
invitation, began to climb the steeple, and so soon as he had reached
the battlements, the Moravian, with a stroke of his sword, clove his
skull in twain, hurling him down to the churchyard, whither, descending
by the winding stairs, the stranger followed and cut his head off, and
next day delivered it and the body to the villagers, who duly impaled
and burnt them.

“This Moravian nobleman had authority from the then head of the family
to remove the tomb of Mircalla, Countess Karnstein, which he did
effectually, so that in a little while its site was quite forgotten.”

“Can you point out where it stood?” asked the General, eagerly.

The forester shook his head, and smiled.

“Not a soul living could tell you that now,” he said; “besides, they
say her body was removed; but no one is sure of that either.”

Having thus spoken, as time pressed, he dropped his axe and departed,
leaving us to hear the remainder of the General’s strange story.




XIV.
The Meeting


“My beloved child,” he resumed, “was now growing rapidly worse. The
physician who attended her had failed to produce the slightest
impression on her disease, for such I then supposed it to be. He saw my
alarm, and suggested a consultation. I called in an abler physician,
from Gratz.

Several days elapsed before he arrived. He was a good and pious, as
well as a learned man. Having seen my poor ward together, they withdrew
to my library to confer and discuss. I, from the adjoining room, where
I awaited their summons, heard these two gentlemen’s voices raised in
something sharper than a strictly philosophical discussion. I knocked
at the door and entered. I found the old physician from Gratz
maintaining his theory. His rival was combating it with undisguised
ridicule, accompanied with bursts of laughter. This unseemly
manifestation subsided and the altercation ended on my entrance.

“‘Sir,’ said my first physician,’my learned brother seems to think that
you want a conjuror, and not a doctor.’

“‘Pardon me,’ said the old physician from Gratz, looking displeased, ‘I
shall state my own view of the case in my own way another time. I
grieve, Monsieur le General, that by my skill and science I can be of
no use.

Before I go I shall do myself the honor to suggest something to you.’

“He seemed thoughtful, and sat down at a table and began to write.

Profoundly disappointed, I made my bow, and as I turned to go, the
other doctor pointed over his shoulder to his companion who was
writing, and then, with a shrug, significantly touched his forehead.

“This consultation, then, left me precisely where I was. I walked out
into the grounds, all but distracted. The doctor from Gratz, in ten or
fifteen minutes, overtook me. He apologized for having followed me, but
said that he could not conscientiously take his leave without a few
words more. He told me that he could not be mistaken; no natural
disease exhibited the same symptoms; and that death was already very
near. There remained, however, a day, or possibly two, of life. If the
fatal seizure were at once arrested, with great care and skill her
strength might possibly return. But all hung now upon the confines of
the irrevocable. One more assault might extinguish the last spark of
vitality which is, every moment, ready to die.

“‘And what is the nature of the seizure you speak of?’ I entreated.

“‘I have stated all fully in this note, which I place in your hands
upon the distinct condition that you send for the nearest clergyman,
and open my letter in his presence, and on no account read it till he
is with you; you would despise it else, and it is a matter of life and
death. Should the priest fail you, then, indeed, you may read it.’

“He asked me, before taking his leave finally, whether I would wish to
see a man curiously learned upon the very subject, which, after I had
read his letter, would probably interest me above all others, and he
urged me earnestly to invite him to visit him there; and so took his
leave.

“The ecclesiastic was absent, and I read the letter by myself. At
another time, or in another case, it might have excited my ridicule.
But into what quackeries will not people rush for a last chance, where
all accustomed means have failed, and the life of a beloved object is
at stake?

“Nothing, you will say, could be more absurd than the learned man’s
letter.

It was monstrous enough to have consigned him to a madhouse. He said
that the patient was suffering from the visits of a vampire! The
punctures which she described as having occurred near the throat, were,
he insisted, the insertion of those two long, thin, and sharp teeth
which, it is well known, are peculiar to vampires; and there could be
no doubt, he added, as to the well-defined presence of the small livid
mark which all concurred in describing as that induced by the demon’s
lips, and every symptom described by the sufferer was in exact
conformity with those recorded in every case of a similar visitation.

“Being myself wholly skeptical as to the existence of any such portent
as the vampire, the supernatural theory of the good doctor furnished,
in my opinion, but another instance of learning and intelligence oddly
associated with some one hallucination. I was so miserable, however,
that, rather than try nothing, I acted upon the instructions of the
letter.

“I concealed myself in the dark dressing room, that opened upon the
poor patient’s room, in which a candle was burning, and watched there
till she was fast asleep. I stood at the door, peeping through the
small crevice, my sword laid on the table beside me, as my directions
prescribed, until, a little after one, I saw a large black object, very
ill-defined, crawl, as it seemed to me, over the foot of the bed, and
swiftly spread itself up to the poor girl’s throat, where it swelled,
in a moment, into a great, palpitating mass.

“For a few moments I had stood petrified. I now sprang forward, with my
sword in my hand. The black creature suddenly contracted towards the
foot of the bed, glided over it, and, standing on the floor about a
yard below the foot of the bed, with a glare of skulking ferocity and
horror fixed on me, I saw Millarca. Speculating I know not what, I
struck at her instantly with my sword; but I saw her standing near the
door, unscathed. Horrified, I pursued, and struck again. She was gone;
and my sword flew to shivers against the door.

“I can’t describe to you all that passed on that horrible night. The
whole house was up and stirring. The specter Millarca was gone. But her
victim was sinking fast, and before the morning dawned, she died.”

The old General was agitated. We did not speak to him. My father walked
to some little distance, and began reading the inscriptions on the
tombstones; and thus occupied, he strolled into the door of a side
chapel to prosecute his researches. The General leaned against the
wall, dried his eyes, and sighed heavily. I was relieved on hearing the
voices of Carmilla and Madame, who were at that moment approaching. The
voices died away.

In this solitude, having just listened to so strange a story,
connected, as it was, with the great and titled dead, whose monuments
were moldering among the dust and ivy round us, and every incident of
which bore so awfully upon my own mysterious case—in this haunted spot,
darkened by the towering foliage that rose on every side, dense and
high above its noiseless walls—a horror began to steal over me, and my
heart sank as I thought that my friends were, after all, not about to
enter and disturb this triste and ominous scene.

The old General’s eyes were fixed on the ground, as he leaned with his
hand upon the basement of a shattered monument.

Under a narrow, arched doorway, surmounted by one of those demoniacal
grotesques in which the cynical and ghastly fancy of old Gothic carving
delights, I saw very gladly the beautiful face and figure of Carmilla
enter the shadowy chapel.

I was just about to rise and speak, and nodded smiling, in answer to
her peculiarly engaging smile; when with a cry, the old man by my side
caught up the woodman’s hatchet, and started forward. On seeing him a
brutalized change came over her features. It was an instantaneous and
horrible transformation, as she made a crouching step backwards. Before
I could utter a scream, he struck at her with all his force, but she
dived under his blow, and unscathed, caught him in her tiny grasp by
the wrist. He struggled for a moment to release his arm, but his hand
opened, the axe fell to the ground, and the girl was gone.

He staggered against the wall. His grey hair stood upon his head, and a
moisture shone over his face, as if he were at the point of death.

The frightful scene had passed in a moment. The first thing I recollect
after, is Madame standing before me, and impatiently repeating again
and again, the question, “Where is Mademoiselle Carmilla?”

I answered at length, “I don’t know—I can’t tell—she went there,” and I
pointed to the door through which Madame had just entered; “only a
minute or two since.”

“But I have been standing there, in the passage, ever since
Mademoiselle Carmilla entered; and she did not return.”

She then began to call “Carmilla,” through every door and passage and
from the windows, but no answer came.

“She called herself Carmilla?” asked the General, still agitated.

“Carmilla, yes,” I answered.

“Aye,” he said; “that is Millarca. That is the same person who long ago
was called Mircalla, Countess Karnstein. Depart from this accursed
ground, my poor child, as quickly as you can. Drive to the clergyman’s
house, and stay there till we come. Begone! May you never behold
Carmilla more; you will not find her here.”




XV.
Ordeal and Execution


As he spoke one of the strangest looking men I ever beheld entered the
chapel at the door through which Carmilla had made her entrance and her
exit. He was tall, narrow-chested, stooping, with high shoulders, and
dressed in black. His face was brown and dried in with deep furrows; he
wore an oddly-shaped hat with a broad leaf. His hair, long and
grizzled, hung on his shoulders. He wore a pair of gold spectacles, and
walked slowly, with an odd shambling gait, with his face sometimes
turned up to the sky, and sometimes bowed down towards the ground,
seemed to wear a perpetual smile; his long thin arms were swinging, and
his lank hands, in old black gloves ever so much too wide for them,
waving and gesticulating in utter abstraction.

“The very man!” exclaimed the General, advancing with manifest delight.
“My dear Baron, how happy I am to see you, I had no hope of meeting you
so soon.” He signed to my father, who had by this time returned, and
leading the fantastic old gentleman, whom he called the Baron to meet
him. He introduced him formally, and they at once entered into earnest
conversation. The stranger took a roll of paper from his pocket, and
spread it on the worn surface of a tomb that stood by. He had a pencil
case in his fingers, with which he traced imaginary lines from point to
point on the paper, which from their often glancing from it, together,
at certain points of the building, I concluded to be a plan of the
chapel. He accompanied, what I may term, his lecture, with occasional
readings from a dirty little book, whose yellow leaves were closely
written over.

They sauntered together down the side aisle, opposite to the spot where
I was standing, conversing as they went; then they began measuring
distances by paces, and finally they all stood together, facing a piece
of the sidewall, which they began to examine with great minuteness;
pulling off the ivy that clung over it, and rapping the plaster with
the ends of their sticks, scraping here, and knocking there. At length
they ascertained the existence of a broad marble tablet, with letters
carved in relief upon it.

With the assistance of the woodman, who soon returned, a monumental
inscription, and carved escutcheon, were disclosed. They proved to be
those of the long lost monument of Mircalla, Countess Karnstein.

The old General, though not I fear given to the praying mood, raised
his hands and eyes to heaven, in mute thanksgiving for some moments.

“Tomorrow,” I heard him say; “the commissioner will be here, and the
Inquisition will be held according to law.”

Then turning to the old man with the gold spectacles, whom I have
described, he shook him warmly by both hands and said:

“Baron, how can I thank you? How can we all thank you? You will have
delivered this region from a plague that has scourged its inhabitants
for more than a century. The horrible enemy, thank God, is at last
tracked.”

My father led the stranger aside, and the General followed. I know that
he had led them out of hearing, that he might relate my case, and I saw
them glance often quickly at me, as the discussion proceeded.

My father came to me, kissed me again and again, and leading me from
the chapel, said:

“It is time to return, but before we go home, we must add to our party
the good priest, who lives but a little way from this; and persuade him
to accompany us to the schloss.”

In this quest we were successful: and I was glad, being unspeakably
fatigued when we reached home. But my satisfaction was changed to
dismay, on discovering that there were no tidings of Carmilla. Of the
scene that had occurred in the ruined chapel, no explanation was
offered to me, and it was clear that it was a secret which my father
for the present determined to keep from me.

The sinister absence of Carmilla made the remembrance of the scene more
horrible to me. The arrangements for the night were singular. Two
servants, and Madame were to sit up in my room that night; and the
ecclesiastic with my father kept watch in the adjoining dressing room.

The priest had performed certain solemn rites that night, the purport
of which I did not understand any more than I comprehended the reason
of this extraordinary precaution taken for my safety during sleep.

I saw all clearly a few days later.

The disappearance of Carmilla was followed by the discontinuance of my
nightly sufferings.

You have heard, no doubt, of the appalling superstition that prevails
in Upper and Lower Styria, in Moravia, Silesia, in Turkish Serbia, in
Poland, even in Russia; the superstition, so we must call it, of the
Vampire.

If human testimony, taken with every care and solemnity, judicially,
before commissions innumerable, each consisting of many members, all
chosen for integrity and intelligence, and constituting reports more
voluminous perhaps than exist upon any one other class of cases, is
worth anything, it is difficult to deny, or even to doubt the existence
of such a phenomenon as the Vampire.

For my part I have heard no theory by which to explain what I myself
have witnessed and experienced, other than that supplied by the ancient
and well-attested belief of the country.

The next day the formal proceedings took place in the Chapel of
Karnstein.

The grave of the Countess Mircalla was opened; and the General and my
father recognized each his perfidious and beautiful guest, in the face
now disclosed to view. The features, though a hundred and fifty years
had passed since her funeral, were tinted with the warmth of life. Her
eyes were open; no cadaverous smell exhaled from the coffin. The two
medical men, one officially present, the other on the part of the
promoter of the inquiry, attested the marvelous fact that there was a
faint but appreciable respiration, and a corresponding action of the
heart. The limbs were perfectly flexible, the flesh elastic; and the
leaden coffin floated with blood, in which to a depth of seven inches,
the body lay immersed.

Here then, were all the admitted signs and proofs of vampirism. The
body, therefore, in accordance with the ancient practice, was raised,
and a sharp stake driven through the heart of the vampire, who uttered
a piercing shriek at the moment, in all respects such as might escape
from a living person in the last agony. Then the head was struck off,
and a torrent of blood flowed from the severed neck. The body and head
was next placed on a pile of wood, and reduced to ashes, which were
thrown upon the river and borne away, and that territory has never
since been plagued by the visits of a vampire.

My father has a copy of the report of the Imperial Commission, with the
signatures of all who were present at these proceedings, attached in
verification of the statement. It is from this official paper that I
have summarized my account of this last shocking scene.




XVI.
Conclusion


I write all this you suppose with composure. But far from it; I cannot
think of it without agitation. Nothing but your earnest desire so
repeatedly expressed, could have induced me to sit down to a task that
has unstrung my nerves for months to come, and reinduced a shadow of
the unspeakable horror which years after my deliverance continued to
make my days and nights dreadful, and solitude insupportably terrific.

Let me add a word or two about that quaint Baron Vordenburg, to whose
curious lore we were indebted for the discovery of the Countess
Mircalla’s grave.

He had taken up his abode in Gratz, where, living upon a mere pittance,
which was all that remained to him of the once princely estates of his
family, in Upper Styria, he devoted himself to the minute and laborious
investigation of the marvelously authenticated tradition of Vampirism.
He had at his fingers’ ends all the great and little works upon the
subject.

“Magia Posthuma,” “Phlegon de Mirabilibus,” “Augustinus de cura pro
Mortuis,” “Philosophicae et Christianae Cogitationes de Vampiris,” by
John Christofer Herenberg; and a thousand others, among which I
remember only a few of those which he lent to my father. He had a
voluminous digest of all the judicial cases, from which he had
extracted a system of principles that appear to govern—some always, and
others occasionally only—the condition of the vampire. I may mention,
in passing, that the deadly pallor attributed to that sort of
revenants, is a mere melodramatic fiction. They present, in the grave,
and when they show themselves in human society, the appearance of
healthy life. When disclosed to light in their coffins, they exhibit
all the symptoms that are enumerated as those which proved the
vampire-life of the long-dead Countess Karnstein.

How they escape from their graves and return to them for certain hours
every day, without displacing the clay or leaving any trace of
disturbance in the state of the coffin or the cerements, has always
been admitted to be utterly inexplicable. The amphibious existence of
the vampire is sustained by daily renewed slumber in the grave. Its
horrible lust for living blood supplies the vigor of its waking
existence. The vampire is prone to be fascinated with an engrossing
vehemence, resembling the passion of love, by particular persons. In
pursuit of these it will exercise inexhaustible patience and stratagem,
for access to a particular object may be obstructed in a hundred ways.
It will never desist until it has satiated its passion, and drained the
very life of its coveted victim. But it will, in these cases, husband
and protract its murderous enjoyment with the refinement of an epicure,
and heighten it by the gradual approaches of an artful courtship. In
these cases it seems to yearn for something like sympathy and consent.
In ordinary ones it goes direct to its object, overpowers with
violence, and strangles and exhausts often at a single feast.

The vampire is, apparently, subject, in certain situations, to special
conditions. In the particular instance of which I have given you a
relation, Mircalla seemed to be limited to a name which, if not her
real one, should at least reproduce, without the omission or addition
of a single letter, those, as we say, anagrammatically, which compose
it.

Carmilla did this; so did Millarca.

My father related to the Baron Vordenburg, who remained with us for two
or three weeks after the expulsion of Carmilla, the story about the
Moravian nobleman and the vampire at Karnstein churchyard, and then he
asked the Baron how he had discovered the exact position of the
long-concealed tomb of the Countess Mircalla? The Baron’s grotesque
features puckered up into a mysterious smile; he looked down, still
smiling on his worn spectacle case and fumbled with it. Then looking
up, he said:

“I have many journals, and other papers, written by that remarkable
man; the most curious among them is one treating of the visit of which
you speak, to Karnstein. The tradition, of course, discolors and
distorts a little. He might have been termed a Moravian nobleman, for
he had changed his abode to that territory, and was, beside, a noble.
But he was, in truth, a native of Upper Styria. It is enough to say
that in very early youth he had been a passionate and favored lover of
the beautiful Mircalla, Countess Karnstein. Her early death plunged him
into inconsolable grief. It is the nature of vampires to increase and
multiply, but according to an ascertained and ghostly law.

“Assume, at starting, a territory perfectly free from that pest. How
does it begin, and how does it multiply itself? I will tell you. A
person, more or less wicked, puts an end to himself. A suicide, under
certain circumstances, becomes a vampire. That specter visits living
people in their slumbers; they die, and almost invariably, in the
grave, develop into vampires. This happened in the case of the
beautiful Mircalla, who was haunted by one of those demons. My
ancestor, Vordenburg, whose title I still bear, soon discovered this,
and in the course of the studies to which he devoted himself, learned a
great deal more.

“Among other things, he concluded that suspicion of vampirism would
probably fall, sooner or later, upon the dead Countess, who in life had
been his idol. He conceived a horror, be she what she might, of her
remains being profaned by the outrage of a posthumous execution. He has
left a curious paper to prove that the vampire, on its expulsion from
its amphibious existence, is projected into a far more horrible life;
and he resolved to save his once beloved Mircalla from this.

“He adopted the stratagem of a journey here, a pretended removal of her
remains, and a real obliteration of her monument. When age had stolen
upon him, and from the vale of years, he looked back on the scenes he
was leaving, he considered, in a different spirit, what he had done,
and a horror took possession of him. He made the tracings and notes
which have guided me to the very spot, and drew up a confession of the
deception that he had practiced. If he had intended any further action
in this matter, death prevented him; and the hand of a remote
descendant has, too late for many, directed the pursuit to the lair of
the beast.”

We talked a little more, and among other things he said was this:

“One sign of the vampire is the power of the hand. The slender hand of
Mircalla closed like a vice of steel on the General’s wrist when he
raised the hatchet to strike. But its power is not confined to its
grasp; it leaves a numbness in the limb it seizes, which is slowly, if
ever, recovered from.”

The following Spring my father took me a tour through Italy. We
remained away for more than a year. It was long before the terror of
recent events subsided; and to this hour the image of Carmilla returns
to memory with ambiguous alternations—sometimes the playful, languid,
beautiful girl; sometimes the writhing fiend I saw in the ruined
church; and often from a reverie I have started, fancying I heard the
light step of Carmilla at the drawing room door.




Other books by J. Sheridan LeFanu

The Cock and Anchor
Torlogh O’Brien
The House by the Churchyard
Uncle Silas
Checkmate
Carmilla
The Wyvern Mystery
Guy Deverell
Ghost Stories and Tales of Mystery
The Chronicles of Golden Friars
In a Glass Darkly
The Purcell Papers
The Watcher and Other Weird Stories
A Chronicle of Golden Friars and Other Stories
Madam Growl’s Ghost and Other Tales of Mystery
Green Tea and Other Stories
Sheridan LeFanu: The Diabolic Genius
Best Ghost Stories of J.S. LeFanu
The Best Horror Stories
The Vampire Lovers and Other Stories
Ghost Stories and Mysteries
The Hours After Midnight
J.S. LeFanu: Ghost Stories and Mysteries
Ghost and Horror Stories
Green Tea and Other Ghost Stones
Carmilla and Other Classic Tales of Mystery


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARMILLA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


eeThe Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. Durant of Salt Lake City, by Ben E. Rich

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Mr. Durant of Salt Lake City
       "That Mormon"

Author: Ben E. Rich

Release Date: March 6, 2018 [EBook #56685]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. DURANT OF SALT LAKE CITY ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Renah
Holmes.







MR. DURANT

OF

SALT LAKE CITY,

"THAT MORMON."


BY BEN. E. RICH.


"God attributes to place No sanctity, if none be thither brought By men
who there frequent."--MILTON


SALT LAKE CITY:
GEORGE Q. CANNON & SONS CO.,
PRINTERS
1893.



PREFACE.

Mormonism is a subject which has been handled by many authors. Some
have written in its favor, with prayerful hearts, seeking the guidance
of the Holy Spirit as their honest convictions were recorded; while
others have declared against the Mormons and the man who was the
instrument, in the hands of God, of founding their faith. A few of the
latter class have been honest in their attacks, believing, perhaps,
that they were doing the Lord's will in opposing it; but the majority
have been actuated by hatred in all they have said on the subject.

The author of this work has endeavored to present, in plain and simple
words, the faith of the Latter-day Saints, with a desire to aid and
interest the young men of Mormondom, who have had no missionary
experience, and to fit them to make known their belief to the nations
of the earth, should they be called upon for that purpose.

If this book shall benefit them, and give others a better conception of
the Latter-day Saints and their religion, the object in publishing it
will have been attained.

                                                      THE AUTHOR.

OGDEN, February, 1893.



CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

THE OLD AND THE NEW.

The Changes In the Sunny South, since the War. Hospitality of the
Southerner. His Traits of Character. Politics and Religion. Purpose of
the Description.

CHAPTER II.

A NEW ARRIVAL IN THE TOWN.

The Town of Westminster. Harmony Place, the Hotel of the Marshalls.
Guests and their social Methods. Mr. Charles Durant, the New Arrival
from the West. Introduction to the Family and Visitors.

CHAPTER III.

NEW ACQUAINTANCES AND AN AGREEABLE DISCUSSION.

An Evening on the veranda. A Variety of Subjects Discussed. Politics
and Religion. Christian America. Do People Practice their Religious
Professions? Priests Addicted to Money-getting rather than to
Soul-getting. The Stranger Interested. Proposed Discussion. Search
after Truth. A Quotation from the Prayer Book. A Difference Concerning
the Godhead. Erroneous Conception of God. Oneness of the Father and the
Son. Three Separate Identities, United as One in all Things. Character
of Each. A God with Body, Parts and Passions. Mysteries Explained.
"Good Night."

CHAPTER IV.

GAINING AND LOSING FAVOR.

Entirely at Home. Another Evening on the Veranda. The Reverend, the
Stranger, and Churches. The Baptism of Christ. Baptism by Immersion.
Necessity of this Ordinance. The Savior's Example. Who are True
Christians? Laying on of Hands. The Reverend Retires from the Argument.
Continued Discussion. The Gospel and its Necessity. Men must Answer
for their own Sins. The Double Effect of the Atonement of Christ.
Conditions of Salvation. A Definition of Faith. First Step Alone Is not
Sufficient for Salvation. Scripture Explained. Romans, Chapter X. The
Stranger's Errand.

CHAPTER V.

FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES.

The Second Step that should be Taken by the Convert to Christianity.
True Repentance, its End and Aim. Forgiveness of Sin, How obtained.
Mode, Meaning, and Significance of Baptism. Who are fit Candidates for
this Ordinance? Little Children exempt. What shall we do to be saved?
The Answer of Paul. The Holy Ghost, How conferred. The Signs Following.
Conditions of Salvation named. "Show Me Where True Christians Live."
Who is authorized to Baptize? The Need of Authorized Officers. A
Sign of the True Church. Teachers must be called of God "The Falling
Away" Foretold. Christians turned Heathen, The Gospel to be restored.
Prophecies Concerning this Event. The Restoration through Revelation to
Man. Promises to the Believer. A Lecture Arranged for.

CHAPTER VI.

TRUTH AGAIN DEFEATS FALSEHOOD.

A Pleasant Conversation. Missionary Hymn. Perfect Happiness, True
Enjoyment, How Obtained. The Medium Course, Sensible Christianity. The
Reverend Once More. His peculiar Surprise. "Are You from Salt Lake
City?" The Stranger is a Latter-day Saint, or Mormon. A Discomfited
Minister. Some Falsehoods Exposed. The Articles of Faith.

CHAPTER VII.

Durant's Experience in Westminster. His Labors. Meeting in the Town
Hall. Sincere Congratulations. Fears of a Mob.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE PROPHET JOSEPH'S STATEMENT.

Once More on the Veranda. Answering Questions. Information from the
Right Source. Complete Statement of the Early Rise and Progress of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by the Prophet, Joseph
Smith. The Book of Mormon. The Testimony of Three Witnesses. And also
the Testimony of Eight Witnesses. Concerning the Restoration of the
Gospel. Striking Illustration. Departure from Westminster.

CHAPTER IX.

THAT MORMON AGAIN.

A New Member of the Marshall Family. Meeting an Esteemed Friend. A
Delayed Breakfast. A Promised Return. Anxious to Meet the Missionary.
Effect of the Elder's Testimony. Danger of Being converted to
Mormonism. An Informal Meeting Place.

CHAPTER X.

THE MISSIONARY'S RETURN.

Once More with his Friends. Experience While Away. Account of a
Terrible Mobbing. Peculiar Feelings Attending the Formation of New
Friendships. Opportunity to introduce a New Principle. The Doctrine of
Pre-Existence. A Beautiful Poem. Proofs from the Scriptures. The Truth
is Reasonable. A Walk through the Village. "The World my Home."

CHAPTER XI.

A PLEASANT INTERVIEW.

An Evening Gathering. Remarks on the Faith of the Latter-day Saints.
What they Believe. A Literal Resurrection. The Teachings of Jesus and
the Scriptures on this Subject. Illustrations. Now Accepted Facts were
Once Incomprehensible. Great Truths Yet Unrevealed. The story of the
Silver Cup. Death-bed Repentance. The Repentant Malefactor did not go
to Heaven with the Savior. The Subject explained. Where and What is
Paradise? Preaching to Departed Spirits. Baptism for the Dead. The
Welding Link Between the Fathers and their Children. Testimony of a
Prophecy Fulfilled. Organization of the Church of Christ. The Holy
Priesthood. Officers of the Melchisedek and the Aaronic Priesthoods.

CHAPTER XII.

A BAPTISM AND A CONVERSATION ON MARRIAGE.

Importance of Baptism. Necessity of Earnest Preparation. Form of the
Ordinance Given. Quotations Showing the Gathering to be In Strict
Harmony with the Bible. The Marriage Covenant is Eternal. The Union of
Adam and Eve. What is meant by Marriage as Ordained of God? Necessity
of Authority.

CHAPTER XIII.

ABOUT THE MORMONS.

A Trip to Utah. Consideration that Led the Mormons to Settle that
Territory. The Death of the Prophet Joseph, How it Occurred. Its Effect
on the Saints. How Brigham Young Became Leader of the People. The
Exodus from Nauvoo. Testimony of Historians. Good by. Off for the West.
Arrival in Salt Lake City. A Happy Meeting. A Doctrinal Sermon.

CHAPTER XIV.

MR. BROWN'S LETTER TO THE MARSHALLS.

The Great West. Along the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific. By the
Denver & Rio Grande over the Rockies. Scenes Along the Line. Over the
Wasatch into Utah. Delightful Views. Area, Population and Resources
of the Territory. In Salt Lake City. The Tabernacle and the Temple.
Ecclesiastical Divisions. Natural Attractions. Education. A Living
Faith. Fair Minded People. President Wilford Woodruff. Greetings.

CHAPTER XV.

CONCLUSION.

A Word Before we Separate. Important Questions. "What if the Message
be True." "Read, Listen, Investigate." "Know this, that Every Soul is
Free."

APPENDIX.

WHAT BRIGHAM YOUNG SAID.

Quotations from the Sermons of President Brigham Young.



MR. DURANT OF SALT LAKE.



CHAPTER I.

THE OLD AND THE NEW.

There are few if any cities or towns of any consequence in the vast
territory known to poesy as the Sunny South, that do not speak in
every street corner, in almost every building, and even through the
individuals themselves, of the wondrous changes wrought by the great
civil war. Those who knew that Sunny South before the sanguinary
struggle, and have since looked upon it, will most readily appreciate
the force of this statement; while those who have not seen it, need
only be told that where villages existed then, now thriving towns
arise, or bustling municipalities; elegant mansions have supplanted log
huts or other indifferent abodes of men; the railway has displaced the
stage coach for all time; newspapers abound where before these were
almost unknown, and--greatest boon of all--the auction block, whereon
human merchandise was publicly vended, exists only as a memory which
itself is rapidly vanishing before the pressure of modern progress and
a better civilization. In one respect at least, however, there has been
little, if any, change, and that is in regard to the best feature of
all among the many that are commendable in the true Southerner--the
stranger or wayfarer is received with the same unaffected hospitality
as of yore, and is at liberty, within reasonable limits, to avail
himself of all the conveniences and enjoyments of whatever home he may
find himself the guest.

Notwithstanding their hospitality, the people of the South are usually
disposed to be suspicious of strangers until well acquainted with them,
and they are overly watchful, jealous and even irritable when once
a real or fancied cause for vigilance arises. Inheriting traditions
and propensities which are inseparable from the climate and the race,
they brook no interference with their peculiar views, and anything
savoring of intolerance or bigotry concerning a cherished Southernism
is summarily suppressed if it can be; apart from this, it matters
little what the visitor believes or practices in a general way. In
politics they incline largely one way, possibly for the reason that
to do otherwise would, as they look upon it, threaten them with the
domination of the black race, and this of all things they will not
have, no matter by what means it is prevented. In religion they are
protestant with heavy leaning towards the Baptist doctrines, not always
free from narrowness, yett fairly tolerant--many evincing a willingness
to listen, and demanding a right to believe or disbelieve, as their
judgment may dictate.

Those who are unacquainted with the situation would be inclined to say
at this point. What a grand field for missionary work! And so it is;
but the great mistake of supposing that the South is deficient in the
matter of Christian endeavor or ecclesiastical institutions, must not
be made. Far from that! On the contrary, perhaps religious feeling is
more generally diffused, guarded, and defended as herein expressed,
than in any other section of the civilized world; but it is not of the
kind from which riots and persecutions grow for no other reason than
that it is opposed.

There is much else south of the imaginary dividing line of North and
South that might be spoken of to interest, but which will not be
referred to except incidentally in the succeeding chapters. What we
have said is for the purpose of giving only so much of a description of
the country and people as is necessary to make our little narrative,
the incidents of which are laid there, more easily understood. As this
book deals principally with actual occurrences, and people in real
life, such a foundation seems to be entirely proper.



CHAPTER II.

A NEW ARRIVAL IN THE TOWN.

A town pleasantly situated in the south-western part of Tennessee, the
name of which for the present shall be Westminster, was at the time of
which we write one of the most cosmopolitan places imaginable for its
size--that is, for a southern town. It contained probably two thousand
regular inhabitants, but these were constantly augmented, it being at
times a rallying point for tourists from every clime, and the temporary
abode of men who, in the aggregate, during a season, came well-nigh
representing every shade of opinion, if not every phase of character.

A quiet little hotel, or perhaps it would be better to say a residence,
with accommodations for a limited number of guests, was situated near
the outskirts, and so pleasant in all respects were the location,
surroundings and appointments, that its name, Harmony Place, did not
seem at all inappropriate. In two important respects it was unlike
any other hostelry in the town--there was no bar, and the guests all
had an air of respectability in keeping with the house itself. It was
kept by a planter, in ordinary financial circumstances, whose name
was Marshall; he was assisted in his duties by a colored roustabout
of uncertain ancestry, a circumscribed present, and a future wholly
undefined. Mr. Marshall's wife, and daughter Claire, did their part
by generously entertaining the visitors. There were at the time of
which we write three guests--a lawyer named Brown, who had established
himself at Westminster; a doctor calling himself Slocum, who was
giving the town a trial with a view to locating in it if the patronage
warranted; and a tourist whose name was given as Reverend Fitzallen,
and whose object seemed to be the pursuit of health, pleasure and
information, and incidentally, the dissemination of the gospel
according to his faith. Naturally, with so limited a circle of patrons,
each having been there for some length of time, the associations all
around were more like those in a family than such as exist between
landlord and guests. An evening in the parlor with everybody but the
Ethiopian present, the daughter singing to her own accompaniment on the
piano, while the doctor turned the music for her, was often enjoyed,
and there was rarely if ever a discordant circumstance to mar the
serenity of these occasions.

It was early in September, 189--, the most enjoyable part of the year
in Westminster. A man, who was readily distinguishable from the
town-folk, not only by his strange face but by his attire, and by that
indescribable air which appears the more plainly the more a stranger
tries to discard or conceal it, made his way leisurely to the gate
fronting Harmony Place, and continued his way up the walk leading to
the door. He was met by Mrs. Marshall and informed, in response to his
inquiry, that he could obtain lodgings there. The colored man took
the guest's valise and led the way to a room on the second floor.
After washing himself and brushing off the dust from his clothes, the
stranger reappeared in the sitting room, and taking up a paper waited
the announcement that refreshments were ready, which was not long in
coming.

He was somewhat above medium height, well proportioned, not unusually
well dressed, but still appeared presentable in good society, and had
a countenance which, while not decidedly handsome, was regular and of
that caste which attracts attention; his voice was quite pleasant, his
natural conversational faculty proved to be good, and he was so well
fortified with current facts and all the pleasantries of the day, that
before the meal was over he was quite in harmony with the hostess, who
was not only happy to answer any question he asked, but look advantage
of every opportunity to propound queries for herself. Within an hour
from the time of arrival, the new guest seemed to be nearly as well
acquainted as if he had been an inmate of the house for a month at
least. This ability of rapidly forming acquaintance is very rare; and
particularly in the case of travelers, no amount of money or graces can
recompense its absence. Those who possess it do not need an extended
reference to its usefulness to be made aware thereof, while those who
are not in possession of it can never be made fully to understand its
value by means of cold type and white paper.

The landlady has learned the name of the latest arrival before the
reader has--it is Charles Durant, aged thirty, and he comes from
the West--a rather indefinite abiding place to those of us who are
residents of, or are familiar with, that division of our country. It
is satisfactory, however, to a majority of our eastern and southern
brethren who have never placed feet upon the shores of the Missouri,
or crossed its waters, and who seem to entertain a vague idea that
Westerners all come from one place, and are all alike in most respects.

Later in the day Durant took a stroll through the suburbs of the town,
and returning was introduced to Mr. Marshall, to the guests, as they
appeared one by one, with all of whom he was soon on the most cordial
terms, and finally to the young lady, the sole representative on earth
of her devoted parents, who, being twenty years of age, as pretty as
a dream, well informed, and altogether attractive, was not likely to
bear their name much longer, albeit at this time reveling in "maiden
meditation, fancy free."

It was truly an interesting circle and the interest did not abate in
the least by reason of the latest arrival.



CHAPTER III.

NEW ACQUAINTANCES AND AN AGREEABLE DISCUSSION.

The evening of the first day that marked the stranger's advent into
Westminster saw the entire _personnel_ of Harmony Place on the veranda;
the new moon smiled benignly upon them, the evening was cool and
the "ripe harvest of the new-mown hay" gave to the air a "sweet and
wholesome odor." One subject after another was taken up, discussed and
disposed of, or at least laid aside to give way to some other, and in
each and all of them our hero (for such we may as well commence to
recognize him) took a part, and exhibited a fund of information and
an aptitude of presentation which gave him the preference without a
contest whenever he chose to speak. This became more and more frequent
as the night wore on, for there was no disguising the fact that he was,
like the others, already one of the household. If any one of the party
wondered what it was that he had come for, how he expected to get it,
or how long he was to stay, the conjecture never found expression; for
they all experienced so much of general satisfaction in hearing him,
and took such genuine pleasure in his word-painting of western scenes
and events, that they were all willing to have him stay indefinitely.
He was literally chosen as one of their number without opposition, and
the mere matters of detail regarding his purposes might be left to the
future or be entirely undiscovered; he was now decidedly the architect
of his own fortune so far as retaining the good will of that little
group was concerned.

The conversation proceeded from point to point until the topics of the
quiet gathering assumed more the aspect of an intellectual _melange_
than anything else; the Sepoy rebellion made way for the Dakota
blizzard, the signal failure of the first laying of the Atlantic cable
was shelved to make place for Webster's artistic destruction of Dr.
Parkman, and Cromwell's career of conquests and crimes was followed
by a brief discussion of the science and practice of silver mining.
(Variety and scope enough, surely!) It must be noticeable that the two
subjects which agitate us nationally and sometimes locally more than
any others--politics and religion--had so far escaped; they had not,
however, been unthought of, and presently the latter was begun by the
minister saying:

"Representing to some extent as I do, the church, I am compelled to
admit that in the matters of organization, discipline and places of
worship, America is thoroughly Christianized. Look at the profusion
of church buildings wherever you go. To me such rivalry is gratifying
in the extreme, representing as it does the highest type of good
citizenship."

"I partially concur with you," said the lawyer, "and yet I belong to no
church at all--do not, in fact, endorse Christianity as a department of
civilized life."

"Why, how is this?" said Fitzallen, "I thought nearly everybody in this
country must be orthodox to some extent at least."

"Not so with me, I assure you," the other replied, "and the strangest
part of it is that my 'peculiar views,' as you may call them, are
not the result of neglect or indifference, but are rather caused
by investigation and the peculiar explanations, or rather lack of
explanations, of those who make the dissemination of religious views
their calling."

"In other words you are an unbeliever."

"Exactly."

"Not totally, I trust."

"Oh, not necessarily. The creeds which base, or profess to base, their
tenets upon the Bible do not, as it appears to me, live up to their
professions, and the clergy--meaning no offense whatever--are more
addicted to money-getting than to soul-getting. That there may be
salvation and a Supreme Judge who provides it is to me simply like the
traditional Scotch verdict--not proved."

The stranger from the west was listening to all this with the air of
one deeply interested. It was as if an opportunity which he desired,
but had not expressed himself concerning, had come, and he was not at
all reluctant about replying when questioned as to his own views. It
came when the churchman, after announcing his determination to "labor"
with the infidel, turned to the new-comer and said:

"I do not know whether you would be for or against me in such a work,
but coming from what we of the East are prone to regard as the land
where restraints are not severe, I fear you might be disposed to assist
him rather than me."

"Well, gentlemen," said Durant, "this topic interests me, and while I
and my opinions are unknown to you all, still I will, if agreeable,
endeavor to throw some light upon the subject at present, and will seek
to do more in that direction hereafter if favored with an opportunity.
I am a believer in religion, laying claim to a testimony from above,
and still I often find myself opposed by ministers; they are generally
the very persons who are foremost in opposing me on every side, strange
to say."

"I cannot imagine why this should be the case," said Fitzallen, "if you
are as you state, a true believer in Christ and have a testimony of
Him."

"It may seem strange to you, at which I do not wonder. But I am afraid
I am delaying the work you have planned for Mr. Brown's welfare. If
you will permit me to ask a few questions during your conversation
with him, I may be able to take a general part in it before it closes,
provided, however, that should we differ upon any religious views, it
will be in a friendly and pleasant manner."

"Oh, certainly," said the churchman, "I am sure it will be a pleasure
to me to have you join in our conversation as you see fit, and I do not
doubt that Mr. Brown and the other gentlemen will look upon it in the
same way."

The entire party here expressed approval of the proposed discussion,
and the lawyer said:

"I have not the slightest objections, and will be glad to have all the
light possible thrown upon the different doctrinal points that I do not
believe, and mainly because of which I am not at present a member of
any Christian church."

"Then, Mr. Brown," said Fitzallen, "let us commence our voyage in
search of eternal truth. What particular part of the Christian faith
appears to you as being most difficult to understand?"

"I confess there are many. However, let us commence with one of the
principles of your belief. I will refer to some of the literature of
the Church of England. The first article of religion contained in the
Church of England Prayer Book is: 'There is but one living and true
God, everlasting; without body, parts or passions; of infinite power,
wisdom and goodness; the maker and preserver of all things, both
visible and invisible; and in the unity of this Godhead there are three
persons of one substance, power and eternity,--the Father, Son and the
Holy Ghost.' According to this, then, your belief is that the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost are one person, without body, parts or passions."

"You have certainly quoted correctly from the prayer book; I fail to
see anything wrong with that. What fault have you to find with it?"

"None whatever if you really believe it, because there does not seem
to me much variance in our conclusions if you believe in such a God as
this; I can not conceive of a just God who has neither body, parts nor
passions. So far as the Bible is concerned, I fail to see from what
part of that book you obtain such a conclusion."

"Well, Mr. Brown, using your own language, 'so far as the Bible is
concerned,' let us do as Isaiah commands, go 'to the law and to the
testimony,' (Isaiah viii: 20) and I will soon convince you that the
Bible plainly sets forth the fact that the Father and the Son are one.
In fact, Jesus Himself declares that He and His Father are one. (John
x: 30.) Is this not true?"

"Excuse me," said Durant, "but is it not more reasonable for us to
believe He meant that He and His Father were united in all things as
one person?--not that they were actually one and the same identity?"

"Certainly not," said the reverend, "our Savior meant just what He said
when He declared that He and His Father were one."

"I must certainly differ from you," said the stranger, "for He also
asked His Father to make His disciples one, even as He and the Father
were one, as you will see by reference to John xvii: 20 and 21, and by
your argument it must have been His wish for those disciples to lose
their separate and distinct identities. I am afraid you are not making
a very favorable impression on Mr. Brown's mind."

"Stranger," said Mr. Brown, "your view of the case, I must confess,
appears to be very reasonable. Looking at it from any other standpoint
would not be in accord with sound reason."

"Let me ask," said the preacher, "did not Jesus say, 'He that hath seen
me, hath seen the Father?'" (John xiv: 9.)

"Yes," said the westerner, "for as Paul says, 'He was in the express
image of His (Father's) person,' (Heb. i: 3), and this being the case
Jesus might well give them to understand that when they had seen one
they had seen the other. When Jesus went out to pray, He said, 'O, my
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not
as I will but as Thou wilt.' (Matt, xxvi: 39.) Now then, to whom was
our Savior praying? Was He asking a favor of Himself?"

"Oh, no; He was then praying to the Holy Spirit."

"Oh, then by such admission you have separated one of the three from
Jesus, for in the beginning you declared that the three were one; and
now that we have one of the three separated from the others, let us
see if we can separate the other two. In order to do this, I refer
you to the account of the martyrdom of Stephen. While being stoned to
death he looked up to heaven and saw the glory of God, and that Jesus
was standing on the right hand of God. (Acts vii: 55.) Would it not be
rather difficult for any person to stand on the right hand of himself?
And in order to prove further that Jesus is a separate person from the
Father, we will examine into the account of His baptism. On coming up
out of the water, what was it that lighted upon Him in the form of a
dove?" (Matt iii: 16.)

"We are told it was the Spirit of God."

"Exactly! And whose voice was it that spoke from the heavens, saying,
'This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased?' (Matt. iii: 17.)
Now, mind you, there was Jesus, who had just been raised from the
water, being one person, the Holy Ghost which descended from above
and rested upon Him in the form of a dove, making two personages; and
does not the idea strike you very forcibly that the voice from heaven
belonged to a third person? And then, again, I will draw your attention
to--"

The churchman was getting warmed up. Said he: "These are things which
we are not expected to understand; and, my young friend, I would advise
you to drop such foolish ideas, for--"

"Excuse me. Did you say 'foolish ideas'? Why, my dear sir, we are told
in the Bible that, 'This is life eternal, that they might know thee,
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.' (John xvii:
3.) Therefore, it should be our first duty to find out the character
and being of God. You say we are not expected to understand these
things, while the Bible says these are what we must understand if we
desire eternal life. It also says we can understand the things of man
by the spirit of man, but to understand the things of God we must have
the Spirit of God; and as you profess to be one of His servants, you
are supposed to be in possession of the necessary Spirit to understand
the true and living God, also Jesus Christ whom He sent. You say God
has no body; did our Savior have one? If so, then His Father had one,
for I have just proved by the words of Paul that Christ was in the
express image of his person. (Heb. i: 3.) Jesus appeared in the midst
of His disciples after His resurrection, with a body of flesh and
bones, and called upon His disciples to satisfy themselves on this
point by touching Him; for, says He, 'a spirit hath not flesh and bones
as ye see me have.' (Luke xxiv: 39.) Then He called for something to
eat and He did eat (verses 42, 43), and with this body of flesh and
bone He ascended into heaven and stood, as Stephen says, on the right
hand of God. (Acts vii: 55.) Now, if He has no body, what became of the
one He took away with Him?"

"This is nonsense! You know that God is a spirit, and I think we would
better not delve too deeply into matters which we are not permitted to
comprehend."

"Pray, listen a while longer, for I have yet more to say in regard to
what you call nonsense, although if it be such, I must insist that
it is Bible nonsense. You say God is a spirit; does that prove He
has no body? We are also told we must worship Him in spirit. Am I to
understand from this that we must worship Him without a body? Have
you a spirit? Yes. Have you also a body? Yes. Were you made in the
image of God, body and spirit? So says the good old Bible. Man was
created in the image of God. (Gen. i: 26, 27.) Then God has a body,
and, consequently, must have parts. Moses talked with Him face to face,
as one man talks with another (Ex. xxxiii: 11), arid he also saw His
back parts. He promised (Num. xii: 8) to speak with Moses mouth to
mouth. We are told in the fifth chapter of Deuteronomy that He has a
hand and arm. The Psalm (cxxxix: 16) tells us He has eyes, and Isaiah
(xxx: 27) says he has lips and a tongue. John describes His head, hair
and eyes. (Rev. i: 14.) And, as for passions, we are told in the Bible
that He has love, wrath, and is a jealous God. Are these not parts and
passions? My dear sir, it would appear that all who believe in the
scriptures must conclude that they are parts and passions, and that the
Creator is a God after whose likeness we are made."

"Well, I had no idea when I commenced this conversation with Mr. Brown
that I was to find such an antagonist in yourself. One would naturally
come to the conclusion that you had made the Bible a study."

"Thank you, you do me honor. I confess I have as a Christian studied
the record; in fact, at a very early age my parents required me to
commit and remember a very important verse in that good old book. It is
found in the fifth chapter of the gospel according to St. John, being
the 39th verse, and reads as follows: Search the scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of
me."

"That is certainly proper, but I must again warn you against plunging
into mysteries which we cannot understand."

"But Peter tells us that 'no prophecy of the scripture is of any
private interpretation' (II. Peter i: 20), and these are the things
which we should seek for information upon; for lack of explanation by
the ministers upon these points is, to a great extent, the cause of
many persons being in Mr. Brown's frame of mind today."

"You are scarcely complimentary, and if your assertion be correct,
perhaps it would be better for me to withdraw and leave Mr. Brown in
your hands."

"I beg your pardon, my dear sir," said Durant, "I meant not to offend,
I assure you, and intended only to be in earnest; I will endeavor to be
more careful during the rest of the conversation."

The lawyer, who was decidedly impressed at this juncture, dispelled
what might have been a painful silence by saying:

"Well, I declare, things have taken a very peculiar turn, I seem to be
out of the fight altogether. But I want to say this, I have heard more
that appears to be reasonable from you, Mr. Durant, regarding these
matters than ever before in my life, and I must also admit that if my
early teaching on religious matters had been as reasonable, I almost
believe I might have been a Christian."

As it was getting late Mr. Marshall here "put in a word," saying:

"It is now getting quite late and perhaps all would like to retire; if
so, I will conduct you to your rooms."

"No," said Mr. Brown; "we must not go to bed yet a while. I never was
religiously interested before in my life, and I wish to listen to
further discussion between these two."

The new-comer was more than willing; but being somewhat fatigued
himself, and realizing that possibly there might be a sense of
weariness in some of the others, he deemed it best not to continue for
the time being, although asked to do so. He then made a suggestion,
which was unanimously agreed to: that the subject be taken up on the
following evening in the same place; and so, with mutual expressions of
regard and a kind "good night" all around, the party dispersed for the
night.



CHAPTER IV.

GAINING AND LOSING FAVOR.

The western man had not intended to make a stay at the little home
hostelry where he was quartered, and where he had became so thoroughly
ingratiated all at once. His mission required a frequent "change
of base" and constant action; but he realized that nothing was
occurring which was so greatly at variance with his general purpose
as to materially change it, and that, a nucleus for possible future
engagements having been established, he might as well remain where he
was until called elsewhere. Already he was on the best of terms with
all, even with the "colored citizen," and he was disposed to make
himself entirely at home, as all hands were willing to have him do.

The time for the adjourned meeting on the veranda came and not only
was a quorum present, but all of the party were there, besides two or
three neighbors who had learned something of what was taking place.
After a few formalities had been engaged in, the discussion was opened
by Durant suggesting to Fitzallen that it was a little singular that
two men believing in, and upholding, the same good book should find
anything to dispute about; such things did happen, however, and perhaps
it was as well, since by free discussion error was eradicated and truth
made plain.

The preacher then asked a question which must seem to the reader to
have been too long delayed--"May I ask of what church you are a member?"

"Certainly," said the westerner; "but before answering, will you tell
me what church edifice that is to the east of us?"

"That is the Wesleyan church."

"And the one a short distance below here?"

"That is the Episcopalian."

"What other churches are there in this place?"

"Oh, there are the Baptist, the Catholic chapel, and the quarters of
the Salvation Army, so called."

"Is that all?"

"Yes, I believe so, and I think enough, unless we have omitted naming
yours."

"You certainly have, for the church of which I am a member you have
failed to mention at all."

"Indeed? And what is it?"

"The Church of Jesus Christ, sir. Don't you think it would be well if
He also had a church in your midst?"

"Why, my friend, they all belong to Him."

"Is it possible? I certainly have no recollection of hearing you even
mention His name in connection with any of them."

"You may not have heard His name, but they are all, yes, even the
parading and noise-making Salvation Army, engaged in His service."

"Then why not bear His name?"

"It is a case in which the name need not be connected with the object,
and still the service rendered and the objects aimed at are all for
Him, as certainly all who engage in the calling of Christianity
believe, and as those who practice in the ministry instruct."

"Let us see how this is. Your church members believe in the Lord Jesus,
accept the word of God as an exposition of His principles, as well as a
command to them, and the ministers instruct them accordingly. Is that
so?"

"It is."

"Then I am to understand that all these churches and communicants
uphold and practice baptism by immersion as set forth in, and enjoined
by, the scriptures."

"No; that is to say, some do, and some do not."

"What is the probable proportion?"

"Oh, I could not say as to that."

"Do not you and the majority of the others accept of other forms of
baptism and in many cases of none at all?"

"Yes."

"Does not that depart from the teachings of the Bible and the example
set by Christ Himself?"

"Not necessarily."

"Did not He go down into the waters of baptism and receive immersion at
the hands of John the Baptist?"

"Yes."

"And did not the injunction go forth which forms the very corner-stone
of His own Church--of Christianity--'Repent and be baptized?'"

"Yes; but He did not say that of necessity all were to be immersed.
The Bible is fertile in parables and much that is said is left to the
intelligence of the reader for interpretation."

"By the same authority I have warned you already against 'private
interpretations.' However, we need not rest the case entirely upon
that. Take up your Bible at your leisure and examine well all accounts
given of cases where this ordinance was performed, and you cannot
help admitting that baptism by immersion was the only way in which
the ancients accepted that principle. You will see that the word of
God _commands_, in unequivocal language, the ordinance of baptism
by immersion, and His Son set us the example by going down into the
waters. Therefore, those who do not perform this have no claim upon
the Savior's name, for they obey not His Father's words nor His own
example."

"You would hold, then, that those who do not conform literally to such
example are not Christians."

"They may believe in Christian conduct and practice righteousness
within a certain sphere; they may be upright and just in their dealings
and their hearts may be filled with love for their race, but they
cannot establish rules of conduct for themselves and claim to act in
the authority and name of Christ. He has set the pattern and it is for
them and for us to follow."

"I never heard such strange reasoning before, and it reminds me of a
fact upon which I have often dwelt--that sophistry and logic may both
rest upon the same foundation, not, however, accusing you of dealing in
sophistry or claiming that in all respects my words have been those of
logic. Now, to follow your theme further in the same vein and employing
precisely your method of arriving at conclusions--those who do not, for
instance, practice the laying on of hands for the healing of the sick,
or for the casting out of real or imaginary devils, who do not, for
example, subscribe to all the superstitions and resort to the practices
enjoined by the Bible--which practices must have had reference to a
time in which the domain of science was so limited that it could not
even comprehend the present--that all such people, I say, are also
outside the pale of Christianity are pagans, infidels, in fact?"

"You state part of the proposition correctly enough, but your
conclusion is unjust--unjust because not a natural outgrowth of the
premises stated, and also unjust because containing a reflection."

"I meant no reflection at all."

"So I may readily believe. Now, a man may be entirely outside the
pale of practical, or if you prefer it, modern Christianity and still
be neither a pagan nor an infidel; while he may be inside it and not
practice the things spoken of, by means of which he would be as much at
variance with the requirements of our Father and Savior, perhaps, as
the others named, and none of them be of necessity bad people, or among
those wholly condemned."

"Then you believe in the actual practice of laying on of hands as well
as of baptism by immersion?"

"Assuredly I do."

"And practice it, perhaps?"

"Whenever necessary, yes."

"Well, for fear you may not wish to try it here, and it is nearly bed
time, I will relieve you of one of the 'devils,' and the power of
'casting out' can be held in reserve for some future occasion."

"My dear sir, you do us both injustice. No one would put you in such a
category, and it is not a part of the work of a Christian to come into
a circle as I have and engender harsh feelings, far from it."

"Oh, no matter. We might talk again at another time, when I may be
pleased to continue our remarks, but not tonight as I only intended
remaining a short time, having an important engagement which I was
compelled to make since I saw you last evening; so, if you will excuse
me, I will wish you all good evening."

And so saying, the churchman, in not a very pleasant mood, withdrew.

Said Brown: "Stranger, I am somewhat familiar with the doctrines of
different Christian societies, and from the way you expressed yourself
regarding the personality of God, I would like very much to hear your
views regarding other differences. If the rest of your views are as
reasonable as these you have given expression to, I should like very
much to hear them, and you can now proceed without interruption. Do you
differ from these ministers very much in other principles?"

"I am afraid the difference on many very important principles is just
as great as the difference concerning the personality of God. But if
you really desire to go with me in this search after the kingdom of
God, and the others are willing, I assure you it will give me great
pleasure."

Unanimous approval was expressed at once, and Mr. Brown continued,
saying:

"I never before had as great a desire in this direction, and must
confess that my curiosity has become quite aroused."

"Then," said Durant, "we will take King James' translation of the Holy
Scriptures as the law book, and 'Seek ye first the kingdom of God' for
our text; and if we should discover before we have finished that the
teachings of men differ greatly from the teachings of Christ, I will be
somewhat justified in saying that religionists have 'transgressed the
laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.'" (Isaiah
xxiv: 5. Jeremiah ii: 13.)

"Very well," said Mr. Brown, "I will proceed," and obtaining the family
Bible he continued: "And should your assertions prove correct, it might
perhaps account for the increase of infidelity, and it might also cause
others as well as myself to stop and consider. Now, then, to the 'law
and the testimony.' Give me the chapter and verse, that I may know you
make no mistake."

The doctor then for the first time took part, saying: "I am also
becoming very much interested, and think I shall join you with my
Bible. Let us all come into the circle."

"All right, we will examine the Gospel of Jesus Christ from the
Bible, principle by principle. In order to have a clear understanding
concerning this, it will be necessary for us to go back to the days of
our Father Adam. Through the transgression of our first parents, death
came upon all the human family, and mankind could not, of themselves,
overcome the same and obtain immortality. To substantiate this, see
first, second and third chapters of Genesis, Romans 5th chapter and
12th verse, and I. Corinthians 15th chapter and 21st and 22nd verses.
But in order that they should not perish, God sent His Son Jesus Christ
into the world to satisfy this broken law and to deliver mankind from
the power of death. (John iii: 16; Romans v: 8; John iv: 9.) And as
all became subject to death by Adam, so will all men be resurrected
from death through the atonement of Christ (I. Cor. xv: 20-23; Rom.
v: 12-19; Mark xvi: 15, 16), and will stand before the judgment seat
of God to answer for their own sins and not for Adam's transgression.
(Acts xvii: 31; Rev. xx: 12-15; Matt. xvi: 27.) Am I right as far as I
have gone?"

"Yes," said the doctor, "I have been following you with your
quotations, and find them correct. Proceed."

"Then I have proved one of the principles of some of the so-called
Christians incorrect, for they do not believe that the wicked will
have the same chance of resurrection as the righteous. Jesus Christ
did not die for our individual sins, only on condition that we conform
to the plan He has marked out, which will bring us a remission of our
sins. The only way we can prove that we love Him is by keeping His
commandments (John xiv: 15); therefore, if we say we love God and keep
not His commandments, we are liars and the truth is not in us. (I.
John ii: 4.) I think I have proved to your satisfaction that there is
something defective with their understanding of the attributes of God,
and I think I can prove also that they do not keep His commandments.
Christ has given us to understand two things which you must remember
while on this search after the 'kingdom of God.' First, that we must
follow Him; secondly, that when He left His disciples He was to send
them the Comforter that would lead them into all truth; therefore we
must follow Christ and accept all the principles which were taught by
His disciples while in possession of the Holy Spirit, though it should
prove the world to be in error."

"Thus far your arguments are reasonable, also in accordance with Holy
Writ; and as there is no other name given us except Jesus Christ
whereby we can be saved (Acts iv: 12), you may now lay before us the
conditions; but give us chapter and verse, as I said before, that we
may know you speak correctly."

"We will now examine into the conditions; but first remember that God
does not send men into the world for the purpose of preaching contrary
doctrines, for this always creates confusion, and God is not the author
of confusion, but of peace. (I. Cor. xiv: 33.) Paul has said, if any
man teach another gospel let him be accursed. (Gal. i: 8, 9.) The first
condition is this: To believe there is a God (not the kind mentioned
in the English prayer book), but the God that created man in His own
image, and to have faith in that God and in Jesus Christ whom He has
sent.

"Go on," said the party in concert.

"Well," continued Durant, "the kind of faith required is that which
will enable a man, under all circumstances, to say, 'I am not ashamed
of the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation.'
(Rom. i: 16.) This is the kind of faith by which Noah prepared an ark;
by which the worlds were framed; by which the Red Sea was crossed as
on dry land; by which the walls of Jericho fell down; it was by this
faith that kingdoms were subdued; righteousness was wrought; promises
were obtained, and the mouths of lions were closed. (Heb. xi: 32,
38.) This faith comes by hearing the word of God (Rom. x: 14), and
the lack of this faith, and the absence of prayer and fasting, caused
even the apostles to be unsuccessful on one occasion in casting out
devils. (Matt. xvii: 14, 20.) No wonder, then, that without faith it is
impossible to please God. (Heb. xi: 6.) Faith, then, is the first grand
and glorious stepping-stone to that celestial pathway leading towards
the eternal rest. The more we search into eternal truth, the more we
discover that God works upon natural principles. All the requirements
which He makes of us are very plain and simple. How natural that the
principle of faith should be the primary one of our salvation! With
what principle are we more familiar? Faith is the first great principle
governing all things; but great and grand as it is, it is dead without
works. (James ii: 14-17.) We must not expect salvation by simply having
faith that Jesus is the Christ, for the devils in purgatory are that
far advanced (James ii: 19.) In fact if you will read the entire second
chapter of James you will see that faith without works is as dead and
helpless as the body after the spirit has taken its departure. It is
utter folly to think of gaining an exaltation in His presence unless
we obey the principles He advocated (Matt. vii: 21), for no one speaks
truthfully by saying he is a disciple of Christ while not observing His
commandments. (John viii: 31.) In fact, the only way by which man can
truthfully say he loves Jesus Christ is by keeping His commandments."
(John xiv: 12-21.)

"Is it not recorded in Holy Writ," said the doctor, "that if we believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ we will be saved?"

"You have referred to the words used by Paul and Silas to the keeper
of the prison. These disciples were asked by this keeper what he
should do to be saved, and was assured, as you have quoted, 'Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.' Then
the disciples immediately laid before them those principles which
constituted true belief, and not until this man and his house had
embraced the principles taught by these disciples were they filled with
true belief and really rejoiced. (Acts xvi: 81-33.) You see by this
example that we must not deceive ourselves by thinking that we can be
hearers of the word only and not doers." (James i: 22,23.)

"But, friend," said the lawyer, "here is a passage found in the tenth
chapter of Romans, which, in my opinion, will be extremely hard for you
to explain. The passage referred to reads as follows: 'If thou shalt
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart
that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.' Now,
then, it looks to me as if salvation is here promised through faith
alone. How do you explain it?"

"Very easily. Let us thoroughly examine this passage in all its
different phases. In the first place, this letter was written by
Paul to individuals who were already members of the church. They had
rendered obedience to the laws of salvation, and having complied
with those requirements were entitled to salvation providing their
testimony remained within them like a living spring; and in order
that they should not become lukewarm, Paul exhorted them to continue
bearing testimony of the divinity of Christ, and not let their hearts
lose sight of the fact that God had raised His Son from the dead, and
inasmuch as they kept themselves in this condition, salvation would be
theirs. This is the only sensible view one can take of this passage.
Unquestionably, Paul was speaking to sincere members of the church,
who had been correctly initiated into the folds of Christ, not aliens
living 1800 years after."

"That appears to be correct, and is satisfactory; but further on in
the same chapter we find this expression: 'For whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.' It appears to me here that
reference is not made to those who had embraced the gospel and those
who had the faith, but salvation is made general to whomsoever shall
call upon the name of the Lord." (Rom. x: 13.)

"Exactly, but the next verse gives an explanation so simple that none
can fail to understand it: 'How, then, shall they call on Him in whom
they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher? So, then,
faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.' In other
words, if there is faith, there have been works, and having true faith,
no person will remain in that condition without complying with further
works of salvation to which that faith urges him."

"I see, I see," said Brown, the others remaining silent, but
interested; "you are right, but I never looked at the matter in that
way before."

"Now, then, ladies and gentlemen," said Durant: "I maintain as before
stated, that faith is the first principle of the gospel leading to
salvation, but it will not bring us to the top of the glorious gospel
ladder without the other principles."

"Well, suppose we accept this as the first round in the gospel ladder,
where will we find the second?"

"To explain this question involves, perhaps, some little time, and as
it must be near the 'witching hour' of midnight, I would not care to be
responsible for extending the sitting beyond, or even up to, that time.
To give this information is, in some measure, my errand among you, and
if desired I shall be pleased to meet with you again. Before leaving I
hope to be able to address the citizens publicly, and will do so if a
suitable place can be obtained."

Both the doctor and the lawyer were disposed to remonstrate against
adjournment, and there seemed to be none who were not willing to
remain and hearken unto that which to them was somewhat in the nature
of an awakening, notwithstanding, as stated, it was growing late,
and the exercises had been purely colloquial. It might be mentioned
that only the more important parts of the conversation have been
produced here--for the reproduction of everything in the nature of
mere colloquy, the auxiliary questions, answers and suggestions,
would make this a large book instead of a small one. Besides, the full
conversation would be no more interesting for the particular object to
which this book is devoted than would the matter reported.

The visitors took their departure with evident regret, albeit their
interest in the occasion was more attributable to unsatisfied curiosity
than to concurrence in all that the stranger had said.

"He can talk Bible by the yard," said one.

"Yes, and show what it means better than a regular minister," said
another.

"He said he had a mission among us," chimed in a third; "I wonder what
it can be?"

The parting on the veranda was one in which friendly feelings prevailed
all around, and the meeting on the morrow, when the second of the
grand fundamental principles of the gospel was to be explained, seemed
uppermost in every mind.



CHAPTER V.

FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES.

The audience had increased in numbers when the time for the continuance
of the gospel exposition arrived. Rev. Fitzallen was not present; he
had an engagement elsewhere, was the word he left; but his absence was
compensated for by the presence of two or three others.

But little time was spent in formality, and a beginning was effected by
our legal friend saying:

"Mr. Durant, you closed last night with a definition of the first
principle in the series of steps to be taken by the convert to
Christianity, with a promise that tonight we should have the second
explained. Will you now proceed to fulfill the promise?"

"Most willingly, if it is desired."

Unanimous approval was at once manifested, and the western man
proceeded.

"The second follows the first, just as naturally as the second step
follows the first when a child learns to walk. When faith in God is
once created, the knowledge that we have at some time, perhaps many
times during our lives, done things displeasing to Him, naturally
follows immediately, therefore repentance makes its appearance as
the second principle of the gospel. When John came preaching in the
wilderness, as the forerunner of Christ, his message to the people
was, 'Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.' (Matt. iii:
2.) When Jesus came into Galilee preaching the gospel of the kingdom
of God, it was with a message calling them to repentance. (Mark i:
15.) When He chose His disciples and began sending them forth, it was
to call mankind to repentance. (Mark vi: 7-12.) When He upbraided the
cities wherein the most of His mighty works were done, it was because
they repented not. (Matt. xi: 20.) True repentance is that which will
cause him who stole to steal no more; that which will keep corrupt
communications from our mouths; that which will cause us to so conduct
our walks through life as not to grieve the Spirit of God; that which
will cause all bitterness, wrath, anger, and evil speaking to be put
away from us, and will make us kind one to another, tender-hearted and
forgiving even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us. (Ephesians
iv: 28-32.) When he who has committed a sin shall commit it no more,
then he has repented with that Godly sorrow which worketh repentance
to salvation, and not with the sorrow of the world, bringing with it
death. (II. Cor. vii: 10.) When a sinner repents with such repentance
more joy is found in heaven than over ninety and nine just persons who
need no repentance. (Luke xv: 7.) This, then, ladies and gentlemen, is
the second round in the gospel ladder according to the plan given us
by the Master, and without it, faith is of no substantial consequence
whatever."

"Your reasoning is both logical and just," said Brown, "and no one can
find fault with those doctrines. This world of ours would certainly
be more pleasant if these teachings were followed, and when a person
is filled with that kind of faith, and has truly repented with such
repentance, it must be manifest that he is entitled to salvation."

"But he must not stop at that," the speaker went on, "there are other
principles just as important, just as necessary, for him to obey. If
I am in possession of enough faith to convince me that I have sinned
against you, and the knowledge of this causes me sincerely to repent, I
must not and cannot rest until I am satisfied I have your forgiveness
for the wrong. So it is with sinning against God and His laws; He has
marked out the path of repentance and it is our duty to follow that
divine way until we arrive at the sacred altar of forgiveness. Sin must
be forgiven before it can be wiped out, and God in His wisdom selected
and placed in His Church water baptism, as spoken of last night, for
this purpose. It is a means whereby man can receive forgiveness of sin."

"And do you really believe that baptism brings forgiveness of sin?"
queried the lawyer.

"Certainly, provided, however, honest faith and sincere repentance go
before it, and the ordinance is administered in the proper way by one
who is endowed with divine authority; otherwise I believe it is of no
avail whatever."

"It seems to me you surround the principle of baptism with more
safeguards than anyone else of whom I have ever heard. Why so?"

"Perhaps I do, and yet it should not be the case. Every principle of
the gospel should be well and carefully protected, and the failure
on the part of man to do this is the main cause of so many different
so-called plans of salvation existing among us today, when there should
be only one true and perfect plan, as found in the days of Christ."

"You are certainly giving me ample information on religious conditions.
It does seem strange that there should be so many different roads,
leading, as is claimed, in one direction. I declare, I never thought of
that before."

"Well, we will try to cover all those points before we finish. Let
us examine this principle. Let us see if the idea of water baptism
appears reasonable. The Lord has wisely and kindly selected this form
of ordinance for the remission of sins. It was with this object in view
that John advocated the principle. (Mark i: 4.) Peter promised it on
the day of Pentecost. (Acts ii: 38.) Saul also received aid to arise
and have his sins washed away. (Acts xxii: 16.) And so it was taught by
different disciples as a means whereby God would forgive sins."

"And as you have already stated, there are various modes of baptism
among different sects. What is your method?"

"The only correct form, as stated before, is that explained in the
Bible. Baptism was performed anciently by immersion, in fact no other
mode was thought of until centuries after the day of Christ. The word
baptize is from the Greek _baptizo_ or _bapto_, meaning to plunge or
immerse, and such noted writers as Polybius, Strabo, Dion Cassius,
Mosheim, Luther, Calvin, Bossuet, Schaaf, Baxter, Jeremy Taylor,
Robinson, and others, all agree that with the ancients immersion, and
no other form, was baptism. The holy record itself explains the mode
so plainly that even a wayfaring man might understand. John selected
a certain place on account of there being much water. (John iii: 23.)
Christ Himself was baptized in a river, after which He came up out of
the water. (Mark i: 5-10.) Both Philip and the eunuch went down into
the water (Acts viii: 38, 39), and Paul likens baptism to the burial
and resurrection of Christ, dying from sin, buried in water, and a
resurrection to a new life. (Rom. vi: 3-5.) Jesus declares that a man
must be born of the water as well as of the spirit. (John iii: 5.) By
being immersed we are born of the water, and we cannot liken baptism
to a birth when performed in any other way. How mankind can accept any
other form, in the face of all these facts, is more than I can account
for. I think enough has been said to show that I am correct in my views
regarding the object and mode of baptism, so now let us enquire who are
proper subjects."

"Why, all who have souls to save, I suppose," said the doctor.

"Yes, providing they have obeyed the two principles, already mentioned;
that is, faith and repentance; for Christ commanded His apostles to
teach before baptizing. (Matthew xxviii: 19 and 20.) The candidate
must believe before he can be baptized. (Mark xvi: 16.) Before Philip
baptized the people of Samaria they believed the Gospel as he taught
it. (Acts viii: 12.) When the eunuch asked for baptism at the hands
of this same disciple, Philip answered: 'If thou believest with all
thine heart, thou mayest.' (Acts viii: 37.) All persons, then, who are
capable of understanding, are fit subjects for baptism as soon as they
believe and have repented. None are exempt, not even was Cornelius of
old who was so generous that a report of his good deeds reached the
throne of God. His prayers were so mingled with faith that they brought
down an angel from heaven; yet through baptism alone was it possible
that he could gain membership in the fold of Christ. (Acts x.) We
see, then, that all, except little children, are proper subjects for
this ordinance, providing, as stated, they have faith, and have truly
repented of their sins."

"And do you claim that little children are exempt?" said the doctor.

"I do; baptism is for the remission of sins, and little children, being
free from sin, are of necessity exempt."

"I do not see how you make that doctrine accord with the teachings of
the Bible. Did not Jesus say, 'Suffer little children to come unto me?'"

"He did, but instead of administering the ordinance of baptism unto
them, He took them in His arms and blessed them, declaring at the
same time that they were pure and free from sin like unto those who
were in the kingdom of heaven. A little child is free from sin, is
pure in heart, humble and merciful, in fact is the great example of
goodness which Christ points out for us to follow. (Mark x: 13-16.)
This ordinance, then, is for people who are old enough to embrace it
intelligently, not for children who cannot understand its significance,
and who already belong to the kingdom of heaven.

"We have now examined three of the fundamental principles of the
gospel of salvation. There is one more that I wish to touch upon,
after which we will discuss a subject that is of more interest to
you, perhaps, than any of these. The principle which I wish to speak
of now, is the gift of the Holy Ghost, which in olden times always
followed the embracing of the principles we have discussed, and when
once received brought with it some of the gifts of the gospel. When the
first sermon was delivered after the crucifixion of Christ, at the time
when the apostles were endowed with power from on high, a multitude
of people were pricked in their hearts, and asked Peter and the rest
of the apostles what they should do. Peter undertook to answer this
all-important question, and so far as authority to do so was concerned,
we must admit that he, of all men at that peculiar time, was fully
capable, for he was in possession of the keys of the kingdom of God
bestowed upon him by Christ Himself. He was the chief apostle and, with
his brethren, had been endowed with power from above. Therefore, he,
more than any minister of our day, occupied a place that enabled him to
answer correctly, and with authority."

"You are stating the case properly, but what did he tell them?" queried
the interested man of law.

"His answer is found in the second chapter of Acts, beginning with the
38th verse. You will observe that as soon as he discovered that they
had faith, he immediately taught them repentance, then baptism for the
remission of sins, and followed these doctrines with a promise of the
gift of the Holy Ghost.

"Yes, commencing at the verse mentioned it says: 'Then Peter said unto
them, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to
all that are afar off, _even_ as many as the Lord our God shall call.'"

"But how were they to receive the Holy Ghost?"

"By the laying on of hands. When Peter went down into Samaria for the
purpose of bestowing this gift on those whom Philip had baptized, he
did it by the laying on of hands. (Acts viii: 17.) Ananias conferred
it upon Paul in the same manner (Acts ix: 17), and Paul did the same
in the case of those who were baptized at Ephesus (Acts xix: 2-6); and
when people received this birth of the Spirit (John iii: 5), they also
received the promised blessings; they were entitled to the signs which
He promised would follow; for said He, 'These signs shall follow them
that believe; in my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak
with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any
deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick
and they shall recover.' (Mark xvi: 17, 18.) We have now discovered
the conditions: faith, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins,
and the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, with
the promise of Christ that the signs will follow. Can you tell me now,
which of all these different denominations has the gospel of Jesus
Christ? Or as Wesley has questioned in one of his hymns which we may
with profit quote in full: 'Show me where true Christians live.'"

  "Happy the souls that first believ'd,
  To Jesus and each other cleav'd,
  Joined by the unction from above,
  In mystic fellowship of love.

  "Meek, simple foll'wers of the Lamb,
  They liv'd, and spake, and thought the same;
  They joyfully conspir'd to raise
  Their ceaseless sacrifice of praise.

  "With grace abundantly endued,
  A pure believing multitude;
  They all were of one heart and soul,
  And only love inspir'd the whole.

  "Oh, what an age of golden days!
  Oh, what a choice, peculiar race!
  Wash'd in the Lamb's all-cleansing blood,
  Anointed kings and priests to God.

  "Where shall I wander now to find
  Successors they have left behind?
  The faithful, whom I seek in vain,
  Are 'minish'd from the sons of men.

  "Ye diff'rent sects, who all declare,
  'Lo, here is Christ,' or 'Christ is there!'
  Your stronger proofs divinely give,
  And show me where true Christians live."

"You must remember, my friend, that the signs were only given in order
to establish the church in the day of the apostles, but now they are
abrogated and are no longer needed."

"'To the law and to the testimony,'" replied Durant "and give me
chapter and verse to substantiate the assertion you have just made."

"If you will read the 13th chapter of the 1st Corinthians, you will
learn that 'whether there be prophecies they shall fail, and whether
there be tongues they shall cease.'"

"If you will take pains to read the two verses following, you will see
that 'we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.'
My friend, instead of this quotation proving that these things are
done away, it establishes the assertion that they shall remain until
perfection shall come. Surely no sane man will say that we have come to
perfection."

"I have understood that these gifts were no longer needed. This
certainly is the conclusion the ministers of the day have come to."

"But this is not surprising to me, for this good old Bible declares
that the time will come when the people will turn from sound doctrine
to fables." (II. Tim. iv: 4.)

"I must admit that you have convinced me that baptism is a necessity,
and when I am baptized, the ordinance will be performed in the proper
manner," said the doctor.

"I am pleased to learn that, but I may have another surprise for you
yet. May I ask, who do you intend shall baptize you?"

"My minister, I suppose; why?"

"If the words of the Bible be true, there may be a doubt as to whether
your minister is authorized to baptize you."

"Do you mean to prove that these men, ministers of the gospel, have
no authority to officiate in that ordinance? I wonder what you will
undertake next, but proceed, for I am now prepared for surprises."

"I assure you, my dear sir, I only wish to refer to a few doctrines
from the Bible which are necessary to be understood by you in order
that you may obtain eternal life. Thus far we have only examined the
first principles of the gospel, but now we will speak of the officers
whom Christ placed in His Church, and learn by what means men receive
authority to act in the name of God. Paul tells us that God has placed
'first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after which
gifts of healing,' etc. (I. Cor. xii: 28), and says the work is built
upon the foundation of apostles. (Eph. ii: 20.) He furthermore declares
that these officers have been placed in the Church for the work of the
ministry, and to remain until we all come to a knowledge of the truth.
(Eph. iv: 11-13). Have all mankind come to a knowledge of the truth? If
not, why has the church dispensed with the officers that God placed in
it for the purpose of bringing all to a unity of the faith? Paul tells
us that these officers were placed in the Church to keep us from being
tossed to and fro and carried about by every wind of doctrine which is
taught by man. (Eph. iv: 12-14.) At the present time, when men declare
that they have no need of apostles or prophets, they are divided,
and subdivided, and in fact carried about by every doctrine that is
promulgated--as Paul saw that they would be, if inspired apostles and
prophets were not found to lead them. In losing these officers, the
Church lost her authority, together with all her gifts and graces,
and the so-called Christian churches today are disrobed of all her
beautiful garments; and even those who pretend to defend her are crying
out that her gifts, graces and ordinances are useless in this age of
the world. Did Christ establish the true order or did He not? We say He
did, and would ask, has any man a right to change it? And if any man
or even an angel from heaven should alter it in the least, will he not
come under the condemnation that Paul uttered when he said: 'Though
we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed?' (Gal. i: 8.)
Christ placed these officers and the ordinances in the Church for the
perfection of the Saints; and any one teaching contrary to this is a
perverter of the gospel, and an anti-Christ in the full meaning of the
word. The difference between the true Church of Christ on the one hand,
and the Catholic Church, with all her posterity composing the whole
protestant world on the other hand, amounts to this: one had apostles,
prophets, etc., who led the Church by inspiration or by divine
revelation; while the others have learned men to preach learned men's
opinions; have colleges to teach divinity instead of the Holy Ghost;
instead of preaching the gospel without hire, their ministers must have
large salaries each year, and they are not certain of the doctrines
which they teach, when they should be in possession of the gifts of
knowledge, prophecy and revelation. Now then in what church do we find
apostles and prophets?"

The doctor replied, "There are none; but you must remember there must
be a preacher, for 'how shall they hear without a preacher?'" (Rom. x:
14.)

"And in the next verse he asks, 'How shall they preach except they be
sent?' This same apostle says that no man is to take the honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron. (Heb. v: 4.) Aaron
was called by revelation (Ex. iv: 14-17); hence we see that no man
is to preach the gospel except he be called by revelation from God.
As I said, instead of men being called by revelation as the Bible
declares they should be in our day they argue that God has not revealed
Himself for almost eighteen hundred years. Go and ask your minister
if he has been called by revelation, and he will tell you that such
manifestations are not needed now, which assertion I think will prove
to you that he has no authority to baptize for the remission of sins."

"But did not Jesus say, 'Go ye into all the world and preach the
gospel?'"

"He did; but was He talking to modern ministers then? When He gave His
apostles authority to preach, did that give all men who feel disposed
to take the honor unto themselves, the same authority? He gave His
apostles to understand that they had not chosen Him, but He had chosen
them (John xv: 16); but in this day men reverse the condition. Then
again, He sent His servants into the world to preach His gospel without
purse or scrip. (Luke x: 4.) Paul says his reward is this, 'That when I
preach the gospel I may make the gospel of Christ without charge, that
I abuse not my power in the gospel.' (I. Cor. ix: 18.) Now, go and ask
your minister if he does the same, and I think you will find that he
must have a salary."

"Then what has become of the gospel?" said the lawyer.

"Paul says that the coming of Jesus Christ will not be, save there
be 'a falling away' (II. Thess. ii: 3), and that 'in the last days
perilous times shall come.' (II. Tim. iii: 1.) People 'will not endure
sound doctrine,' but will 'heap to themselves teachers having itching
ears, and shall turn from the truth to fables (II. Tim. iv: 3, 4),
and will have a form of godliness but will deny the power thereof.
(II. Tim. iii: 5.) Peter also says these false teachers will make
merchandise of the souls of men. (II. Peter ii: 1-3.) They are doing
so by demanding a salary for preparing sermons to tickle the people's
itching ears. (Micah iii: 11) says, their heads judge for reward, their
priests teach for hire, and their prophets divine for money, yet they
lean upon the Lord and say, is not the Lord among us? Now, my friends,
do not the different sects of the day present us with a literal
fulfillment of all these sayings? Have they not transgressed the laws,
changed the ordinance and broken the everlasting covenant? (Isaiah
xxiv: 5.) John Wesley in his 94th sermon, referring to the condition of
the church after it had departed from the right way and lost the gifts,
says: 'The real cause why the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost
were no longer to be found in the Christian Church was because the
Christians were turned heathens again and had only a dead form left."

"It would appear, then, that God has forsaken mankind and left us
without any hope," said Mr. Marshall.

"No, he has not; but this falling away, is the result of mankind
forsaking God, by changing His gospel and departing from its teachings,
as I have already shown. But He has promised, through his servants,
that there would be a dispensation when He would gather together all
things in Christ (Eph. i: 10), and would restore all things which He
has spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets since the world began.
(Acts iii: 20, 21.) This dispensation was called the dispensation
of the fullness of times. (Eph. i: 10.) Daniel, who received, by
revelation, the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, saw what
would take place in the latter times, when the God of heaven would set
up a kingdom. (Dan ii: 44.) John, the revelator, while on that desolate
island, Patmos (some ninety years after Christ), saw how this gospel
would be restored: namely, that an angel would bring it from heaven
(Rev. xiv: 6), and Christ says it 'shall be preached in all the world
as a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.' (Matt.
xxiv: 14.) As God is always the same, and has but one plan for the
redemption of the human family, we may expect to see the same gospel
with like promises preached in a similar way. Where do we find it as
it existed anciently? But as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it
be also in the days of the coming of the Son of Man. (Matt. xxiv: 37;
Luke xvii: 26, 27.) Noah was sent by the Lord to foretell the coming
of the flood, but the people rejected his testimony, in fact, whenever
God has revealed His mind and will to man in days gone by, the world,
instead of receiving the same, have rejected the message and said all
manner of evil concerning the prophets, and in many instances have
killed them, as was the case with Christ Himself. Now then, my friends,
we are living in the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God
is gathering together all things in Christ. An angel has come from
the heavens and brought the everlasting gospel, and on the 6th day
of April, 1830, God--through revelation to man organized the kingdom
spoken of by Daniel, in the exact pattern of the kingdom as it existed
in the days of Christ, with apostles and prophets, and since that day
the servants of God have been traveling through the world preaching the
same, as a witness that the end will soon come. They call upon mankind
to exercise faith in God our eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus
Christ, also to repent of, and turn from their sins, and be baptized by
one who has been called of God by revelation, and receive the laying
on of hands for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost. As servants of God
they then promise that the convert shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God or man (John vii: 17); and, furthermore, that the signs
which followed the believers in the days of the ancient apostles will
follow the believer at the present time, for the same cause will always
produce the same effect. My friends, as a servant of God, I call upon
you to obey these principles and you shall have the promised blessings."

The doctor said: "Much that you say is convincing, some of it excites
curiosity, and all is entertaining. I will now announce that the Town
Hall has been obtained for Saturday night and as that involves a little
longer stay than you intended, I suggest that a collection be taken and
turned over to you."

"I beg you, do nothing of that kind," said the missionary. "If the hall
is free, the lecture shall be also; and I can doubtless spend the time
pleasantly enough till then."

"Very well, if that is your pleasure. There will be such an attendance
as this town has rarely seen, I promise you."

And then after a few pleasantries in the usual vein, and a general
"good night," the party separated just as the clock struck twelve, each
in the best humor.

In view of the coming lecture it was mutually agreed that the veranda
gatherings should be discontinued for the present at least.



CHAPTER VI.

TRUTH AGAIN DEFEATS FALSEHOOD.

The meeting was to be held in the Town Hall on Saturday, and in the
meantime our missionary busied himself variously, but devoted part of
the time in getting his lecture arranged and in refreshing his memory
on the topics upon which he wished to speak. When not thus employed
he took strolls about the country, or engaged in pleasant bits of
conversation with his acquaintances, and with others whom he happened
to meet on the way. He was such a favorite at the Marshall mansion
that the people there were always pleased to have him express a wish
for anything, in order that it might at once be gratified; but such
expressions were very rare and confined to the scope of his actual
requirements.

On Friday afternoon he engaged in a pleasant discussion with Mrs.
Marshall on some scriptural topic. Missionaries all understand the
power of song, Mr. Durant was no exception, so at one point he sang one
of his hymns:

  "How the light from Zion's mountain
    Clears the mists of error's age:
  Clarified in ray and fountain,
    How its truths our fears assuage!

  "Tempest-tossed, we still are certain
    Life is but a pleasant span.
  Hope has painted every curtain
    Pictured in the gospel plan.

  "Once again to every nation,
    Jesus opens wide the door;
  Here are truths that bring salvation,
    Preached and practiced as of yore.

  "Joyful tidings to the people
    From the perfect courts on high;
  Sweetest chimes from tower and steeple
    Ring: Redemption's drawing nigh.

  "Shine, thou light, with doubled splendor,
    Spread thy soothing, restful rings,
  Till the sun of Zion, tender
    Rise, with healing in his wings!"

The daughter was an interested listener, and at the close broke in
with--"It seems to me that there is no such thing as perfect happiness
after all. We are always being disappointed in relation to some hope or
desire, and when we engage in that which affords pastime or amusement,
there is invariably a penalty following. Is not this true, Mr. Durant?"

"I could scarcely dispute with a lady, even if there were grounds for
it," said he, gallantly.

"But I prefer you would," she said, "because you appear to know all
about these things and I desire to learn. Why is it, for instance, that
after enjoying myself greatly at a dance or other late entertainment,
injured nature afterward cries out for revenge, and takes it? So with
all things it seems to me. The pleasure experienced in meeting a dear
friend is beclouded by the knowledge that there must be a parting
soon; and death is ever near as if to remind us of the fact that life,
happiness, honor, wealth, youth, are all fleeting and unsubstantial."

"Very true."

"Why Claire," said her mother, "you are becoming a regular pessimist.
Surely at your age there is no need to borrow trouble about death or
anything else."

"I do not borrow it, mamma, it comes. Pain follows pleasure, sorrow
treads upon the heals of happiness, and misfortune is the constant
attendant of fortune. There is, as I said, no perfect happiness, so it
seems to me."

"Pardon me," said the missionary, "but you did not finish your
sentence. Shall I do so for you?"

"O, by all means," replied the girl with eager delight.

"Well, then," he continued, "doubtless what you meant to say was that
there is no such thing as perfect happiness in either the contemplation
or realization of things which in themselves are fleeting and
unsubstantial--that is, the things of the world. Every movement of the
machinery of a steamer, for instance, creates friction, which in turn
indicates an eventual breaking down, and so it is with all temporal
things; thus we cannot rely upon them for permanent good, and in
addition they are constantly subjecting us to peril.

"It is impossible to create perfect results out of imperfect
conditions; therefore, there can be no complete or unbroken happiness
come out of earthly surroundings, for the reason that all such things
are changeable and fleeting. And yet there is such a state as perfect
joy unclouded and endless."

"But not in this life, as you yourself have shown."

"Yes, in this life."

"I thought you referred to this life as uncertain and ephemeral and as
such curtailed or extinguished its own joys."

"That is true, also. But yet endless and supreme delight is to be found
in it."

"Where and how, pray?"

"In observing principles and practicing truths which lead to
immortality, and which confer upon us the title-deeds to homes where
pains and penalties are unknown, where all is peace, contentment and
love."

"Oh, yes, I did not think of that."

"In such enjoyment there is no alloy. More than that; the more it is
engaged in, the more enjoyable it becomes; it does not cloy, we cannot
become surfeited; the more we devote our attention and effort to it the
greater the desire we have to continue and to increase our experience.
This is that perfect happiness with which nothing else can compare."

"But would you have us dispense with all pleasures--with the refined
indulgences, the innocent pastimes and the intellectual recreations
which lighten our burdens at least for the time being, and have us
participate in sacred things only? Should there be no buoyancy of
spirit, no diversion, no relaxation, in order that there might be no
penalty as the result of indulgence?"

"Why, what an--pardon me--absurd idea! Of course you do not advance it
seriously and should therefore be free from criticism. Rather than that
such a rule of conduct as you have suggested is the proper one, it is
almost as bad as that in which amusement alone prevails. The medium
course, which enables us to enjoy all that is properly enjoyable in
its appropriate season, and still does not cause us to loose sight of
the great aim and end of existence, is the right one. We should let
our pastimes be the incidents in our career, not the objects of it;
thus they lighten our burdens, and, for the time being, dispel some of
the shadows that cross our pathway, whereas, if made the purpose of
living--the only things to be considered--they become burdensome and
even sinful."

"Then the devout Christian may be happy and jovial without being less a
Christian, on account of that?"

"Yes, indeed. More--it is pleasing to our Father for His children to be
light-hearted, so long as their pleasures are proper and are enjoyed in
moderation. The people from among whom I come enjoy themselves as much
as other people do, but do not overlook their devotions, and above all
they remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy."

"That seems to me," said Mrs. Marshall, "to be a sensible form of
Christianity. Why, a person, according to your faith, can be profoundly
religious and yet deny himself no proper amusement."

"Most decidedly; that is our belief and practice."

"It seems to me I would like to be a member of your Church," said the
girl, artlessly, at which interesting stage of the conversation, Rev.
Fitzallan entered, who greeted the party stiffly, his brow having a
distinct frown as he looked at the westerner.

"Pardon me," said the Clergyman, after a few commonplaces had passed,
"but we 'gather wisdom by the wayside,' and I have just acquired some
information from that source concerning our friend here from the wilds,
and as it surprised me, I thought it might equally surprise the rest of
you, himself included, perhaps."

Evidently the churchman had been engaged in the questionable calling of
picking up stray scraps of gossip here and there, containing as usual
some truth mixed with much error. There was obviously trouble ahead.

"Anything concerning me is not apt to be of sufficient consequence to
be very interesting," said Mr. Durant, "and having already stated all I
thought worth saying about myself and my errand, there can be little or
nothing that is surprising, I am sure."

"Is it not a fact that you are from Salt Lake City?"

"It is."

"It is! Why you never informed us of this and yet you have been
associated with us several days."

"Indeed! May I ask you, Mrs. Marshall, and you, Miss Marshall, what
part of the country our friend here comes from?"

The ladies did not know.

"Indeed! Why sir, you have been associated with this family several
weeks, and yet they do not know what particular point you came from.
Perhaps like myself, you were never asked."

"This is evasion," said the now thoroughly excited churchman. "There is
no place in my district possessed of such peculiar conditions as would
place one of its inhabitants under suspicion because of them."

"Nor in mine either, that I know of," calmly rejoined Durant.

"Is not Salt Lake City the headquarters and residence of a class of
people known as Mormons who hold exclusive sway there?"

"No, sir."

"That is what I have heard."

"Surely, I am not accountable for what you have heard. There are a
great many Mormons in Salt Lake, and just as many that are not Mormons;
it is the headquarters of the Church as you suggest, but its members
are not in exclusive sway there."

"How can that be?"

"No matter about the means; the fact itself is what concerns us."

The churchman was discomfited and measurably confused; he was compelled
to change his course.

"You told us," said he, "that you were an advocate of the Church of
Jesus Christ; should there not be a suffix in these words--Latter-day
Saints?"

"That is correct."

"And is not 'Mormonism' its other name?"

"No, it has no other name. It is called 'Mormonism' by nearly every one
not connected with it, and yet that is not a proper designation."

"Then to yourself you are a 'Latter-day Saint,' and to the world you
are a 'Mormon?'"

"That is it exactly."

"Strange that we should be kept in ignorance of it so long."

"I have answered every question fairly and in addition have stated
everything necessary to a full explanation of my cause and myself. If
the doctrine I teach be true--and it has stood all tests so far--can
you find nothing more than a name to oppose it?"

"I hope sir, you do not accuse me of innuendo?"

"I accuse you of nothing."

"Come now," said Mrs. Marshall, "do not be too earnest."

"Well, madam," said Rev. Fitzallan, "I thought my services in this
connection would be received graciously and thankfully. As they are not
I occupy the position of an intruder and will take my leave."

"Not on my account, I hope," said Mr. Durant. "If there is an intruder
here it is I, and it would be my duty to depart."

"You must not go under such circumstances," said Mrs. Marshall.

The girl's looks seconded her mother's words, and the irate churchman
permitted his passion to overcome his judgment.

"Excuse me," he said, "but I will take my leave. Under the
circumstances my presence must be altogether unwelcome. I have heard of
the fascinating character of some of the features of Mormonism, and the
persuasiveness of those who advocate it. Violation of the laws of God
and man by practicing polygamy is one of the seductive usages of that
creed, I believe."

"Your belief is erroneous, then," said Durant.

"Whatever my people may have believed in the past as to the correctness
of doctrines taught by the Bible and the prophets of old, they now obey
the laws of the land in which they live."

"Marvelous! I have heard otherwise. I have even taken the pains to
bring with me a newspaper which I received from a traveler, and in
which information of a different character is obtained. It is published
in Salt Lake City and should be correct. Here is part of a sermon
delivered by a Mormon Bishop; and here an account of several arrests
for violating the law against polygamy and kindred offenses, while an
editorial in the same paper comments strongly on the deception and
falsity pervading the Mormon people. There must be a mistake somewhere."

"No, there is no mistake at all, but much falsehood and
misrepresentation. It is true that since the law against polygamy was
enacted there have been many prosecutions of members of our Church
chiefly because of their inability instantly to sever the happy
associations of a lifetime which had been formed before the law went
into effect, or their lack of exact knowledge as to what the law
required of them. It was a difficult, I may say an impossible matter,
for them to break away entirely from a part of their families and never
go near them, to give a word of counsel, or it may be hurriedly to
embrace the little ones from whom the law had separated them. When thus
found they have been apprehended, tried, convicted and punished, often
without an effort to defend themselves. The Bishop named by the paper,
does not, and never did exist, and the sermon referred to was never
delivered, as the same paper has been compelled to admit on several
occasions; and the editor's views, or rather sayings, are the words of
a man whose chief interest in the community is to fan the flames of
discord so that his nefarious business may prosper. His statements are
utterly and entirely false."

After these remarks the reverend went to his room, and shortly
afterward took his departure.

"I don't like the Mormons at all, and I'm just sorry you're one," said
the girl.

"I too, am somewhat opposed to that peculiar religion, but it does seem
to me, after hearing you, that my dislike arises more from prejudice
than from anything else," said the mother.

"I have here a card containing the articles of our faith from which you
may learn that we are not so evil as we are represented to be."

    We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus
    Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

    We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not
    for Adam's transgression.

    We believe that, through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may
    be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.

    We believe that these ordinances are: First, Faith in the Lord
    Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for
    the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of Hands for the Gift of
    the Holy Ghost.

    We believe that a man must be called of God, by "prophecy, and by
    the laying on of hands," by those who are in authority, to preach
    the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

    We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive
    church, namely: apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists,
    etc.

    We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions,
    healing, interpretation of tongues, etc.

    We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is
    translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the
    word of God.

    We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal,
    and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important
    things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

    We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the
    restoration of the Ten Tribes, That Zion will be built upon this
    continent. That Christ will reign personally upon the earth, and
    that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.

    We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the
    dictates of our conscience, and allow all men the same privilege,
    let them worship how, where, or what they may.

    We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and
    magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law.

    We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous,
    and in doing good to all men; indeed we may say that we follow the
    admonition of Paul, "We believe all things, we hope all things,"
    we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all
    things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report,
    or praiseworthy, we seek after these, things.--_Joseph Smith_.

With this Durant took from his pocket the card, and handing it to Mrs.
Marshall, said:

"Examine it at your leisure." And without more adieu he was gone,
leaving the ladies in reflective mood.

Mr. Marshall received the news regarding Durant, in silence; perhaps he
had suspected, or even knew already, that the stranger was a "Mormon."



CHAPTER VII.

A TRIUMPH AND AN ESCAPE.

The afternoon preceding the night on which Charles Durant was to
appear before the public in the Town Hall of Westminster to place the
plan of salvation before the people, and bear his testimony to the
eternal truth, was wearing slowly away. By this time his name was on
everybody's lips, and nearly all knew him. As he walked abroad some
would pass him with a frown, some with a gaze of curiosity, rarely one
would smile, and less frequently still would he receive a pleasant
"good-day." If he had delighted in notoriety, here was certainly a
field in which he might enjoy that to the full limit of his desire;
but he wanted nothing of the kind. He was filled with the spirit of
his calling which was to spread the truth and labor unto the salvation
of men; and neither the insults of the insolent nor the frowns of
opponents could turn him aside from that purpose. He bore within
his breast the realization of an upright purpose, together with the
certainty of a reward to come. What were threats and annoyances to
him? And yet he sought not persecution that a cheap martyrdom might
be gained; perhaps if warned of a personal danger, in obedience to a
natural impulse, he would have shunned or gone around it, but never to
the sacrifice of one jot or tittle of principle.

His experience of less than a week in Westminster had been sufficient
for a volume of much greater proportions than this little publication,
and yet enough of it is noted here to give a fair idea of what
transpired. In that time our hero, a comparative stranger, had become
well-settled and was welcome in an honorable household, and this
without deception or any special effort to please; he had dethroned the
demon of infidelity in one good man's heart when a skilled churchman's
efforts in that direction only threatened to perpetuate the evil; had
caused another good man, indifferent to gospel measures, to become
actively interested; had defeated the churchman spoken of, on his own
ground, and had shown in an unmistakeable manner the fallacy of his
doctrine, and finally, had brought this showy patron of religion to
utter discomfiture without desiring, intending, or trying to annoy him
in any way; had set the family named and several of their neighbors to
thinking as they had never thought before; and now, as a special favor
was to address the town people in their chief public building. The Town
Hall was filled to overflowing, and when Durant entered and walked
slowly up to the platform, it is perhaps needless to say he was the
observed of all observers. There were some feelings of surprise when
Mr. Brown, the (late) infidel, arose to introduce the speaker of the
evening; he announced before doing so that the lecture would consist
of an exposition of the groundwork, and some advanced principles of
the gospel as laid down in the Bible. "Nothing will be left to be
conjectured or surmised," he said; "the speaker is familiar with the
subject and is capable of doing it justice. I speak advisedly, having
heard him before. I ask your earnest and respectful attention, and now
present to you Mr. Charles Durant, of Salt Lake City."

Notwithstanding the sacredness of the occasion, there was a burst of
applause when the speaker arose. Before him, on a table, were the Bible
and two or three other books. He entered upon his subject at once,
first explaining the principles of faith, repentance and baptism,
citing the Holy Book in support of his arguments, and making every
principle plain and lucid as he proceeded. In as extended a manner as
he could, within the time at his disposal, he developed the philosophy
and practice of true Christianity from the beginning to the present
time, leaving no salient point unmentioned, and no stone marking the
way, unturned. He occupied two hours, and there was not a listener but
gladly would have remained that much longer. The impression made was
deep; as to whether or not it was lasting, that depended largely upon
the individuals themselves.

The lawyer and the doctor and the Marshalls came forward and grasped
the speaker's hand extending sincere congratulations. The preacher
was absent. As they left the room, people could be heard making such
remarks as--"Well, that is mighty sound reasoning no matter where it
comes from;" a few asked to be introduced and one of these, an old
lady, said in a low voice, "You spoke the truth, I know it; God bless
you!"

As soon as he could make his way to Durant's side, the negro, Caesar,
said hurriedly--"You want to look a little out as you go home; I heard
a lot of fellers down the lane talking, and they said they would fix
that Mormon."

A spontaneous exclamation of surprise and disgust came from the little
party of which Durant was the center. However, it was left to the
lawyer to engage in explosiveness, and he did it in a manner which left
no doubt of what he would do in an emergency. It was finally decided
that he and the doctor should lead the way homeward, with the Marshall
family, our guest, a neighbor and the negro, following leisurely after.
The improvised mob was soon encountered and the interview was stormy
for awhile, but before the party in the rear reached the spot, the
tumult was quieted down considerably. The lawyer knew every one in the
party and if any violence was offered to the stranger, he would make
it his personal business to see that every one of them answered to the
law. This, coupled with milder and more persuasive methods, had its
effect, and one by one the rioters dispersed, at least for the present.
Mr. Durant and his friends walked home without being assaulted by so
much as an unpleasant exclamation though he fully expected trouble from
the first; but he determined to continue his labor as he had begun,
leaving the result to Providence.



CHAPTER VIII.

THE PROPHET JOSEPH'S STATEMENT.

Perhaps it was the force of habit as well as the impelling power of
desire that caused the group, with whom we are now so familiar, again
to assemble at the place made somewhat memorable by recent events--the
verandah fronting the Marshall mansion. All the persons hitherto named,
excepting, of course, the minister, were present; that gentleman had
not only taken his departure from the house, but doubtless from the
town also.

It was Sunday evening, the weather was perfect, all things seemed
conducive to harmony, and a most pleasurable occasion, it being perhaps
the last they would enjoy together. The doctor and lawyer were so
anxious to begin the conversation that they could scarcely wait for all
to be seated; they desired to improve the opportunity, and learn what
they could of other principles of the missionary's faith.

"Mr. Durant," finally said the doctor, "we have listened with much
pleasure to different conversations with you since your arrival and
these have awakened a lively interest within us, and as there is
nothing to prevent this evening, we thought it would not be at all
unpleasant to you to spend an hour or so in answering what to us
appears to be some very important questions concerning the faith of the
so-called Mormons."

"I assure you it will be pleasant to me, indeed. I am here for that
purpose, and the more questions I have an opportunity to answer, the
better and more successfully will I perform my duty. Could I read your
thoughts and know what you desire explained, I assure you nothing would
be left untold; but this not being the case, I rely upon you to make
enquiries and will request that you keep nothing back, and I will be
honest in giving any information that I am capable of imparting."

"I am now inclined to believe," said the doctor, "after our experience
with you, that, like most of the good people of this nation we have
been in possession of only one side of the question regarding your
people. Never having heard, from your standpoint, the claims of Mr.
Joseph Smith, the founder of your Church, in regard to his being a
prophet, we would be pleased to learn what he said on this question."

"This is a frankness which I appreciate very much. As a general
thing, the majority of the people, when desirous of knowing anything
concerning us, are prone to ask any other person on earth than a
Mormon. They do not seem to think for a moment that we ourselves might
be able to place them in possession of the most reliable information on
the subject. Joseph Smith's claim to being divinely inspired to open up
a new dispensation of the gospel, is here given in his own statement so
that you will be getting it direct from the fountain head."

"By all means, read it," said two or three in concert; "there will then
be no room for misrepresentation."

"Joseph Smith has made the following statement regarding the subject,"
continued Durant:

    "Owing to the many reports which have been put in circulation by
    evil designing persons in relation to the rise and progress of the
    Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, all of which have been
    designed by the authors thereof to militate against its character
    as a Church, and its progress in the world, I have been induced
    to write this history, so as to disabuse the public mind, and put
    all inquirers after truth in possession of the facts as they have
    transpired in relation both to myself and the Church so far as I
    have such facts in possession.

    "In this history I will present the various events in relation to
    this Church, in truth and righteousness, as they have transpired,
    or as they at present exist, being now the eighth year since the
    organization of the said Church.

    "I was born in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
    five, on the twenty-third day of December, in the town of Sharon,
    Windsor County, State of Vermont. My father, Joseph Smith, senior,
    left the State of Vermont, and moved to Palmyra, Ontario (now
    Wayne) County, in the State of New York, when I was in my tenth
    year. In about four years after my father's arrival at Palmyra,
    he moved with his family into Manchester, in the same County of
    Ontario. His family consisted of eleven souls, namely: my father,
    Joseph Smith, my mother, Lucy Smith (whose name previous to her
    marriage was Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack), my brothers Alvin
    (who is now dead), Hyrum, myself, Samuel Harrison, William, Don
    Carlos, and my sisters Sophronia, Catherine, and Lucy,

    "Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester,
    there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on
    the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but
    soon became general among all the sects in that region of country;
    indeed the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and
    great multitude united themselves to the different religious
    parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the
    people, some crying, Lo, here, and some, Lo there; some were
    contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian,
    and some for the Baptists'. For notwithstanding the great love
    which the converts for these different faiths expressed at the
    time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by their
    respected clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting
    this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have
    everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them
    join what sect they pleased: yet when the converts began to file
    off, some to one party, and some to another, it was seen that
    the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts
    were more pretended than real, for a scene of great confusion and
    bad feeling ensued priest contending against priest, and convert
    against convert, so that all the good feelings one for another, if
    they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words, and a
    contest about opinions.

    "I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was
    proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined
    that church, namely, my mother, Lucy, my brothers Hyrum, Samuel
    Harrison, and my sister Sophronia.

    "During this time of great excitement, my mind was called up to
    serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings
    were deep and often pungent, still I kept myself aloof from all
    those parties, though I attended their several meetings as often
    as occasion would permit; but in process of time my mind became
    somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to
    be united with them, but so great was the confusion and strife
    among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a
    person, young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to
    come to any certain conclusion who was right, and who was wrong. My
    mind at different times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult was
    so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against
    the Baptists and Methodists, and used all their powers of either
    reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make
    the people think they were in error. On the other hand the Baptists
    and Methodists, in their turn, were equally zealous to establish
    their own tenets and disprove all others.

    "In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often
    said to myself, What is to be done? Who of all these parties are
    right? Or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be
    right, which is it, and how shall I know it?

    "While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties, caused by the
    contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading
    the Epistle of James, first chapter, and fifth verse, which reads,
    If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth unto
    all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.
    Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the
    heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter
    with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on
    it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from
    God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get
    more wisdom than I then had, would never know; for the teachers
    of religion of the different sects understood the same passage so
    differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question
    by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that
    I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do
    as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the
    determination to ask of God, concluding that if He gave wisdom to
    them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally and not upbraid,
    I might venture. So, in accordance with this, my determination to
    ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was
    on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of
    eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that
    I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never
    as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

    "After I had retired into the place where I had previously designed
    to go, having looked around me and finding myself alone, I kneeled
    down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had
    scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power
    which entirely overcame me, and had such astonishing influence
    over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick
    darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if
    I were doomed to sudden destruction. But exerting all my powers to
    call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which
    had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to
    sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction, not to an
    imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the
    unseen world, who had such a marvelous power as I had never before
    felt in any being. Just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a
    pillar of light exactly over my head above the brightness of the
    sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. It no sooner
    appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me
    bound. When the light rested upon me, I saw two personages, whose
    brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in
    the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said
    (pointing to the other), 'THIS IS MY BELOVED SON, HEAR HIM.'

    "My object in going to enquire of the Lord, was to know which
    of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No
    sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be
    able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in
    the light, which of all the sects was right (for at this time it
    had never entered into my heart that all were wrong), and which
    I should join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for
    they were all wrong, and the personage who addressed me said that
    all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those
    professors were all corrupt. They draw near to me with their lips,
    but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrine the
    commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the
    power thereof.

    "He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other
    things did he say unto me which I cannot write at this time. When I
    came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up
    into heaven.

    "Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company
    with one of the Methodist preachers who was very active in the
    before mentioned religious excitement, and conversing with him on
    the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account
    of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his
    behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with
    great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no
    such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such
    things had ceased with the apostles, and that there never would be
    any more of them.

    "I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a
    great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion,
    and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to
    increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen
    and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to
    make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing
    would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me,
    and create a hot persecution, and this was common among all sects;
    all united to persecute me.

    "It has often caused me serious reflection, both then and since,
    how very strange it was that an obscure boy of a little over
    fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the
    necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor,
    should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract
    the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the
    day, so as to create in them a spirit of the hottest persecution
    and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and was often a
    cause of great sorrow to myself. However it was nevertheless, a
    fact that I had had a vision. I have thought since, that I felt
    much like Paul when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and
    related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light and
    heard a voice, but still there were but few who believed him;
    some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad, and he was
    ridiculed and reviled: but all this did not destroy the reality
    of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the
    persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though
    they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew and would know
    unto his latest breath that he had both seen a light and heard a
    voice speaking to him, and all the world could not make him think
    or believe otherwise.

    "So it was with me; I had actually seen a light, and in the midst
    of that light I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak
    unto me, or one of them did; and though I was hated and persecuted
    for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while
    they were persecuting me, reviling me and speaking all manner of
    evil against me, falsely, for so saying, I was led to say in my
    heart, Why persecute for telling the truth? I have actually seen
    a vision, and who am I that I can withstand God? Or why does the
    world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had
    seen a vision. I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could
    not deny it, neither dare I do it; at least I knew that by so doing
    I would offend God and come under condemnation.

    "I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was
    concerned, that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but
    continue as I was until further directed; I had found the testimony
    of James to be true, that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of
    God, and obtain and not be upbraided. I continued to pursue my
    common avocations in life until the twenty-first of September, one
    thousand eight hundred and twenty-three, all the time suffering
    severe persecution at the hands of all classes of men, both
    religious and irreligious, because I continued to affirm that I had
    seen a vision.

    "During the space of time which intervened between the time I
    had the vision, and the year eighteen hundred and twenty-three
    (having been forbidden to join any of the religious sects of the
    day, and being of very tender years, and persecuted by those who
    ought to have been my friends, and to have treated me kindly,
    and if they supposed me to be deluded to have endeavored, in a
    proper and affectionate manner, to have reclaimed me), I was
    left to all kinds of temptations, and mingling with all kinds of
    society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed
    the weakness of youth, and the corruption of human nature,
    which I am sorry to say led me into divers temptations, to the
    gratification of many appetites offensive in the sight of God. In
    consequence of these things I often felt condemned for my weakness
    and imperfections; when on the evening of the above mentioned
    twenty-first of September, after I had retired to my bed for the
    night, I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty
    God, for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a
    manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing
    before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine
    manifestation, as I had previously had one.

    "While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a
    light appearing in the room, which continued to increase until the
    room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage
    appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did
    not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite
    whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever
    seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to
    appear so exceedingly white and brilliant; his hands were naked,
    and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so also were his feet
    naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and
    neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing
    on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his
    bosom.

    "Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person
    was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like
    lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright
    as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him I
    was afraid, but the fear soon left me. He called me by name and
    said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of
    God to me, and that his name was Moroni. That God had a work for
    me to do, and that my name should be had for good and evil among
    all nations, kindreds, and tongues; or that it should be both good
    and evil spoken of among all people. He said there was a book
    deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the
    former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence
    they sprang. He also said that the fullness of the everlasting
    Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the
    ancient inhabitants. Also that there were two stones in silver bows
    (and these stones, fastened to a breast plate, constituted what is
    called the Urim and Thummim,) deposited with the plates, and the
    possession and use of these stones was what constituted Seers in
    ancient or former times, and that God had prepared them for the
    purpose of translating the book.

    "After telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies
    of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of
    Malachi, and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same
    prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in
    our Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our
    books, he quoted it thus: 'For behold, the day cometh that shall
    burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly,
    shall burn as stubble, for they that come shall burn them, saith
    the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor
    branch.' And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: 'Behold I will
    reveal unto you the priesthood by the hand of Elijah the prophet,
    before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.' He
    also quoted the next verse differently: 'And he shall plant in the
    hearts of the children, the promises made to the fathers, and the
    of hearts the children shall turn to their fathers; if it were not
    so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at His coming.'

    "In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah,
    saying that it was about to be fulfilled. He quoted also the third
    chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely
    as they stand in our New Testament. He said that prophet was
    Christ, but the day had not yet come when they who would not hear
    His voice should be cut off from among the people, but soon would
    come.

    "He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth
    to the last verse. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled,
    but was soon to be. And he further stated, the fullness of the
    Gentiles was soon to come in. He quoted many other passages of
    scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned
    here. Again, he told me that when I got those plates of which he
    had spoken (for the time that they should be obtained was not
    yet fulfilled) I should not show them to any person, neither the
    breastplate with the Urim and Thummim, only to those to whom I
    should be commanded to show them; if I did I should be destroyed.
    While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was
    opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were
    deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly, that I knew the
    place again when I visited it.

    "After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to
    gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking
    to me, and it continued to do so, until the room was again left
    dark, except just around him, when instantly I saw, as it were,
    a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended up till he
    entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before
    this heavenly light had made its appearance.

    "I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling
    greatly at what had been told me by this extraordinary messenger,
    when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that
    my room was again beginning to get lighted, and in an instant, as
    it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside. He
    commenced, and again related the very same things which he had
    done at his first visit, without the least variation, which having
    done, he informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the
    earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence,
    and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this
    generation. Having related these things, he again ascended as he
    had done before.

    "By this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind, that
    sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment
    at what I had both seen and heard; but what was my surprise when
    again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him
    rehearse or repeat over again to me the same things as before, and
    added a caution to me, telling me that Satan would try to tempt
    me (in consequence of the indigent circumstances of my father's
    family) to get the plates for the purpose of getting rich. This
    he forbade me, saying that I must have no other object in view in
    getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced
    by any other motive but that of building his kingdom, otherwise
    I could not get them. After this third visit, he again ascended
    up into heaven as before, and I was again left to ponder on the
    strangeness of what I had just experienced, when almost immediately
    after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me the third time,
    the cock crew, and I found that day was approaching, so that our
    interviews must have occupied the whole of that night, I shortly
    after arose from my bed, and, as usual, went to the necessary
    labors of the day, but, in attempting to labor as at other times, I
    found my strength so exhausted as rendered me entirely unable. My
    father, who was laboring along with me, discovered something to be
    wrong with me, and told me to go home. I started with the intention
    of going to the house, but, in attempting to cross the fence out
    of the field where we were, my strength entirely failed me, and I
    fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious
    of anything. The first thing that I can recollect, was a voice
    speaking unto me, calling me by name; I looked up and beheld the
    same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light, as
    before. He then again related unto me all that he had related to me
    the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father, and tell
    him of the vision and commandment which I had received.

    "I obeyed, I returned back to my father in the field and rehearsed
    the whole matter to him. He replied to me that it was of God, and
    to go and do as commanded by the messenger. I left the field and
    went to the place where the messenger had told me the plates were
    deposited, and owing to the distinctness of the vision which I had
    had concerning it, I knew the place the instant that I arrived
    there. Convenient to the village of Manchester, Ontario County, New
    York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of
    any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far
    from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates,
    deposited in a stone box; this stone was thick and rounding in the
    middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that
    the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge
    all round was covered with earth. Having removed the earth and
    obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone,
    and with a little exertion raised it up; I looked in, and there
    indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the
    breastplate as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay
    was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the
    bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on
    these stones lay the plates and the other things with them. I made
    an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messenger,
    and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had
    not yet arrived, neither would arrive until four years from that
    time; but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in
    one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and
    that I should continue to do so, until the time should come for
    obtaining the plates.

    "Accordingly as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each
    year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and
    received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our
    interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and
    in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days.

    "As my father's worldly circumstances were very limited, we were
    under the necessity of laboring with our hands, hiring by day's
    work and otherwise as we could get opportunity; sometimes we were
    at home and sometimes abroad, and by continued labor were enabled
    to get a comfortable maintenance.

    "In the year 1824, my father's family met with a great affliction,
    by the death of my eldest brother, Alvin. In the month of October,
    1825, I hired with an old gentleman, by the name of Josiah Stoal,
    who lived in Chenango County, State of New York. He had heard
    something of a silver mine having been opened by the Spaniards,
    in Harmony, Susquehanna County, State of Pennsylvania, and had,
    previous to my hiring with him, been digging, in order, if
    possible, to discover the mine. After I went to live with him he
    took me among the rest of his hands to dig for the silver mine, at
    which I continued to work for nearly a month without success in
    our undertaking, and finally I prevailed with the old gentleman to
    cease digging after it. Hence arose the very prevalent story of my
    having been a money digger.

    "During the time that I was thus employed, I was put to board with
    a Mr. Isaac Hale, of that place; it was there that I first saw my
    wife (his daughter) Emma Hale. On the 18th of January, 1827, we
    were married, while yet I was employed in the service of Mr. Stoal.

    "Owing to my still continuing to assert that I had seen a vision,
    persecution still followed me, and my wife's father's family were
    very much opposed to our being married. I was therefore under the
    necessity of taking her elsewhere, so we went and were married at
    the house of Squire Tarbill, in South Bainbridge, Chenango County,
    New York. Immediately after my marriage, I left Mr. Stoal's and
    went to my father's and farmed with him that season.

    "At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and
    Thummim, and the Breastplate. On the 22nd day of September, 1827,
    having gone, as usual, at the end of another year, to the place
    where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered
    them up to me with this charge, that I should be responsible for
    them; that if I should let them go carelessly or through any
    neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all
    my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call
    for them, they should be protected.

    "I soon found out the reason why I had received such strict charges
    to keep them safe, and why it was that the messenger had said,
    that when I had done what was required at my hand, he would call
    for them; for no sooner was it known that I had them, than the
    most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me; every
    stratagem that could be invented was resorted to for that purpose;
    the persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and
    multitudes were on the alert continually to get them from me if
    possible; but, by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my
    hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my
    hand; when according to arrangements, the messenger called for
    them, I delivered them up to him, and he has them in his charge
    until this day, being the 2nd of May, 1838.

    "The excitement, however, still continued, and rumor, with her
    thousand tongues, was all the time employed in circulating many
    tales about my father's family and about myself. If I were to
    relate a thousandth part of them, it would fill up volumes. The
    persecution, however, became so intolerable that I was under
    the necessity of leaving Manchester, and going with my wife to
    Susquehanna County, in the State of Pennsylvania; while preparing
    to start (being very poor, and the persecution so heavy upon us,
    that there was no probability that we would ever be otherwise),
    in the midst of our afflictions we found a friend in a gentleman
    by the name of Martin Harris, who came to us and gave me fifty
    dollars to assist us in our afflictions. Mr. Harris was a resident
    of Palmyra Township, Wayne County, in the State of New York, and
    a farmer of respectability. By this timely aid was I enabled to
    reach the place of my destination in Pennsylvania, and immediately
    after my arrival there I commenced copying the characters of the
    plates. I copied a considerable number of them, and by means of the
    Urim and Thummim I translated some of them, which I did between the
    time I arrived at the house of my wife's father in the month of
    December, and the February following.

    "Some time in this month of February, the aforementioned Mr. Martin
    Harris came to our place, got the characters which I had drawn off
    the plates, and started with them to the city of New York. For what
    took place relative to him and the characters, I refer to his own
    account of the circumstances as he related them to me after his
    return, which was as follows--

    "'I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters
    which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to
    Professor Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary
    attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was
    correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the
    Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated,
    and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyric, and Arabic,
    and he said that they were the true characters. He gave me a
    certificate certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true
    characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been
    translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into
    my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called
    me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were
    gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an
    angel of God had revealed it to him.

    "'He then said unto me, 'Let me see that certificate.' I
    accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he
    took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing
    now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates
    to him, he would translate them. I informed him that part of the
    plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them; he
    replied, 'I cannot read a sealed book.' I left him and went to Dr.
    Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting
    both the characters and the translation.'

    "On the 15th day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery came to my house,
    until when I had never seen him. He stated to me that having been
    teaching school in the neighborhood where my father resided, and my
    father being one of those who sent to the school, he went to board
    for a season at his house, and while there, the family related to
    him the circumstances of my having the plates, and accordingly he
    had come to make inquiries of me.

    "Two days after the arrival of Mr. Cowdery, (being the 17th of
    April,) I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he
    commenced to write for me.

    "We still continued the work of translation, when, in the ensuing
    month, (May, 1829,) we on a certain day went into the woods to
    pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission
    of sins, as we found mentioned in the translation of the plates.
    While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a
    messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having
    laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying unto us, '_Upon you,
    my fellow-servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood
    of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and
    of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the
    remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the
    earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the
    Lord in righteousness_.' He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not
    the power of laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but
    that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us
    to go and be baptized, and gave us directions that I should baptize
    Oliver Cowdery, and afterwards that he should baptize me.

    "Accordingly we went and were baptized--I baptized him first, and
    afterwards he baptized me--after which I laid my hands upon his
    head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he
    laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood for so
    we were commanded.

    "The messenger who visited us on this occasion, and conferred this
    Priesthood upon us, said his name was John, the same that is called
    John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under
    the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of the
    Priesthood of Melchisedec, which Priesthood, he said, should in
    due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the first
    elder and he the second. It was on the 15th day of May, 1829, that
    we were baptized and ordained under the hand of the messenger.

    "Immediately upon our coming up out of the water, after we had
    been baptized, we experienced great and glorious blessings from
    our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery than
    the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many
    things which would shortly come to pass. And again, so soon as I
    had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy, when,
    standing up, I prophesied concerning the rise of the Church, and
    many other things connected with the Church and this generation
    of the children of men. We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and
    rejoiced in the God of our salvation.

    "Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures
    laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning of their
    more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we
    never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of.
    In the meantime we were forced to keep secret the circumstances of
    our having been baptized and having received the Priesthood, owing
    to a spirit of persecution which had already manifested itself in
    the neighborhood. We had been threatened with being mobbed, from
    time to time, and this, too, by professors of religion. And their
    intentions of mobbing us were only counteracted by the influence of
    my wife's father's family (under Divine Providence,) who had become
    very friendly to me, and who were opposed to mobs, and were willing
    that I should be allowed to continue the work of translation
    without interruption; and therefore offered and promised us
    protection from all unlawful proceedings as far as in them lay."

"Have you any further proofs to offer respecting the divine
authenticity of this book you refer to?"

"Yes, we have evidence sufficient to establish its divinity beyond
doubt, before any impartial court on earth. I will read you from one
of our books the voluntary testimony of witnesses who have not; been
impeached, as follows:

    THE TESTIMONY OF THREE WITNESSES.

    "Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto
    whom this work shall come, that we, through the grace of God the
    Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which
    contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and
    also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of
    Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken; and we
    also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of
    God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a
    surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen
    the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shewn
    unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with
    words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and
    he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the
    plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the
    grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld
    and bear record that these things are true; and it is marvellous
    in our eyes, nevertheless the voice of the Lord commanded us that
    we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the
    commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know
    that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the
    blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat
    of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And
    the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
    which is one God. Amen.

    OLIVER COWDERY, DAVID WHITMER, MARTIN HARRIS.

"Can you give us any other evidences respecting this record?"

"Yes, here is also the testimony of eight additional witnesses, who
declare they saw the plates."

    AND ALSO THE TESTIMONY OP EIGHT WITNESSES.

    "Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto
    whom this work shall come, that Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator
    of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been
    spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the
    leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our
    hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the
    appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we
    bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown
    unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the
    said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give
    our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we
    have seen; and we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

    CHRISTIAN WHITMER, HIRAM PAGE, JACOB WHITMER, JOSEPH SMITH, SEN.,
    PETER WHITMER, JUN., HYRUM SMITH, JOHN WHITMER, SAMUEL H. SMITH.

"There is one point," said Brown, "upon which I would like to hear
further: it is the restoration, before mentioned. If these things are
true, then the gospel was not upon the earth at the time of Joseph
Smith's birth, and, as you will admit, the Church was organized in the
days of Christ and left on the earth when He ascended on high: the
question then arises, how the Gospel was it taken from the earth?"

"Let me give you another quotation from the Bible on the subject," said
the Elder. "'From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence; and the violent take it by force.' (Matthew
xi: 12.) By parity of reasoning where would our own government be
if subjected to similar treatment? Suppose, that instead of Christ
being crucified, it were the President, that the Cabinet instead of
the Apostles were murdered, the Congress and not the Seventies were
scattered to the four winds, and our citizens were subjected to the
fate of the Saints of old in being driven beneath the earth--what would
then remain of our nation? It exists now proudly and gloriously, and
has existed for more than a century, but such treatment would leave
it to future generations as only an incident in history that is, it
came, it nourished and it passed away, just as did the true religion
in the early days; and it might again, also like the true religion, be
restored, even as the Roman Empire rose, fell and rose again."

"I understand."

"If you have no objections, I would like to read to you the words of
a wise man on this subject, which will illustrate my meaning in a
much clearer way than it is possible for me to express it myself. The
quotation is not long and you will all especially my legal friend--see
the force of his argument. He uses these words:

"'Now, in order to come at this subject in plainness, let us examine
the constitution of earthly governments in regard to the authority
and laws of adoption. We will say, for instance, the President of the
United States writes a commission to A. B., duly authorizing him to
act in some office in the government, and daring his administration,
two gentlemen from Europe come to reside in this country, and being
strangers and foreigners wishing to become citizens, they go before
A. B., and he administers the oath of allegiance in due form, and
certifies the same, and this constitutes them legal citizens, entitled
to the privileges of those who are citizens or subjects by birth. After
these things A. B. is taken away by death, and C. D., in looking over
his papers happens to find the commission given to A. B., and applying
it to his own use, assumes the vacant office; meantime, two foreigners
arrive and apply for citizenship, and being informed by persons
ignorant of the affairs of government that C. D. could administer the
laws of adoption, they submit to be administered unto by C. D., without
once examining his authority; C. D. certifies of their citizenship,
and they suppose they have been legally adopted, the same as the
others, and are entitled to the privileges of citizenship. But, by and
by, their citizenship is called into question, and they produce the
certificates of C. D.; the President inquires, 'Who is C. D.? I never
gave him a commission to act in any office, I know him not and you are
strangers and foreigners to the commonwealth, until you go before the
legally appointed successor of A. B., or some other of like authority,
who has a commission from the President direct in his own name.' In the
meantime C. D. is taken and punished according to law, for practicing
imposition, and usurping authority which was never conferred upon him.
And so it is with the kingdom of God. The Lord authorized the Apostles
and others, by direct revelation, and by the spirit of prophecy, to
preach and baptize, and build up His church and kingdom; but after
awhile they died, and a long time passed away; men reading over their
commission, where it says to the eleven Apostles, 'Go ye into all the
world and preach the gospel to every creature,' etc., have had the
presumption to apply these sayings as their authority, and, without
any other commission, have gone forth professing to preach the gospel,
and baptize, and build up the church and kingdom of God; but those
whom they baptize never receive the same blessings and gifts which
characterized a Saint, or citizen of the kingdom, in the days of the
Apostles. Why? Because they are yet foreigners and strangers, for the
commission given to the Apostles never commissioned any other man to
act in their stead. This was a prerogative the Lord preserved unto
Himself. No man has a right to take this ministry upon himself, but he
that is called by revelation, and duly qualified to act in his calling
by the Holy Ghost."

"You give us abundance of authority, as well as your own testimony and
evidence," said the doctor. "You have developed a wide and profound
subject for our consideration, and for one I regret that we cannot at
once hear you out, that is, go to the end of the subject with you,
and know all that you are in possession of in regard to it. Right or
wrong, one thing is plainly manifest--that you convey a philosophy each
part of which is so reasonable, consistent and harmonious with every
other part, and with the ground-work itself, that he who doubts must
question himself as to why he doubts. And now, let me ask, will it not
be practicable for you to remain another day?"

"While it would give me, personally, the greatest pleasure to do so,
it must be remembered that I am not performing this work for my own
individual gratification. The field is a broad one, and just think how
small a portion of it I would be able to cover should I give way to my
present inclinations and remain unduly long in places where everything
is so pleasant as here. No, I must go, but hope to return to this
region again."

"Well, of course you understand your own affairs best, but you are
making such headway here that I hoped it might be desirable for you to
continue to the end."

"So it would but for the reasons stated. My train departs at 11 o'clock
tomorrow, and I must fill the appointments I have made."



CHAPTER IX.

THAT MORMON AGAIN.

Some months had passed away since the Elder took his departure from
Westminster, and during this time his name had been on everybody's
lips, both for good and evil. The principles advanced by him had taken
such root in the minds of many that it seemed impossible for them to
lay the doctrine aside. Among this class were the Marshalls, who, by
the way, had increased their family by the addition of a son-in-law,
their daughter Claire having, as was anticipated, changed her name from
Marshall to Sutherland.

Herbert Sutherland was a rising young man of Westminster, well and
favorably known to most of the people. He had for several years been
very much attached to Miss Marshall, and, as the love was mutual, of
course no one appeared surprised in the least when the wedding took
place. Joy, and promise of an unclouded life, seemed to be the portion
of the young couple.

Breakfast had been waiting for over an hour for Mr. Marshall, and
his good wife had become almost impatient when the gate opened and
he entered, saying to his wife, "You must overlook this delay, as I
have been detained at the station. While passing, I noticed a familiar
friend and could not resist the temptation of spending with him the
forty minutes given for transferring baggage, even when aware that the
detention kept you and the breakfast waiting."

"Well I declare," said Mrs. Marshall, "you must have met a very
esteemed friend indeed, to have remained so long at the expense of so
many."

"Who was it, papa?" remarked Claire; "it's no use asking us to guess,
for you know we are not Yankees enough for that."

"One would imagine you had been in the presence of a number of
friends," said Mr. Sutherland, "judging from the pleased expression on
your face."

"Well, why not tell us who it was?" said Mrs. Marshall.

"It was one whose visit with us was very short, but whose name has been
mentioned since scores of times," Mr. Marshall answered; "and now we
will go to the dining room, and, in the meantime, I will tell you what
my conversation was with Mr. Charles Durant, of Salt Lake City, our
Mormon friend.

"I had learned that he promised while here to visit you again,"
remarked Mr. Sutherland, "and is it possible, he has been so near and
yet failed to keep his promise? I did not think this of Mr. Durant,
for, while I have not had the pleasure of his acquaintance, I had
formed a very good opinion of him from remarks made by others, and was
in hopes of seeing him myself some day."

"And so you shall," answered Mr. Marshall, "I tell you he has not
forgotten. He is on his way home, it is true, but has taken a trip up
the country for a few days, and intends visiting us when he returns."

"That's better," said Sutherland; "I do not wish to miss what you
people claimed was a treat to you."

With this the family adjourned to the dining room, where Mr. Marshall
acquainted them with all the facts received from Mr. Durant. He had
performed his work to the entire satisfaction of the president of the
Southern States Mission, and had been given a leave of absence to
return home; but he had received word while _en route_ that some Elders
had been terribly beaten by a band of fanatics. He was instructed to
pay his fellow laborers a visit, and administer to their wants before
continuing his homeward journey. While he had in view a pleasant visit
with the Marshalls, he could not think of enjoying the same before
performing a duty to the brethren in distress. He would be with the
Marshalls in a day or two and would then remain some days in their
company.

"He has promised," said Mr. Marshall, "to answer all the questions we
have been accumulating for him, and will be pleased indeed to have as
many of our neighbors spend the evening with him as we are willing to
invite."

"Exactly what Herbert has been wishing for," exclaimed Claire, "knowing
so well that Mr. Durant and the Mormon gospel doctrines have made a
deep impression on us, he has been very anxious to converse with this
missionary."

"Yes," answered Sutherland, "if all I have heard from you is correct,
then I am surprised that this peculiar people are despised to such
an extent. The principles you have explained to me, as received from
him, are logical and good, and Mr. Brown tells me they have had such
an influence with him, that nothing short of a visit to Salt Lake City
will satisfy the longing he has to study the Mormon question as he
desires; and as for Claire, why she has gone over her Bible and marked
the passages quoted by the Elder, until the Sacred Book looks like a
Chinese record."

"And better than that," exclaimed his young wife, "I have committed
the most of them to memory, and should he desire an assistant, I
can surprise not only him but all of you with my knowledge of those
principles. I realize how much happiness God has given me in this
world, and how much I should endeavor to please Him, and have therefore
devoted more time to reading His word than ever before, and, strange
to say, I have found passages quoted by Mr. Durant whenever I have
read, and the verses marked in my Bible seem to lead to something else
that he has said. His testimony is so deeply rooted in my heart that I
almost believe his people will yet be my people, and his faith will be
my faith."

"Why, Claire," said her mother, "if you are not careful, you will be a
Mormon before you are aware."

"And should you become one," said her husband, "think of your many
friends, and the opinions they will have of you."

"Well, I haven't joined the Mormons yet," said Claire; "but if I do,
it will be because I believe them to be right; and if I have your good
will, Herbert, and that of papa and mamma, what care I for the opinions
of others?"

"Well said," answered Herbert, with a smile; "but we will see if we
cannot 'corner' your missionary, get him into an argumentative jail, if
you please, from which it will be difficult or impossible for him to
escape. Should he be able to make the gospel he teaches as plain and as
reasonable as the doctrines that are set forth in the tracts which he
left here, I can see no reason why any earnest, sincere searcher after
knowledge cannot adopt that gospel as a living truth."

It was agreed, thereupon, that when the promised telegram from Durant
should be received, giving the date of his arrival, the neighbors
were to be invited, and the large dining room would be turned into an
informal meeting place where the principles of the gospel, as believed
in by the Mormons, could be further explained. This was accordingly
done.



CHAPTER X.

THE MISSIONARY'S RETURN.

Elder Charles Durant returned to Westminster just ten days after the
time of his meeting with Mr. Marshall, at the station. He was heartily
welcomed by the family, and being comfortably seated at the dinner
table, the conversation naturally drifted to a detailed account of
his experience since his first visit. His labors had been divided
somewhat in two or three different states. He had met with many kinds
of people, and with a variety of treatments, since leaving the home of
the Marshalls; he made many friends as well as a few enemies, but had
endeavored to perform his work in a way to meet the approbation of that
Being who had commissioned him to spread His word among the children
of men. Having performed his work to the satisfaction of those under
whom he labored, he was, as previously stated, released therefrom, for
a time at least, and had commenced his journey towards the land of his
birth, where dwelt his loved ones, when the telegram reached him from
the president of the Mission to the effect that several Elders had been
mobbed in a neighboring county, and asking that he visit his brethren
on his way home, as stated before.

After the meal, the family adjourned to the sitting room when the
missionary was requested to give an account of the mobbing of the
Elders whom he had just visited.

He said that they had been laboring for several months holding meetings
wherever they could get an opportunity, and had succeeded in obtaining
the permission of the trustees to hold their meetings in a schoolhouse
they being solicited to hold religious services by the people, and
explain the gospel to them.

A family named Brooks expressed a desire to be baptized, and the Elders
had consented to perform the ordinance on a fixed day, according to
their custom, and in conformity with the plan of salvation as pointed
out by Christ, the early Apostles, and by John the Baptist who baptized
openly in the river Jordan, and near "Aenon near to Salim because there
was much water there."

At the appointed time the ordinance was performed, a number of persons
being present who came for the purpose of sneering at the rite, and
making sport of its sacredness, which they did, but which the Elders
paid only little attention to, being accustomed to the jeers of the
wicked. On the same evening there was a pleasant association at the
residence of the newly-baptized family, the time being spent in singing
sacred songs, and in conversation. Retiring at 9 o'clock, leaving their
bedroom door open owing to the heat, they were at 11 o'clock rudely
awakened, ordered to get up, to accompany a mob of about fifteen men to
the woods.

"You are a pretty-looking lot of fellows," said one of the Elders as he
counted them, and glanced at their masked faces.

"What do you consider the Savior would think of your mission, if He
were here? Why do you disturb the slumbers of the peaceful citizens at
night, thus hideously masked? If we have transgressed any law, we are
amenable; take us before your magistrates, and we will answer to any
charge you may prefer."

"We don't want you to preach any more in this locality," said one of
the masked men.

"Then the best way to stop us is to induce the people to cease
attending our meetings."

At this juncture the inmates of the house were alarmed, and Mr. B. came
in, taking a glance at each of the disturbers.

A voice on the outside was heard to cry: "Captain! captain! enough
said, enough said."

The mob then withdrew, and the Elders retired again, still leaving the
door unlocked. They remained there the following day, but subsequently
spent some time visiting friends in other districts. In the course
of two weeks they returned to the same place. On their way thither,
there were a few who hurled insults at them, but to this they paid
no attention. They arrived at Mr. Brooks' house at 5 o'clock in the
evening where they met companions, and where the time was spent in
speaking of the gospel, singing hymns, and in conversing upon a variety
of subjects concerning Utah and her people. No signs of disturbance
appeared, save an occasional ominous bark of the house dog.

The Elders retired with sweet recollections of home, to be roughly
awakened at 2 o'clock at night, by the harsh cry of "Surrender." They
were surrounded by a horde of ruffians, armed with guns, pistols and
clubs; and in the most blasphemous language, were ordered to get up,
the mobbers in the meantime brandishing their weapons in the faces
of the Elders. Not obeying orders as rapidly as the mob wished them
to, they were each (there being four of them), seized by two of the
cowards, one on either side, dragged from their beds in an inhuman
manner, and marched along the road, an eighth of a mile, dressed only
in their thin summer night-clothing. Resistance was impossible, and
the attempt of the proprietor of the house to assist them was met with
curses, a blow across the forehead, with the exclamation: "If you show
your head out of this house before 6 o'clock tomorrow morning, we will
kill you."

The train marched on, the vilest curses and the blackest oaths being
uttered against them that mortals can express. There was no charge
preferred against them, and they said: "If we have broken any law, take
us before the courts," but the only reply was:

"We are law enough for you."

What was to be their fate, they knew not, until the mob began cutting
and trimming limbs of trees from four to six feet long, having ugly
knots. Soon the Elders were ordered to bend over a fallen log about
two feet through, when their doom was made plain to them. They were
terribly whipped, receiving lash after lash upon their backs without
a question being asked, or an opportunity being afforded to appeal
from this inhuman treatment. Occasionally they raise to say a word,
but are immediately thrust down again by some of the mob using pistols
or clubs. In this way three received severe scalp wounds. The woods
resound with the lashes and the groans of the tortured; thirty-five
stripes have been laid upon them, when they are requested to leave
the country. Too faint to comply, their hesitancy is construed as a
refusal, and they are once more belabored with redoubled fury, causing
them to cringe beneath the cruel beech-limbs wielded by a sturdy fiend
weighing over two-hundred pounds. Fifty stripes each, they received,
and yet they had injured no man! How terrible! but it was all for the
sake of the gospel. Finally after such torture, they were released,
upon promising to leave the country the next day.

They returned to their friend and brother! but in what a lacerated
condition. They found him sitting in the door bleeding from his wounds.
They dressed each other's wounds as best they could, then lay down in
troubled rest till morning, when they departed to the place where Elder
Durant met them, perhaps never to return.

While rehearsing not only his own experience but that of his wounded
brothers, no one listened with more marked attention than Claire's
husband. From the moment he was introduced to Durant, at the depot,
they became very much attached to each other, and, as expressed by Mr.
Sutherland, it seemed as if they had always been acquainted.

Later, while these two were conversing upon the veranda, Mr. Sutherland
interrupted the Elder by asking: "How do you account for the peculiar
feelings attending the formation of new friendship, Mr. Durant? Have
you not noticed that upon many occasions when introduced to a person,
you feel as well acquainted as if you had known him for years?"

"Yes," replied Elder Durant, "I have noticed it often, and have
frequently wondered if occasions where such feelings are manifested
were really the beginning of acquaintance."

"I have certainly been very much impressed with this sensation at times
when I have been absolutely certain of its being the first meeting,"
replied Sutherland; "for instance, to be frank, it is the case with
you. I am certain beyond question that you and I have never met
previous to this day, and yet I followed you while giving the account
of your labors and the troubles of your brethren, with as much interest
as if you were my own brother; and I have felt all day long that we
have always been acquainted."

"Mr. Sutherland," said the Elder, "who knows but before now we have
been better acquainted than you are with any gentleman in your village,
and that we have merely forgotten our former associations together?"

"I do not understand your meaning," said Sutherland, "I am certain we
have never seen each other before, and consequently I cannot comprehend
your idea when you intimate that perhaps we have been well acquainted.
You came from the West, while I have always lived here, where you have
never dwelt except during your former visit to Mr. Marshall's home, and
how, therefore, can it be possible for us ever to have met before?

"I do not claim for an instant that such is the case, Mr. Sutherland,
but the idea afforded me such a splendid chance to open a conversation
upon a principle believed in by my people, that I could not resist the
opportunity of saying what I did, and, as you say you are desirous of
learning all you can about our views upon religious principles, you,
yourself, gave me a thought, serving as a text, for dwelling upon one
of the most important of these."

"If that is the case, I am very glad. What is the principle?"

"You know that all Christians believe that after death there is life?"

"Of course, or why should they take the pains to prepare for death? But
what has that to do with having met you before?"

"Neither that nor what I am going to say has anything whatever to do
with it, but, Mr. Sutherland, if it is reasonable for you and me to
believe we shall live after death, why should it be unreasonable for
us also to believe that our spirits existed before the birth of our
earthly tabernacles? There is certainly something connected with the
intelligence of man that should appeal to us as if to say that the
spirit is older than the body, and emanated from a more exalted place
than this earth of ours."

"Why, Mr. Durant," exclaimed Sutherland in astonishment, "I never heard
such a doctrine as that."

"Let me ask, have you ever read the Bible to any great extent?"

"Yes, I have always been a lover of the Divine Record, and have spent
many hours in its perusal."

"I am glad to hear this, and I think, as we proceed, you may
change your mind regarding never having heard such a doctrine as
pre-existence. You will perhaps admit that while reading, you failed
to understand fully what you read. As an introduction to this grand
and glorious principle, let me read a beautiful poem I have here from
the pen of one of the gifted women of Utah; she is dead now, and the
intelligent spirit, sent from God to dwell in her earthly tabernacle,
has been recalled by the Being who sent it, or, as the Bible declares,
'has returned to God who gave it.' Her name was Eliza B. Snow Smith,
and that name, as well as this poem, will live while time endures:"

  "O my Father, thou that dwellest
    In the high and glorious place!
  When shall I regain thy presence,
    And again behold thy face?
  In thy holy habitation,
    Did my spirit once reside?
  In my first, primeval childhood,
    Was I nurtured near thy side?

  "For a wise and glorious purpose
    Thou hast placed me here on earth,
  And withheld the recollection
    Of my former friends and birth;
  Yet oft-times a secret something
    Whispered, You're a stranger here;
  And I felt that I had wandered
    From a more exalted sphere.

  "I had learned to call thee Father,
    Through thy Spirit from on high;
  But, until the Key of Knowledge
    Was restored, I knew not why.
  In the heavens are parents single?
    No; the thought makes reason stare!
  Truth is reason; truth eternal
    Tells me, I've a mother there.

  "When I leave this frail existence,
    When I lay this mortal by,
  Father, mother, may I meet you
    In your royal court on high?
  Then, at length, when I've completed
    All you sent me forth to do,
  With your mutual approbation
    Let me come and dwell with you."

"That is one of the most beautiful compositions I have ever listened
to, Mr. Durant. The words appear to carry a strange conviction with
them. Can it be true? and if so, are we here as school children, sent
by exalted parents, to become acquainted with sorrow in order to
understand happiness?"

"Either this is the case, or else our faith in a hereafter is a
myth. You prove to me that our birth is the commencement of the
intelligence of man, and you also convince me that death is its end.
But we have enough given in the scriptures to convince us that birth
is not the beginning, and likewise that death is not the end. Christ
said He came forth from the Father (John xvi: 28), and it was His
prayer that the glory which He had before coming would be His when He
returned. (John xvii: 5.) In His teachings to His Apostles He must
have familiarized them with this exalted principle of pre-existence,
for upon one occasion they came to Him with a question, concerning a
blind man: 'Who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born
blind?' (John ix: 2.) Surely had this been a foolish question, Christ
would have corrected them, but He answered them in a manner leading
us to understand that it was a principle firmly believed in by them
all; and comprehending this, as certainly they did, they, more than
our generation, could intelligently lisp the prayer taught them by the
Master: 'Our Father who art in heaven.' Our Divine Record says that
God is the Father of the spirits of all flesh (Num. xvi: 22), in whose
hand is the soul of every living thing (Job xii: 10); and we find in it
that when death comes, the spirit of man will return to God who gave
it. (Eccl. xii: 7.) Job was asked by the Lord where he was when the
foundation of the earth was laid (Job. xxxviii: 3-7), and the Almighty
declared He not only knew but ordained Jeremiah to be a prophet
before his earthly birth. (Jer. i: 5.) From these passages, and many
others that might be cited, it should be very easy for Christians to
understand that there is a natural and a spiritual body." (I. Cor. xv:
44.)

"Mr. Durant," said Sutherland, "whether this principle is true or
otherwise, it cannot be gainsaid that you have scripture to support it."

"Why should we not have, Mr. Sutherland? It is truth, and it is only
natural that the truth should appear reasonable. As quoted, God asks
Job: 'Who laid the corner stones of this earth, when the morning stars
sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy?' (Job xxxviii:
7.) Now I sincerely believe that we were there, that we helped to
compose that large congregation of sons of God, and that we _did_
shout for joy at beholding the time approaching when we also would
have the privilege of visiting an earth where our Father would give us
an opportunity to become possessed of bodies which should eventually
be eternal abiding places for our spirits; that when we came to this
school we should have our judgments taken away, or, in other words,
that all recollection of our former existence should be withdrawn, in
order that we might be able to use the greatest gift of all, which is
'free agency,' to do good or evil and become to a certain extent Gods
in embryo, and then when we returned home from this school our Father
could reward us, his children, according to our works."

"Your explanation carries with it conviction. I have been very much
interested and desire to talk further with you on this subject, but
fear I am doing you an injustice by requiring you to speak so much. I
must not forget that the neighbors are coming in tonight, and I should
therefore not weary you."

"You need not fear, I assure you: I have been talking now upon these
principles for two years; it is my mission, and I am well pleased to
find people who are willing to hear."

"I am very anxious to listen, I can assure you," replied Mr.
Sutherland. "Let us walk through the village, you can view our
improvements, and perhaps shake hands with many whom you met when here
before; we might then return in time for supper, and rest awhile before
our evening chat."

This proposition was agreed to, and taking their hats, the two men went
out. The first person met on the ramble was our medical friend, who,
learning of Mr. Durant's intended return, was hastening to the Marshall
residence to welcome him. The greeting which the young missionary
received from his true and lasting friend was unaffected and sincere,
meaning more than language can express. Questions and answers regarding
the missionary's trip, and matters, which to the general reader would
amount to mere commonplace, were exchanged by the conversation, and
must have been interesting to them, for it was continued during the
whole of what proved a very long walk.

"I begin to feel quite like a resident here," said the Elder, "though,
perhaps, I ought to say that my acquaintance is not the only cause for
that feeling, for I try to be at ease wherever I go."

"And succeed I should say. If your experience elsewhere has been
anything like that at Westminster."

"Yes, indeed, and in so doing I find no little comfort in the words of
an eminent man who is classed as a 'pagan,' an agnostic, and so on,
but who, I verily believe, was as much a Christian at heart as most of
us certainly much more so than many who engage in the promulgation of
Christianity as a profession: 'The world is my home, and humanity my
kindred.'"

By this time they had reached the home of Mr. Marshall, and after
supper, preparations were made for the evening gathering.



CHAPTER XI.

A PLEASANT INTERVIEW.

In the evening Elder Durant not only had the pleasure of meeting
all his old friends of the previous visit, but was honored with the
presence of a large number of persons whom he had not seen before. Some
of them had attended the meeting he held in the Town Hall on his first
visit, while others had only heard of him through the Marshalls.

When all were comfortably seated in the large dining room, Mr.
Sutherland by way of introducing the missionary to his new friends,
said:

"My friends and neighbors, we have assembled here this evening for the
purpose of listening to Mr. Durant on the religious faith of a people
who claim to have the keys of a new dispensation committed to them.
If their claim is correct, then it is of the utmost importance to the
whole human race. If God has indeed spoken from the heavens, it is
the duty of His children to listen; on the other hand, if this claim
of the Mormons be founded on a myth, then it is our duty to do all in
our power to disprove their declarations, and deny that they have any
divine commission whatever to proclaim the principles of salvation.
You who have the privilege of listening to him will know whether his
arguments are sound and scriptural, or otherwise; and can therefore
exercise the right, which you all have, of judging for yourselves. We
will, therefore, ask our friend from the valleys of the West to give
us, in as few words as possible, an outline of what Mormonism teaches,
after which all may act with the utmost freedom in asking questions
upon anything the gentleman may say, or upon any principle believed in
by his people. Now, Mr. Durant, we are anxious to hear you, and you
will find us attentive listeners."

The Elder arose and in a few well-chosen words expressed his thanks to
the Marshalls for their kindness, as well as to Mr. Sutherland, and
all his friends who had taken an interest in him. He was pleased to
answer questions pertaining to his faith, and with all sincerity bore
testimony that the Mormons were less understood by the people of this
and other nations than any other sect in Christendom. Their mission is
one of "peace on earth and good will to man," not withstanding they had
been represented as having objects quite the reverse.

Their faith teaches the reason why man is here in this probation;
whence man came, and whither he goes, after his departure by death. It
teaches that the destiny of man is mighty, that his exaltation is to be
great; that what man is, God once was; that what God is, man can be.

"Mormonism teaches men to believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in
His Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost, who bears record of them
forever.

"As a people, we believe that all mankind, through the transgression
of our first parents, were brought under the curse and penalty for
transgression; but that through the atoning sacrifice, sufferings,
and death of Jesus Christ, all are to be redeemed from any effects of
original transgression; that 'as by the offense of one, judgment came
upon all men unto condemnation; even so, by the righteousness of one,
the free gift came upon all men unto the justification of life.' (Rom.
v: 18.)

"We believe that little children are innocent, and not under
transgression; that they are incapable of obeying any law, not
understanding good or evil; and Jesus says, 'Of such are the kingdom of
heaven;' but then, when they arrive at the years of maturity, and know
good from evil, and are capable of obeying or disobeying law; if they
then transgress, they will be condemned for breaking a known law.

"We believe that no man will be condemned for not obeying a law that
he does not know; and that consequently millions of the human family
who have never heard the gospel, are more blessed than those who have
had that privilege, and have refused to accept it; that mankind will be
judged according to the deeds done in the body.

"We believe in the sufferings, death and atoning sacrifice of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, and in His resurrection and ascension on high,
and in the Holy Ghost, which is given to all who obey the gospel.

"We believe, first, it is necessary to have faith in God, and that,
next, it is necessary to repent of our sins to confess and to turn away
from them, and make restitution to all whom we have injured, as far as
it is in our power.

"We believe that the third necessity is to be baptized by immersion in
water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 'for remission
of sins,' and that this ordinance must be performed by one having
authority, or otherwise it is of no avail.

"The fourth is, to receive the laying on of hands, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the gift of the Holy Ghost; and this ordinance must also
be administered by the Apostles or the Elders, whom the Lord Jesus has
called to lay on hands, nor then is it of any advantage except to those
persons who have complied with the before-named three conditions.

"We believe that the Holy Ghost is the same now, as it was in the
apostolic days, and that when a church is organized, it is its
privilege to have all the gifts, powers and blessings which flow from
the Holy Spirit:

"'Such, for instance, as the gifts of revelation, prophecy, visions,
the ministry of angels, healing the sick by the laying on of hands in
the name of Jesus, the working of miracles, and, in short, all the
gifts mentioned in the scriptures, or enjoyed by the ancient Saints.'
We believe that inspired apostles and prophets, together with all the
officers as mentioned in the New Testament, are necessary in the Church
in these days.

"We believe that there has been a general and awful apostasy from the
religion of the New Testament, so that all the known world have been
left for centuries without the church of Christ among them; without a
priesthood authorized of God to administer ordinances; that every one
of the churches has perverted the gospel, some in one way and some in
another. For instance, almost every church has ignored the doctrine of
'immersion for the remission of sins.' Those few who have practiced
it have abolished the ordinance of the 'laying on of hands' upon
baptized believers for the gifts of the Holy Ghost. Again the few who
have practiced the last ordinance have perverted the first, or have
denied the ancient gifts, powers and blessings which flow from the
Holy Spirit, or have said to the inspired apostles and prophets, we
have no need of you in the body. Those few, again, who have believed
in, and contended for, the miraculous gifts and powers of the Holy
Spirit, have perverted the ordinances. Thus all the churches preach
false doctrines and distort the gospel, and instead of having authority
from God to administer its ordinances, they are under the curse of
God for corrupting it. Paul says (Gal. i: 8), 'Though we or an angel
from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed.'

"We believe that there are a few sincere, honest and humble persons who
are striving to do according to the best of their understanding, but,
in many respects, they err in doctrine because of false teachers and
the precepts of men, and that they will receive the fullness of the
gospel with gladness as soon as they hear it."

"We believe in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and in living and continued
revelation; but we also believe that no new revelation will contradict
the old.

"The gospel in the Book of Mormon is the same as that in the New
Testament, so that no one who reads it can misunderstand its
principles. It has been revealed by the angel to be preached as a
witness to all nations, first to the Gentiles and then to the Jews,
then cometh the downfall of Babylon. Thus fulfilling the vision of
John, which he beheld on the Isle of Patmos, (Rev. xiv: 6, 7, 8), 'And
I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice,
fear God and give glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come;
and worship Him that made the heaven and earth, and the sea and the
fountains of water.' And there followed another angel saying, 'Babylon
is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all nations
drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornications.'

"Many revelations and prophecies have been given to this Church since
its rise, which have been printed and sent forth to the world. These
also contain the gospel in great plainness, and instructions of
infinite importance to the Saints. They also unfold the great events
that await this generation, the terrible judgments to be poured forth
upon the wicked, and the blessings and glories to be given to the
righteous. We believe God will continue to give revelations by visions,
by the ministry of angels, and by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
until the Saints are guided into all truth.

"We believe that wherever the people enjoy the religion of the New
Testament, there they enjoy visions, revelations, the ministry of
angels, etc. And that wherever these blessings cease to be enjoyed,
there they also cease to enjoy the religion of the New Testament.

"We believe that God has established His church in order to prepare
a people for His second coming in the clouds of heaven, in power and
great glory; and that then the Saints that are asleep in their graves
will be raised and reign with Him on earth a thousand years.

"We believe that great judgments await the earth on account of the
wickedness of its inhabitants, and that when the gospel shall have been
sufficiently proclaimed, if they reject it they will be destroyed;
that plagues, pestilence and famine will be multiplied upon them; that
thrones will be cast down, empires overthrown, and nations destroyed;
that when the Spirit of God ceases to restrain the people, the world
will be full of blood, carnage and desolation; that peace will be taken
from the earth and from among all people, religious and irreligious. It
shall be as with the people, so with the priest, etc.

"We believe that the Lord will gather His people from among all nations
unto a land of peace, and give them pastors after His own heart, who
shall feed them with knowledge and understanding, and they shall be the
only people upon the earth that shall not be at war with one another.

"We believe that the Ten Tribes of Israel, with the dispersed of
Judah, shall soon be restored to their own lands, according to the
covenants which God made with their ancient fathers, and that when this
great work of restitution shall take place, the power of God shall be
made manifest in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds, far exceeding
anything that took place in the exodus from Egypt. Jerusalem will be
rebuilt, together with the glorious temple, and the Lord shall visit
His Saints in Zion. In that day the name of the Lord shall become great
unto the ends of the earth, and all nations shall serve and obey Him,
for the wicked shall have perished out of the earth.

"We believe in all principles of truth that have been revealed; in all
that are now being revealed, and are prepared to receive all that God
will reveal.

"We believe that the gospel, now being preached by the Latter-day
Saints, is to call the honest in heart out of Babylon, that they
partake not of her sins nor receive of her plagues.

"We believe in morality, chastity, purity, virtue and honesty, and wish
to promote the happiness of our fellow-men."

The Elder's words were listened to with marked attention. He expressed
a willingness to answer questions, and a desire to have as many asked,
concerning the religious principles believed in by his people, as the
listeners were pleased to propound.

"Mr. Durant," said Sutherland, when the former was seated, "I have not
only listened to all you have said with the greatest interest, but have
taken pleasure in reading the tracts left while on your former visit,
and whether your faith is correct or otherwise, it will be a difficult
task to disprove any of your arguments by the Sacred Record. I wish to
ask you a few questions regarding some of the principles you have not
touched upon, and which I understand to be a part of your faith. I am
informed that you believe in a literal resurrection of the body? Is
this correct?"

"Certainly," answered the Elder promptly. "How could we lay any claim
whatever to a Christian belief in the resurrection unless we believed
in a literal resurrection?"

"Well you certainly would not be compelled to believe in a literal
resurrection in order to lay claim to having a Christian belief in that
principle, for all Christians are surely not believers in it."

"All true Christians must follow Christ's teachings regarding this
principle as well as all others, or else how can they be considered
true Christians? Christ is the resurrection and the life. (John xi:
25.) He was also the first fruits of the resurrection. (Acts xxvi:
23.) He, therefore, is our great pattern. We know He was put to death
(Matt. xxvii: 50); that His body was laid in the tomb (Matt. xxvii:
60); that when His friends visited that tomb the body was gone; that
an angel declared that the body had been resurrected (Matt. xxviii:
6); that He appeared to His apostles with the body which had been
crucified, even bearing the prints of the cruel nails in His hands, and
the marks of the spear in His side, and to satisfy Thomas, He asked to
be handled that no mistake might be made regarding its being a literal
resurrection of the same body He had before the crucifixion (John xx:
27, 28). This was the resurrection of our Master, and inasmuch as He
has commanded us to follow Him, why should ours not be the same?"

"But you will admit that if Christianity is true and Christ is really
the Savior, that there is a great difference between His resurrection
and that of those who have died since. His body had only just been
interred; there had not been sufficient time for it to decay in the
grave, and He was God Himself, while the bodies of others decay, and
are scattered, in some cases at least, to the four winds," answered
Brown.

"How about the statement regarding the resurrection of others, who,
the scriptures declare, came forth from their graves at the time of
Christ's resurrection? (Matt. xxvii: 52.) They certainly must have
slumbered for a long time."

"I cannot understand," said Brown "how it could be possible for a
literal resurrection of the body to occur after decay had taken place,
and the body had returned as dust to the earth."

"Mr. Brown," the Elder said, "you will candidly admit that there are
many things now accepted as truths which at one time seemed to you
incomprehensible?"

"No doubt, I do," answered Brown.

"Yes, you do, most decidedly: For instance, when you first learned of
the wonders of the telephone, you could scarcely credit them; when you
were informed that you could converse with a friend who stood miles
away, you not only doubted, but perhaps disbelieved, yet you doubt no
longer, for your eyes have seen, and your ears have heard. Is not this
true?"

"It is; what the eye has seen or the ear has heard, one must certainly
believe. But is not that a vastly different proposition?"

"Not at all; you are only less familiar with the methods or principles
upon which the resurrection depends, that is all. When we have more of
the intelligence of heaven, and can understand more regarding the great
principle by which the resurrection is brought about, it will appear
simple enough. God permits a ray of intelligence to come from heaven;
it reaches the mind of man, it gives us knowledge of the telegraph,
by which our messages flash from nation to nation in the twinkling of
an eye, and opens to our understanding many other wonders of modern
science. We may not understand fully how it is done, but we know it is
accomplished, and we therefore believe what we once disbelieved.

"Another ray reaches us, and we have an understanding of the telephone,
the phonograph, the electric cars; and through the effects of these
discoveries, we open our eyes in wonderment! Yet these flashes of
intelligence are nothing compared with the mighty fire of wisdom in the
heavens from whence these originate. They may be new to us, but are
thoroughly understood by Him who sent them. They are all gifts from the
Father of our spirits, and only small gifts at that, compared with what
He has in store for us."

"How can you imagine for an instant," exclaimed Mr. Sutherland, "that
it can be possible for all the particles of our bodies to be gathered
together again after they have been scattered?"

"I do not, and cannot pretend to, answer this question. It will require
more intelligence than I have, to answer it. But this I firmly believe;
that no particle, that is, none of the component parts, of my body
will ever go to make up the body of anything else, except perhaps for
a time, and that it matters not whether my body be burned or permitted
to decay and return to mother earth, every particle will be collected
and brought together again, at the time of the resurrection which will
be literal in every sense of the word. Let me relate a little anecdote
which illustrates my position.

"A person had received, as a birthday gift, a beautiful silver cup from
a friend. This cup was prized very much, not only on account of its
beauty, but because of the love the receiver had for the giver. In a
short time the one making this present was called away, the cold hand
of death was laid upon him.

"Then the cup increased a hundred fold in value to the owner, and
nothing could influence him to part from it. Years afterward, the
owner of the present carried it to the place where he was employed,
for the purpose of exhibiting it to a fellow workman. During the day,
in passing the shelf where it rested while he was engaged in moving
some valuable goods, he carelessly knocked the cup from the shelf,
and it fell into a vessel of fluid. Thinking at the moment that the
vessel contained nothing but water, the owner waited until his arms
were released from the valuable load they contained, before seeking
to remove the cup from the place into which it had fallen. When he
returned, he found, to his sorrow, that his cup had disappeared. Upon
investigation, imagine his sorrow, when he discovered that the vessel
contained nitric acid instead of water, and that the cup had been
eaten up by the fluid. He thought of how he had valued that keepsake,
how much he revered the memory of the giver, and how foolish he was
to bring the prize from his home that morning. At this moment, his
employer happened along, and noticing his grief enquired for the cause.
After listening to the poor man's story, and learning that the cup was
made in a neighboring town, he rather startled the sorrowing man with
this remark: 'Don't feel bad, my man, I promise, you shall again have
your cup.'

"The workingman, thinking his words meant that he should receive the
amount of its real value, or another cup, explained that it was not its
cost, neither would another cup fill its place. It was the loss of this
particular article, which came from the hands of a friend who had since
died, that caused him grief.

"'Never mind, I say, whether you believe my words or not, I promise,
and will make good that promise, that you shall again have your cup,
and it shall be made of the same identical silver, having the same
form, and being composed of nothing but the same metal. I don't mean
the same kind, but the very same silver you dropped into that fluid.'

"And with this he took a few hand fulls of common salt, flung them into
the liquid, and there formed in the solution a white solid; this he
removed, dried and heated in a crucible, and the result was a lump of
silver of the highest lustre.

"'Now, you see,' said the kind-hearted man, 'how easy it is to restore
when you understand the method by which it is done. All the silver