a  ∫oassa
sivistyksess√§ ja sivistyneist√∂ss√§, joka samalla pohjautuu
el√§v√§√§n ja omana elettyyn kansaan, on Suomen kansa vihdoinkin taas
l√∂yt√§v√§ itsens√§ kansallisesti ja sivistyksellisesti ehe√§n√§ ja
v√§kev√§n√§. Siin√§ sivistyneist√∂ss√§ on se tapaava omanaan ja
el√§v√§n√§ elimen, jonka v√§lityksell√§ yksin se voi el√§√§
sivistyskansan el√§m√§√§, luoda ulkonaiset vaikutuksensa ja sis√§isten
el√§mystens√§ rikkaudet omaksi tajutuksi ja tietoisaksi hengen
kokonaisuudekseen.


       *       *       *       *       *



ALAVIITTEET


[1] Nyky√§√§n on kuitenkin vaara tarjolla, ett√§ vanha suomalainen
raamattumme, t√§m√§ l√§nsisuomalais-h√§m√§l√§isen sivistyskautemme
ainoa suuri kirjallinen perint√∂, jonka ytimek√§s iskev√§ kieli ja
harras sanakuvauksen mahti ovat kirjallisuutemme miehisimpi√§
kaunistuksia, ett√§ se hyv√§√§ tarkoittavassa uusimisinnossa t√§ss√§
merkityksess√§ on tuleva turmelluksi ja laimennetuksi.

[2] Voihan t√§llainen romanttisesti hurmioitunut kotitanhua-ihannointi
toisinaan tosin johtaa hupaisiinkin ajatuksen kuperkeikkoihin kuten
esimerkiksi on k√§ynyt sille intoilijalle, joka puhuessaan
etel√§pohjalaisesta puuku ,√§mist√§ eik√§ vain tietojen
levittelemist√§. Jo kuulee √§√§nten humusta tuolta t√§√§lt√§
itsen√§isyyden vilpitt√∂m√§n rinta√§√§nen, tapaa harhailevien,
haparoivien katseiden keskell√§ nuoren ja rohkean silm√§parin, joka on
jaksanut kohdistaa katseensa tiukasti ja ter√§ksisesti asioiden
k√§rkeen. N√§kee tuolla t√§√§ll√§ aseen heiluvan tietoisassa k√§dess√§
ja iskun t√§hd√§tyksi siihen paikkaan, mihin on iskett√§v√§kin.--Kunpa
vain ei herpautuisi t√§m√§ her√§√§v√§ nuoriso, kunpa ei lohkeaisi
kesken arvostelun tutkain! Kunpa ei v√§s√§ht√§isi katse etsiv√§st√§,
tutkivasta ankaruudesta, kunpa ei uupuisi itsen√§isyyden tarmo kesken
leikkaavan lentonsa! Kunpa ei kuivuisi itsens√§ l√∂yt√§neiden mielien
herkistynyt hedelm√§llisyys ja asettuisi hengen her√§nnyt, k√§yv√§
levottomuus malttavan keskinkertaisuuden tyrehtyneeksi tyytymykseksi!

Virvonneet yksil√∂t ovat kansan her√§nnytt√§ henke√§: niiss√§ kuohuvat
kansan uinuneet voimat n√§kyv√§isiksi, puhkeavat itsetiedottomuuden
y√∂st√§ ajatusten, luomien kirkkaudeksi. Yksil√∂ on k√§ymisen liike
yhteiskunnassa, yksil√∂ss√§ potee kansa itsens√§ hengeksi! Yksil√∂ on
kansan voimien hedelm√§, kansan mullasta hengen p√§iv√§√§n ja
kirkkauteen taiminut, kasvanut, jyviin t√§ytel√∂itynyt t√§hk√§p√§√§.

Mik√§li her√§√§v√§ nuori suomenkielinen sivistys voi s√§ilytt√§√§
itsens√§ henkisesti k√§yv√§n√§, mik√§li sill√§ on hengen tarmoa yh√§
el√§v√§mp√§√§n ja eletymp√§√§n yksil√∂lliseen viljeltymiseen, sik√§li
herk√§sti ja rikkaasti on se voiva tuoda muodon julkisuuteen ja
ajatuksen tietoisuuteen Suomen kansan sis√§iset, salatut el√§mykset.
Meill√§ on j√§ljell√§ kansan s√§√§stetty hengen aines, meill√§ on
j√§ljell√§ koko kansan murtamaton ty√∂tarmo, koko kansan harras, uuras
ty√∂tahto, meill√§ on j√§ljell√§ oman elinpolvemme palava, yrittelev√§
ty√∂into ja tulevien sukupolvien koskematon ty√∂voima! Meid√§n on vain
her√§tt√§v√§, virvottava tajuamaan n√§m√§ uinuvat voimamme,
kirvoitettava ne tiedottomuudestaan ja laskettava toimimaan! Ja viel√§
me muokkaamme vainiomme sulaksi, viljelemme viel√§ murtamattomankin
maaper√§n m√∂yhe√§ksi ja hedelm√§n kantavaksi! Suomalainenkin sivistys
on viel√§ kantava sek√§ rikkaat ett√§ jalot hedelm√§t, hedelm√§t,
joiden kupuun on sidottu sek√§ muodon ja viljelyksen herkk√§, kuulakas
hienous ett√§ aineksen ja sis√§ll√∂n t√§ytel√§s ja runsas paino ja
p√§tevyys.

Kun el√§m√§ntunto on purrut niin syv√§lle kansaan, ett√§ siin√§
virkoaa yksil√∂llinen hengentietoisuus, niin silloin on koittamassa
hetki, jolloin t√§m√§ kansa on saavuttamassa henkisen
t√§ysik√§isyytens√§. Her√§nneiss√§, virittyneiss√§ yksil√∂iss√§√§n on
Suomenkin kansan henki ottava sivistyksen soihdun omiin k√§siins√§
valaistakseen sill√§ omat h√§m√§r√§ns√§, luonteensa ja lahjojensa,
toivojensa ja pettymystens√§ salat, oman el√§m√§npolttonsa tuimuuden
ja oman paisuvan el√§m√§nriemunsa, oman voimansa tarmon ja oman
heikkoutensa h√§pe√§n.

T√§llaisessa yksil√∂llisyytt√§ k√§yv√§ss√§ ja kuohuvassa
sivistyksess√§ ja sivistyneist√∂ss√§, joka samalla pohjautuu
el√§v√§√§n ja omana elettyyn kansaan, on Suomen kansa vihdoinkin taas
l√∂yt√§v√§ itsens√§ kansallisesti ja sivistyksellisesti ehe√§n√§ ja
v√§kev√§n√§. Siin√§ sivistyneist√∂ss√§ on se tapaava omanaan ja
el√§v√§n√§ elimen, jonka v√§lityksell√§ yksin se voi el√§√§
sivistyskansan el√§m√§√§, luoda ulkonaiset vaikutuksensa ja sis√§isten
el√§mystens√§ rikkaudet omaksi tajutuksi ja tietoisaksi hengen
kokonaisuudekseen.


       *       *       *       *       *



ALAVIITTEET


[1] Nyky√§√§n on kuitenkin vaara tarjolla, ett√§ vanha suomalainen
raamattumme, t√§m√§ l√§nsisuomalais-h√§m√§l√§isen sivistyskautemme
ainoa suuri kirjallinen perint√∂, jonka ytimek√§s iskev√§ kieli ja
harras sanakuvauksen mahti ovat kirjallisuutemme miehisimpi√§
kaunistuksia, ett√§ se hyv√§√§ tarkoittavassa uusimisinnossa t√§ss√§
merkityksess√§ on tuleva turmelluksi ja laimennetuksi.

[2] Voihan t√§llainen romanttisesti hurmioitunut kotitanhua-ihannointi
toisinaan tosin johtaa hupaisiinkin ajatuksen kuperkeikkoihin kuten
esimerkiksi on k√§ynyt sille intoilijalle, joka puhuessaan
etel√§pohjalaisesta puukko- ja aidanseiv√§skultuurista, varsin
selitett√§v√§ss√§ ja inhimillisess√§ perint√§muistojen
kultausharrastuksessa haltioituu ruotsinkielisell√§ alueella
n√§kem√§√§n siin√§ sotaisen urheiluhengen ja seikkailuhurmioisen
viikinkimielen karskeja ilmauksia, kun h√§n taas melkoista ynse√§mmin
m√§√§rittelee saman ilmi√∂n, kun se esiytyy suomenkielisell√§
alueella, kansanluonteen sameaksi viehtymykseksi joukkomurhiin. Mutta
asiallisesti eiv√§t t√§mm√∂iset rakkauden ylenpalttisuudesta
aiheutuneet ajatushoiperrukset merkitse mit√§√§n vaaraa
yhteisel√§m√§lle, jos vaan niiden pohjana on terve yhteiskunnallisen
el√§m√§n taju ja tarve.





End of Project Gutenberg's Kansallista itsetutkistelua, by Volter Kilpi



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KANSALLISTA ITSETUTKISTELUA: SUOMALAISIA KULTTUURI-√Ñ√ÑRIVIIVOJA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one‚Äîthe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG‚Ñ¢
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away‚Äîyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (‚Äúthe
Foundation‚Äù or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work (any work
on which the phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù appears, or with which the
phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work in a format
other than ‚ÄúPlain Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original ‚ÄúPlain
Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works
provided that:

    ‚Ä¢ You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, ‚ÄúInformation about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.‚Äù
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
        works.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    ‚Ä¢ You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain ‚ÄúDefects,‚Äù such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ‚ÄúRight
of Replacement or Refund‚Äù described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‚ÄòAS-IS‚Äô, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢‚Äôs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation‚Äôs EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state‚Äôs laws.

The Foundation‚Äôs business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation‚Äôs website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg‚Ñ¢,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


ehmaidhcdaIeART OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 11449 ***

                         AN ENQUIRY INTO THE

                      OBLIGATIONS OF CHRISTIANS,

                         TO USE MEANS FOR THE

                     CONVERSION OF THE HEATHENS.



            IN WHICH THE RELIGIOUS STATE OF THE DIFFERENT
             NATIONS OF THE WORLD, THE SUCCESS OF FORMER
               UNDERTAKINGS, AND THE PRACTICABILITY OF
                FURTHER UNDERTAKINGS, ARE CONSIDERED,



                          BY WILLIAM CAREY.



      For there is no Difference between the Jew and the Greek;
   for the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.
   For whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.
        How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not
       believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
     have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?
            and how shall they preach except they be sent?

                                                              PAUL.




                              MDCCXCII.




                             INTRODUCTION


As our blessed Lord has required us to pray that his kingdom may come,
and his will be done on earth as it is in heaven, it becomes us not
only to express our desires of that event by words, but to use every
lawful method to spread the knowledge of his name. In order to this,
it is necessary that we should become, in some measure acquainted with
the religious state of the world; and as this is an object we should
be prompted to pursue, not only by the gospel of our Redeemer, but
even by the feelings of humanity, so an inclination to conscientious
activity therein would form one of the strongest proofs that we are
the subjects of grace, and partakers of that spirit of universal
benevolence and genuine philanthropy, which appear so eminent in
the of God himself.

Sin was introduced amongst the children of men by the fall of Adam,
and has ever since been spreading its baneful influence. By changing
its appearances to suit the circumstances of the times, it has grown
up in ten thousand forms, and constantly counteracted the will and
designs of God. One would have supposed that the remembrance of the
deluge would have been transmitted from father to son, and have
perpetually deterred mankind from transgressing the will of their
Maker; but so blinded were they, that in the time of Abraham, gross
wickedness prevailed wherever colonies were planted, and the iniquity
of the Amorites was great, though not yet full. After this, idolatry
spread more and more, till the seven devoted nations were cut off with
the most signal marks of divine displeasure. Still, however, the
progress of evil was not stopped, but the Israelites themselves too
often joined with the rest of mankind against the God of Israel. In
one period the grossest ignorance and barbarism prevailed in the
world; and afterwards, in a more enlightened age, the most daring
infidelity, and contempt of God; so that the world which was once
over-run with ignorance, now _by wisdom knew not God, but changed the
glory of the incorruptible God_ as much as in the most barbarous ages,
_into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
four-footed beasts, and creeping things_. Nay, as they increased in
science and politeness, they ran into more abundant and extravagant
idolatries.

Yet God repeatedly made known his intention to prevail finally over
all the power of the Devil, and to destroy all his works, and set up
his own kingdom and interest among men, and extend it as universally
as Satan had extended his. It was for this purpose that the Messiah
came and died, that God might be just, and the justifier of all that
should believe in him. When he had laid down his life, and taken it up
again, he sent forth his disciples to preach the good tidings to every
creature, and to endeavour by all possible methods to bring over a
lost world to God. They went forth according to their divine
commission, and wonderful success attended their labours; the
civilized greeks, and uncivilized barbarians, each yielded to the
cross of Christ, and embraced it as the only way of salvation. Since
the apostolic age many other attempts to spread the gospel have been
made, which have been considerably successful, notwithstanding which a
very considerable part of mankind are still involved in all the
darkness of heathenism. Some attempts are still making, but they are
inconsiderable in comparison of what might be done if the whole body
of Christians entered heartily into the spirit of the divine command
on this subject. Some think little about it, others are unacquainted
with the state of the world, and others love their wealth better than
the souls of their fellow-creatures.

In order that the subject may be taken into more serious
consideration, I shall enquire, whether the commission given by our
Lord to his disciples be not still binding on us,--take a short view
of former undertakings,--give some account of the present state of the
world, consider the practicability of doing something more than is
done,--and the duty of Christians in general in this matter.





                           AN ENQUIRY, &c.




                               SECT. I.


         _An Enquiry whether the Commission given by our Lord
            to his Disciples be not still binding on us._


Our Lord Jesus Christ, a little before his departure, commissioned his
apostles to _Go_, and _teach all nations_; or, as another evangelist
expresses it, _Go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
creature_. This commission was as extensive as possible, and laid them
under obligation to disperse themselves into every country of the
habitable globe, and preach to all the inhabitants, without exception,
or limitation. They accordingly went forth in obedience to the
command, and the power of God evidently wrought with them. Many
attempts of the same kind have been made since their day, and which
have been attended with various success; but the work has not been
taken up, or prosecuted of late years (except by a few individuals)
with that zeal and perseverance with which the primitive Christians
went about it. It seems as if many thought the commission was
sufficiently put in execution by what the apostles and others have
done; that we have enough to do to attend to the salvation of our own
countrymen; and that, if God intends the salvation of the heathen, he
will some way or other bring them to the gospel, or the gospel to
them. It is thus that multitudes sit at ease, and give themselves no
concern about the far greater part of their fellow-sinners, who to
this day, are lost in ignorance and idolatry. There seems also to be
an opinion existing in the minds of some, that because the apostles
were extraordinary officers and have no proper successors, and because
many things which were right for them to do would be utterly
unwarrantable for us, therefore it may not be immediately binding on
us to execute the commission, though it was so upon them. To the
consideration of such persons I would offer the following
observations.

FIRST, If the command of Christ to teach all nations be restricted to
the apostles, or those under the immediate inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, then that of baptizing should be so too; and every denomination
of Christians, except the Quakers, do wrong in baptizing with water at
all.

SECONDLY, If the command of Christ to teach all nations be confined to
the apostles, then all such ordinary ministers who have endeavoured to
carry the gospel to the heathens, have acted without a warrant, and
run before they were sent. Yea, and though God has promised the most
glorious things to the heathen world by sending his gospel to them,
yet whoever goes first, or indeed at all, with that message, unless he
have a new and special commission from heaven, must go without any
authority for so doing.

THIRDLY, If the command of Christ to teach all nations extend only to
the apostles, then, doubtless, the promise of the divine presence in
this work must be so limited; but this is worded in such a manner as
expressly precludes such an idea. _Lo, I am with you always, to the
end of the world._

That there are cases in which even a divine command may cease to be
binding is admitted--As for instance, if it be _repealed_, as the
ceremonial commandments of the jewish law; or if there be _no
subjects_ in the world for the commanded act to be exercised upon, as
in the law of septennial release, which might be dispensed with when
there should be no poor in the land to have their debts forgiven.
Deut. xv. 4. or if, in any particular instance, we can produce a
_counter-revelation_, of equal authority with the original command, as
when Paul and Silas were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the
word in Bythinia. Acts xvi. 6. 7. or if, in any case, there be a
_natural impossibility_ of putting it in execution. It was not the
duty of Paul to preach Christ to the inhabitants of Otaheite, because
no such place was then discovered, nor had he any means of coming at
them. But none of these things can be alledged by us in behalf of the
neglect of the commission given by Christ. We cannot say that it is
repealed, like the commands of the ceremonial law; nor can we plead
that there are no objects for the command to be exercised upon. Alas!
the far greater part of the world, as we shall see presently,
are still covered with heathen darkness! Nor can we produce a
counter-revelation, concerning any particular nation, like that to
Paul and Silas, concerning Bythinia; and, if we could, it would not
warrant our sitting still and neglecting all the other parts of the
world; for Paul and Silas, when forbidden to preach to those heathens,
went elsewhere, and preached to others. Neither can we alledge a
natural impossibility in the case. It has been said that we ought not
to force our way, but to wait for the openings, and leadings of
Providence; but it might with equal propriety be answered in this case,
neither ought we to neglect embracing those openings in providence which
daily present themselves to us. What openings of providence do we wait
for? We can neither expect to be transported into the heathen world
without ordinary means, nor to be endowed with the gift of tongues,
&c. when we arrive there. These would not be providential interpositions,
but miraculous ones. Where a command exists nothing can be necessary to
render it binding but a removal of those obstacles which render
obedience impossible, and these are removed already.  Natural
impossibility can never be pleaded so long as facts exist to prove the
contrary. Have not the popish missionaries surmounted all those
difficulties which we have generally thought to be insuperable? Have
not the missionaries of the _Unitas Fratrum_, or Moravian Brethren,
encountered the scorching heat of Abyssinia, and the frozen climes of
Greenland, and Labrador, their difficult languages, and savage
manners? Or have not English traders, for the sake of gain, surmounted
all those things which have generally been counted insurmountable
obstacles in the way of preaching the gospel? Witness the trade to
Persia, the East-Indies, China, and Greenland, yea even the accursed
Slave-Trade on the coasts of Africa. Men can insinuate themselves into
the favour of the most barbarous clans, and uncultivated tribes, for
the sake of gain; and how different soever the circumstances of
trading and preaching are, yet this will prove the possibility of
ministers being introduced there; and if this is but thought a
sufficient reason to make the experiment, my point is gained.

It has been said that some learned divines have proved from Scripture
that the time is not yet come that the heathen should be converted;
and that first the _witnesses must be slain_, and many other
prophecies fulfilled. But admitting this to be the case (which I much
doubt[1]) yet if any objection is made from this against preaching to
them immediately, it must be founded on one of these things; either
that the secret purpose of God is the rule of our duty, and then it
must be as bad to pray for them, as to preach to them; or else that
none shall be converted in the heathen world till the universal
down-pouring of the Spirit in the last days. But this objection comes
too late; for the success of the gospel has been very considerable in
many places already.

[Footnote 1: See Edwards on Prayer, on this subject, lately re-printed
by Mr. Sutcliffe.]

It has been objected that there are multitudes in our own nation, and
within our immediate spheres of action, who are as ignorant as the
South-Sea savages, and that therefore we have work enough at home,
without going into other countries. That there are thousands in our
own land as far from God as possible, I readily grant, and that this
ought to excite us to ten-fold diligence in our work, and in attempts
to spread divine knowledge amongst them is a certain fact; but that it
ought to supercede all attempts to spread the gospel in foreign parts
seems to want proof. Our own countrymen have the means of grace, and
may attend on the word preached if they chuse it. They have the means
of knowing the truth, and faithful ministers are placed in almost
every part of the land, whose spheres of action might be much extended
if their congregations were but more hearty and active in the cause:
but with them the case is widely different, who have no Bible, no
written language, (which many of them have not,) no ministers, no good
civil government, nor any of those advantages which we have. Pity
therefore, humanity, and much more Christianity, call loudly for every
possible exertion to introduce the gospel amongst them.




                              SECT. II.


        _Containing a short Review of former Undertakings for
                   the Conversion of the Heathen._


Before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ the whole world were either
heathens, or jews; and both, as to the body of them were enemies to
the gospel. After the resurrection the disciples continued in
Jerusalem till Pentecost. Being daily engaged in prayer and
supplication, and having chosen Matthias, to supply the place of Judas
in the apostolic office, on that solemn day, when they were all
assembled together, a most remarkable effusion of the Holy Spirit took
place, and a capacity of speaking in all foreign languages was
bestowed upon them. This opportunity was embraced by Peter for
preaching the gospel to a great congregation of jews and proselytes,
who were from Parthia, Media, Elam, Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia,
the proconsular Asia, Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, Lybia, Crete, Arabia,
Rome, &c. and at the first effort God wrought so powerfully that three
thousand were converted, who immediately after were baptized, and
added to the church.  Before this great addition they consisted of but
about _an hundred and twenty persons_, but from that time they
continually increased. It was but a little after this that Peter and
John, going up to the temple, healed the lame man; this miracle drew a
great multitude together, and Peter took occasion while they stood
wondering at the event, to preach Jesus Christ to them. The
consequence was that five thousand more believed.

This was not done without opposition; the priests and sadducees tried
all the methods they could invent to prevent them from preaching the
gospel. The apostles, however, asserted their divine warrant, and as
soon as they were set at liberty addressed God, and prayed that a
divine power might attend their labours, which petition was heard, and
their future ministry was very successful. On account of their
necessities who were engaged in this good work, those amongst them who
had possessions, or goods, sold them, and devoted the money to pious
uses.

About this time a man and his wife out of great pretensions to piety,
sold an estate, and brought part of the money to the apostles,
pretending it to be the whole; for which dissimulation both he and his
wife, were struck dead by the hand of God. This awful catastrophe
however was the occasion of many more men and women being added to the
church. The miracles wrought by the apostles, and the success
attending their ministry, stirred up greater envy in the priests and
sadducees, who imprisoned them; from which confinement they were soon
liberated by an angel; upon which they went immediately as they were
commanded and preached in the temple: here they were seized, and
brought before the council, where Gamaliel spake in their favour, and
they were dismissed. After this they continued to prosecute their
work, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the
name of Christ.

By this time the church at Jerusalem was so increased that the
multiplicity of its temporal concerns was the occasion of some
neglects, which produced a dissatisfaction. The apostles, therefore,
recommended to the church to chuse seven pious men, whose office it
should be to attend upon its temporal affairs; that _they might give
themselves to prayer, and the ministry of the word_. Seven were
accordingly chosen, over whom the apostles prayed, and ordained them
to the office of Deacons by imposition of hands: and these things
being settled the church increased more and more. One of these
Deacons, whose name was Stephen, being a person of eminent knowledge
and holiness, wrought many miracles, and disputed with great evidence
and energy for the truth of Christianity, which raised him up a number
of opponents. These soon procured his death, and carried their
resentment so far as to stir up such a persecution that the church,
which till now had been confined to Jerusalem, was dispersed, and all
the preachers except the apostles were driven thence, and went every
where preaching the word.

A young man whose name was _Saul_, was very active in this
persecution; he had been educated under Gamaliel, a member of the
Sanhedrim, was a person of promising genius, by profession a Pharisee,
and much attached to the jewish ceremonies. When Stephen was stoned he
appeared much pleased with it, and had the custody of the clothes of
his executioners; and from that time was fired with such a spirit of
persecution himself, that he went about dragging some to prison, and
compelling others to blaspheme the name of the Lord Jesus. Neither was
he contented with exercising his rage at Jerusalem, but went to the
chief priests and obtained testimonials of authority to carry on the
same work at Damascus. But on his way, as he was almost ready to enter
into the city, the Lord changed his heart in a very wonderful manner;
so that instead of entering the town to persecute, he began to preach
the gospel as soon as he was able. This presently brought upon him the
same persecution which he had designed to exercise upon others, and
even endangered his life, so that the brethren found it necessary to
let him down the city wall in a basket by night, and so he escaped the
hands of his enemies. From thence he went to Jerusalem where he
preached the word, but being persecuted there, he went to Cesarea, and
from thence to Tarsus.

In the time of this trouble in the church, Philip went and preached at
Samaria with great success, nay so great was the work that an
impostor, who had deceived the people with legerdemain tricks for a
long time was so amazed, and even convinced, as to profess himself a
Christian, and was baptized; but was afterwards detected, and appeared
to be an hypocrite. Besides him a great number believed in reality,
and being baptized a church was formed there. Soon after this the Lord
commanded Philip to go the way which led from Jerusalem to Gaza, which
he did, and there found an eunuch of great authority in the court of
Ethiopia, to whom he preached Christ, who believed, and was baptized;
after which Philip preached at Ashdod, or Azotus.

About the same time Peter went to Lydda, or Diospolis, and cured Eneas
of a palsy, which was a mean of the conversion not only of the
inhabitants of that town, but also of the neighbouring country, called
Saron, the capital of which was Lasharon; and while he was there, a
circumstance turned up which tended much to the spread of the truth. A
woman of Joppa, a sea-port town in the neighbourhood, dying, they sent
to Lydda for Peter, who went over, and when he had prayed she was
raised to life again; which was an occasion of the conversion of many
in that town. Peter continued there preaching for some time, and
lodged at the house of a tanner.

Now another circumstance also tended to the further propogation of
Christianity, for a Roman military officer who had some acquaintance
with the Old Testament Scriptures, but was not circumcised, was one
day engaged in prayer in his house at Cesarea, when an angel appeared
to him, and bid him send for Peter from Joppa to preach in his house.
Before this the work of God had been wholly confined to the jews, and
jewish proselytes, and even the apostles appeared to have had very
contracted ideas of the Christian dispensation; but now God by a
vision discovered to Peter that Christianity was to be spread into all
nations. He accordingly went and preached at the house of Cornelius,
at Cesarea, when several were converted, and baptized, and the
foundation of a church laid in that city.

Some of the dispersed ministers having fled to Antioch in Syria, began
to preach to the greeks in that city about the same time, and had good
success; upon which the apostles sent Paul and Barnabas, who
instructed and strengthened them, and a church was formed in that city
also, which in a little time sent out several eminent preachers.

In the Acts of the apostles we have an account of _four_ of the
principal journies which Paul, and his companions undertook. The
first, in which he was accompanied by Barnabas, is recorded in the
xiii. and xiv. chapters, and was the first _attack_ on the heathen
world. It was a journey into the lesser Asia. In their way they passed
over the island of Cyprus. No sooner had they entered on their
undertaking, than they met with great difficulty; for Mark, whom they
had taken as their minister, deserted them, and returned to Jerusalem,
where, it seems, he thought he should enjoy the greatest quiet. Paul
and Barnabas however went forward; in every city they preached the
w